Historic Paris Walk

HISTORIC PARIS WALK
Ile de la Cité and the Latin Quarter
Orientation
The Walk Begins
NOTRE-DAME AND NEARBY
  Notre-Dame through the Ages
  Map: Historic Paris Walk
  Map: Notre-Dame Facade
   1 Notre-Dame Facade


  Virtual Tour of Notre-Dame’s Interior
  Map: Notre-Dame Interior
   2 Rue du Cloître Notre-Dame

   3 Ile St. Louis

   4 Deportation Memorial (Mémorial de la Déportation)


LEFT BANK
   5 Left Bank Booksellers

   6 Notre-Dame Side View

   7 Medieval Paris

   8 Shakespeare and Company Bookstore

   9 St. Séverin


  Latin Quarter
   10 Boulevard St. Michel

  Place St. André-des-Arts
   11 Place St. Michel

SAINTE-CHAPELLE AND NEARBY
   12 Sainte-Chapelle

  Map: Sainte-Chapelle
    Palais de Justice
    13 Cité “Metropolitain” Métro Stop

    14 Conciergerie

    15 Place Dauphine

    Statue of Henry IV
    16 Pont Neuf and the Seine


Paris has been the cultural capital of Europe for centuries. We’ll start where
it did, on Ile de la Cité, with a foray onto the Left Bank, on a walk that laces
together 80 generations of history—from Celtic fishing village to Roman
city, bustling medieval capital, birthplace of the Revolution, bohemian
haunt of the 1920s café scene, and the working world of modern Paris.
Along the way, we’ll marvel at two of Paris’ greatest sights—Notre-Dame
and Sainte-Chapelle. Expect changes in the area around Notre-Dame as the
cathedral undergoes reconstruction in the wake of the 2019 fire.



                            Orientation
Length of This Walk: Allow 2 hours to do justice to this three-mile walk
   (allow 4 hours if you go into the Sainte-Chapelle and the Conciergerie).
   This is the most historically important walk you’ll do in Paris, so don’t
   rush it. Take breaks at any number of appealing cafés and bistros along
   the way.
Getting There: The closest Métro stop is Cité (actually on the island).
Paris Museum Pass: Some sights on this walk are covered by the time-
   and money-saving Paris Museum Pass (see here). On Ile de la Cité, you
   can buy a pass at the tourist-friendly tabac/souvenir store (5 Boulevard
   du Palais) across the street from the Sainte-Chapelle entrance.
Notre-Dame: Due to the 2019 fire, only the cathedral’s exterior is
   viewable. The interior and tower climb are closed for repair, and some
   surrounding areas may also be blocked off. For updates, see
   www.notredamedeparis.fr (select “Visiter”—website is in French only).
   Binoculars are helpful to view the church exterior (as well as Sainte-
   Chapelle’s stained-glass windows).
Paris Archaeological Crypt: €8, covered by Museum Pass, Tue-Sun
   10:00-18:00, closed Mon, enter 100 yards in front of cathedral,
   http://www.crypte.paris.fr.
Deportation Memorial: Free, daily 10:00-19:00, Oct-March until 17:00,
   may close at random times, free 45-minute audioguide and guided tours
   may be available, Mo: Cité, +33 6 14 67 54 98.
Shakespeare and Company Bookstore: Daily 10:00-22:00, 37 Rue de la
   Bûcherie, across the river from Notre-Dame, Mo: St-Michel, +33 1 43
   25 40 93.
Sainte-Chapelle: €11.50 timed-entry ticket, €18.50 combo-ticket with
   Conciergerie, free for kids under age 18, covered by Museum Pass,
   reserve online in advance to ensure entry (limited tickets may be
   available in person); open daily 9:00-19:00, Oct-March until 17:00;
   audioguide-€3, frequent evening concerts—see here, 4 Boulevard du
   Palais, Mo: Cité, +33 1 53 40 60 80, www.sainte-chapelle.fr.
      Expect long lines to get in. First comes the security line (sharp
   objects and glass confiscated). Next, you’ll encounter the ticket-buying
   line—Museum Pass, combo, and advance ticket holders can skip this
   queue.
Conciergerie: €11.50 timed-entry ticket, €18.50 combo-ticket with Sainte-
   Chapelle, covered by Museum Pass, book online, daily 9:30-18:00,
   multimedia guide-€5, 2 Boulevard du Palais, Mo: Cité, +33 1 53 40 60
   80, www.paris-conciergerie.fr.
Avoiding Crowds: This area is most crowded from midmorning to
   midafternoon, especially on Tue (when the Louvre is closed) and on
   weekends. Generally, come early or as late in the day as possible (while
   still leaving enough time to visit all the sights).
      Sainte-Chapelle has limited space, and bottlenecks to get in are the
   norm. Its security lines are shortest first thing in the morning, so try for
   an early reservation. Lacking a reservation, arrive by 9:00 to inquire
   about available entry times, or arrive late and cross your fingers.
Tours: Download my free Paris Historic Walk audio tour.
Services: Find WCs at Sainte-Chapelle, the Conciergerie, and at cafés.



                        The Walk Begins
NOTRE-DAME AND NEARBY
• Start in front of Notre-Dame Cathedral, the physical and historic bull’s-
eye of your Paris map. Some areas around the cathedral are blocked off as
reconstruction continues. Find a place where you can take in the whole
scene: the church, the square (Place du Parvis), the cityscape, and visitors
from around the globe. You’re standing near the center of France: The
small bronze plaque called “Point Zero” (embedded in the ground, 30
yards in front of the church) is the point from which all distances are
measured. And you’re looking at the symbolic heart of France. As you take
it all in, ponder this spot’s long and venerable history.

Notre-Dame through the Ages
Centuries from now, people standing here will still talk about the night of
April 15, 2019, when Notre-Dame Cathedral went up in flames. That
disastrous event is just one more episode in the long and fascinating story of
Paris.
   Think of the changes this site has seen over the years. About 2,300 years
ago, there was virtually nothing here at all. This was the humble island
where the Parisii tribe lived, caught fish, and sold their catch at the place
where the east-west river crossed a north-south road. When the Romans
conquered the Parisii, they built their Temple of Jupiter where Notre-Dame
stands today (52 BC). When Rome fell, the Germanic Franks sealed their
victory by replacing the temple with the Christian church of St. Etienne.
Around the year 800, the Frankish King Charlemagne (see his big
equestrian statue to the right of the church) established the first glimmers of
modern “France.”
    By the year 1200, visitors standing here would have seen (as we do
today) a construction zone. The old Frankish church was being torn down
and replaced with a more glorious structure renamed “Notre-Dame.” Soon
it was topped with a pointy spire atop the roof and two never-completed
steeples in front (the two stubby bell towers we see today).
    By 1800, if you were still standing here, you’d be exhausted, but you’d
also see a crumbling church weathered by the ages and neglect. The central
spire had been removed (for fear it would fall over), and there were
virtually no statues on the facade (having been damaged during the
Revolution). The square in front was a tangle of ramshackle medieval
buildings, with Notre-Dame’s bell towers rising above, inspiring Victor
Hugo’s story of a deformed bell-ringer who could look down on all of Paris.
(The instant success of that book helped rally public interest in saving the
building.)
    In 1844, a 30-year-old architect named Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-
Duc began a massive renovation in the Neo-Gothic style. He put a new 300-
foot spire atop the roof (echoing the original), and added more statues,
including the fanciful gargoyles.
    After 800 years of work, Notre-Dame had become a truly glorious
structure, the most famous Gothic church in the world. That was the church
that stood here in 2019 when it caught fire...and Paris began writing yet
another chapter in its story.
• In fact, much of the history of Paris still lies buried in front of the
cathedral. Some has been unearthed and put on display in the
Archaeological Crypt (to your right; see here). Now turn your attention to
the church.
 1   Notre-Dame Facade
Despite the 2019 fire, the main body of the church still stands. We’ll get a
better look at the damaged parts later, but for now, focus on the still-
breathtaking facade.
    Find the circular window in the center of the facade, which frames a
statue of a woman holding a baby. For centuries, the main figure in the
Christian pantheon has been Mary, the mother of Jesus. Catholics petition
her in times of trouble to gain comfort, and to ask her to convince God to be
compassionate with them. This church is dedicated to “Our Lady” (Notre
Dame), and there she is, cradling God, right in the heart of the facade,
surrounded by the halo of the rose window. Though the church is massive
and imposing, it has always stood for the grace and compassion of Mary,
the “mother of God.”
    Imagine the faith of the people who built this cathedral. They broke
ground in 1163 with the hope that someday their great-great-great-great-
great-great grandchildren might attend the dedication Mass, which finally
took place two centuries later, in 1345. Look up the 200-foot-tall bell
towers and imagine a tiny medieval community mustering the money and
energy for construction. Master masons supervised, but the people did much
of the grunt work themselves for free—hauling the huge stones from distant
quarries, digging a 30-foot-deep trench to lay the foundation, and treading
like rats on a wheel designed to lift the stones up, one by one. This kind of
backbreaking, arduous manual labor created the real hunchbacks of Notre-
Dame.
• Looking two-thirds of the way up Notre-Dame’s left tower, you might spot
Paris’ most photographed gargoyle (see drawing on here). Propped on his
elbows on the balcony rail, he watches all the tourists below.
   Now, approach closer to the cathedral (as best you can with the
construction barriers) to view the statues adorning the church’s left portal.

St. Denis
Flanking the left doorway is a man with a misplaced head—that’s St. Denis,
the city’s first bishop and patron saint. He stands among statues of other
early Christians who helped turn pagan Paris into Christian Paris.




   Sometime in the third century, Denis came here from Italy to convert the
Parisii. He settled here on the Ile de la Cité, back when there was a Roman
temple on this spot and Christianity was suspect. Denis proved so
successful at winning converts that the Romans’ pagan priests beheaded
him as a warning to those forsaking the Roman gods. But those early
Christians were hard to keep down. The man who would become St. Denis
got up, tucked his head under his arm, headed north, paused at a fountain to
wash it off, and continued until he found just the right place to meet his
maker: Montmartre. The Parisians were convinced by this miracle,
Christianity gained ground, and a church soon replaced the pagan temple.
     The Fire, the Damage, and the Rebuild
At 18:50 on April 15, 2019, a fire ignited in the attic of Notre-Dame
and quickly grew to an inferno. Paris came to a standstill, transfixed
with horror at the sight of its beloved church in flames. Crowds
flooded the streets while fire crews waged a desperate battle to save
the landmark and its precious relics. Within an hour, the 300-foot-long
roof was reduced to cinders.




   Inside the church, parts of the stone ceiling broke apart and
dropped to the floor far below, followed by massive, fiery, wooden
roof beams. Soon after, the cathedral’s soaring spire teetered, broke in
two, and collapsed. That steeple—known as la flèche to Parisians (“the
arrow”)—was the needle around which this city spins. Remarkably,
the Gallic rooster (France’s unofficial symbol) crowning the top of the
steeple was found undamaged with three relics tucked safely inside—
including a piece from the Crown of Thorns. It seemed like a
miracle…though the real miracle may be that the fire was extinguished
within nine hours, thanks to the heroic work of more than 400
firefighters, mounting cranes while pumping water from the Seine.
    How could a stone building like Notre-Dame catch fire? Although
the cathedral’s main body is stone, its roof and spire were made of
wood coated with sheets of lead. The fire (likely started by an
electrical short circuit) ignited some 1,300 huge 13th-century oak
beams that supported the triangular roof. Once alight, such intense
heat can cause stone to expand and crack, weaken the mortar that
holds the stones together—and cause ceilings, arches, and entire walls
to fail. Fortunately, at Notre-Dame, the fire was contained quickly
enough that damage was limited. Many other cathedrals have fared far
worse from fires—like Chartres (1194), London (1666), Reims (1917),
Barcelona (1936), and Cologne (1945). Yet Notre-Dame, even with no
firewalls or sprinkler systems (an intentional choice to maintain its
original look), survived.




    Once the fire was out, city and church leaders assessed the damage.
The 13th-century lead roof and 19th-century spire were gone (400 tons
of lead were lost in the fire). The roof’s copper statues (by Viollet-le-
Duc in the 19th century) survived, ironically, because they had been
  previously removed for restoration. Inside the church, the nave was
  littered with fallen stones, the remains of the steeple, and charred
  beams. Although most of the rib-arched stone ceiling support was
  intact, gaping holes opened to the sky. The falling debris caused some
  damage to the church’s furnishings, but rescuers had managed to
  retrieve scores of priceless artifacts, including the Crown of Thorns,
  before the fire could reach them. The Grand Organ, one of Notre-
  Dame’s most revered objects, with multiple keyboards and almost
  8,000 pipes, was spared major damage (albeit covered in ash). And
  finally, three big beehives located just below the south transept’s rose
  window, and home to over 180,000 bees, managed to survive the fire.
  C’est incroyable.
      No sooner had the smoke cleared than the French vowed to rebuild.
  Still undecided is exactly what form the rebuilt Notre-Dame roof will
  take. Will builders replicate Viollet-le-Duc’s 19th-century spire…or
  return to its 14th-century look? (President Macron dropped the idea of
  using a modern spire after it proved extremely unpopular.) Whatever
  this great cathedral becomes, it’s clear that Notre-Dame—like its bees
  and the people of Paris—is a survivor. The latest goal? To have the
  church open in time for the 2024 Olympic Games in Paris.


   Medieval art was OK if it embellished the house of God and told biblical
stories. Find the base of the central column (at the foot of Mary, about
where the head of St. Denis could spit if he were really good). Working
around from the left, find God telling a barely created Eve, “Have fun, but
no apples.” Next, the sexiest serpent I’ve ever seen makes apples à la mode.
Finally, Adam and Eve, now ashamed of their nakedness, are expelled by an
angel. This is a tiny example in a church covered with meaning.
• Now, get as close as you can to the central doorway. Over the door are
scenes from the Last Judgment.

Central Portal
It’s the end of the world, and Christ sits on the throne of judgment (just
under the arches, holding both hands up). Beneath him an angel and a
demon weigh souls in the balance; the demon cheats by pressing down. It’s
a sculptural depiction of the good, the bad, and the ugly. The good souls
stand to the left, gazing up to heaven. The bad souls to the right are chained
up and led off to a six-hour tour of the Louvre with a lousy guide on a hot
summer day. The ugly souls must be the crazy, sculpted demons just below.



                     Paris Through History
  250 BC: Small fishing village of the Parisii, a Celtic tribe.
  52 BC: Julius Caesar conquers the Parisii capital of Lutetia (near
  Paris); Romans replace it with a new capital on the Left Bank.
  AD 497: Roman Paris falls to the Germanic Franks. King Clovis (482-
  511) converts to Christianity and makes Paris his capital.
  885-886: Paris under siege by Viking Norsemen = Normans.
  1163: Notre-Dame cornerstone laid.
  c. 1250: Paris is a bustling commercial city with a university and new
  construction, such as Sainte-Chapelle and Notre-Dame.
  c. 1600: King Henry IV beautifies Paris with buildings, roads, bridges,
  and squares.
  c. 1700: Louis XIV makes Versailles his capital. Parisians grumble.
  1789: Paris is the heart of France’s Revolution, which condemns
  thousands to the guillotine.
  1804: Napoleon Bonaparte crowns himself emperor in a ceremony at
  Notre-Dame.
  1830 & 1848: Parisians take to the streets again in revolutions,
  fighting the return of royalty.
  c. 1860: Napoleon’s nephew, Napoleon III, commissions Baron
  Haussmann to build Paris’ wide boulevards.
  1889: The centennial of the Revolution is celebrated with the Eiffel
  Tower. Paris enjoys wealth and middle-class prosperity in the belle
  époque (beautiful age).
  1920s: After the draining Great War, Paris is a cheap place to live,
  attracting expatriates such as Ernest Hemingway.
1940-1944: Occupied Paris spends the war years under gray skies and
gray Nazi uniforms.
1968: Student protests and civil unrest pervade Paris.
1981: High-speed rail service (TGV) links Paris to Lyon, changing
travel patterns in France (and making it easier for tourists to see more
of the country).
1981-1995: Under President François Mitterrand, Paris’ cityscape is
enriched by the Louvre Pyramid, Musée d’Orsay, La Grande Arche de
la Défense, and Opéra Bastille.
2000: Sparkly new lights brighten the Eiffel Tower.
2007: The Vélib’ bike-rental system is the first step in an initiative to
reduce Paris’ car traffic, open riverside quais to pedestrians, and make
the city more “green.”
2008: All bars, cafés, and restaurants in France become smoke-free,
ending the era of the smoky Parisian café.
2014: Socialist Anne Hidalgo becomes Paris’ first female mayor.
2015: Separate terrorist attacks target the Paris offices of satirical
magazine Charlie Hebdo and concertgoers at the Bataclan Theater.
Free-speech supporters worldwide respond to the magazine attack with
a slogan of solidarity: Je suis Charlie (“I am Charlie”).
2017: President Emmanuel Macron and his wife, Brigitte, settle into
Paris’ Elysée Palace—the “French White House.”
2018: Hundreds of thousands of Parisians swarm the Champs-Elysées
to celebrate France’s victory in the World Cup.
2019: Parisians are shocked to see their beloved Notre-Dame catch
fire. Undaunted, they vow to rebuild.
2020: Work on the cathedral stalls as the coronavirus pandemic brings
construction—and life as Parisians knew it—to a halt.
2022: Cathedral reconstruction continues with the goal of reopening to
the public in time for the 2024 Paris Olympic Games.
    On the arch to the right there’s a flaming cauldron with the sinner diving
into it headfirst. The lower panel (beneath the chain of souls) shows angels
with trumpets waking the dead from their graves. The souls are from every
class of French society—knights, ladies, peasants, clergy, even royalty—
reminding all who entered these doors that everyone will be judged.
Fortunately, Jesus (who stands below, between the double doors) can lead
the way to salvation, along with his 12 apostles—each barefoot and with his
ID symbol (such as Peter with his keys).
• Now look higher. Above the doorway arches is a row of 28 statues, known
as...

The Kings of Judah
In the days of the French Revolution (1789-1799), these biblical kings were
mistaken for the hated French kings, and Notre-Dame represented the
oppressive Catholic hierarchy. The citizens stormed the church, crying, “Off
with their heads!” Plop—they lopped off the crowned heads of these kings
with glee, creating a row of St. Denises that weren’t repaired for decades.
   But the story doesn’t end there. A schoolteacher who lived nearby
collected the heads and buried them in his backyard for safekeeping. There
they slept until 1977, when they were accidentally unearthed. Today, you
can stare into the eyes of the original kings in the Cluny Museum, a few
blocks away.
• Remember that Notre-Dame is more than a tourist sight—it’s been a place
of worship for nearly a thousand years. Close your eyes and imagine the
church in all its glory. Since the interior is currently closed to visitors, let’s
remove our metaphorical hats and mentally “step inside” the church, to
take a...

Virtual Tour of Notre-Dame’s Interior
“Enter” the church like a simple bareheaded peasant of old (referring to the
modern “Notre-Dame Interior” map). Imagine stepping into a dark, earthly
cavern lit with an unearthly light from the stained-glass windows. The priest
intones the words of the Mass that echo through the hall. Your eyes follow
the slender columns up 10 stories to the praying-hands arches of the ceiling.
Walk up the long central nave lined with columns and flanked by side
aisles. The place is huge—it can hold up to 10,000 faithful for a service.
   When you reach the altar, you’re at the center of this cross-shaped
church, where the faithful receive the bread and wine of Communion. This
was the holy spot for Romans, Christians...and even atheists. When the
Revolutionaries stormed the church, they gutted it and turned it into a
“Temple of Reason,” complete with a woman dressed like Lady Liberty
holding court at the altar.
   If you were able to browse around the church, you’d see it’s become a
kind of Smithsonian for artifacts near and dear to the heart of the Parisian
people. There’s the venerated Crown of Thorns that supposedly Jesus wore
(kept safely in the Treasury). There’s the gilded-and-enameled reliquary
dedicated to St. Geneviève (fifth century), whose prayers saved Paris from
Attila the Hun. A painting honors the scholar Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274),
who studied at the University of Paris while writing his landmark
theological works fusing faith and reason. There’s a statue of Joan of Arc,
the teenager who rallied her country to drive English invaders from Paris.
(Though she was executed, the former “witch” was later beatified—right
here in Notre-Dame.)
    The oldest feature inside the church is the blue-and-purple rose-shaped
window in the north transept—still with its original medieval glass, though
not viewable. A new feature is the huge white tarp covering the roof above
to prevent rain from entering the church during reconstruction. (To
experience an intact Gothic interior, visit St. Eustache Church, near the
Forum des Halles market—see here.) Finish your virtual visit by pausing at
one of the many chapels. Here the faithful can pause in your mental tour to
meditate and light a (virtual) candle in hopes that someday soon the interior
will be restored to its former glory.
• Let’s circle around the left (north) side of the church, walking down the
street called...




 2   Rue du Cloître Notre-Dame
As you head toward the back of the church, you’ll pass fascinating
information panels describing (in English) the fire and its aftermath, the
recovered rooster from the steeple’s top, and the restoration process. You’ll
also get your most up close and personal view of the building. Notice gaps
where stained-glass windows were removed—each panel is being tested for
lead to ensure they’re safe for restoration work to begin. Get close to a
flying buttress, now supported by wooden structures.




• Keep going past the church. (Don’t worry, we’ll get another classic look at
Notre-Dame later, from just across the river.) After passing the garden
behind the cathedral, pause for a moment on the arched pedestrian-only
bridge, Pont St. Louis, for a look at...
 3   Ile St. Louis
If Ile de la Cité is a tugboat laden with the history of Paris, it’s towing this
classy little residential dinghy, laden only with high-rent apartments,
boutiques, characteristic restaurants, and famous ice cream shops.
    Ile St. Louis wasn’t developed until much later than Ile de la Cité (17th
century). What was a swampy mess is now harmonious Parisian
architecture and one of Paris’ most exclusive neighborhoods.




    Now look upstream (east) to the bridge (Pont Tournelle) that links Ile St.
Louis with the Left Bank (which is now on your right). Where the bridge
meets the Left Bank, you’ll find one of Paris’ most exclusive restaurants, La
Tour d’Argent (with a flag flying from the rooftop). This restaurant was the
inspiration for the movie Ratatouille. Because the top floor has floor-to-
ceiling windows, your evening meal comes with glittering views—and a
golden price (allow €200 minimum, though you get a photo of yourself
dining elegantly with Notre-Dame floodlit in the background).
    Ile St. Louis is a lovely place for an evening stroll (for details, see the
Entertainment in Paris chapter). If you won’t have time to come back later,
consider taking a brief detour across the pedestrian bridge, Pont St. Louis,
to explore this little island.
• Let’s head toward the Left Bank. Do an about-face and start walking south
(with the backside of Notre-Dame on your right). Enter the little grassy
park to your left, where (behind a tall green hedge) you’ll find the...
 4   Deportation Memorial (Mémorial de la Déportation)
This memorial to the 200,000 French victims of the Nazi concentration
camps (1940-1945) draws you into their experience. France was quickly
overrun by Nazi Germany, and Paris spent the war years under Nazi
occupation. Jews and dissidents were rounded up and deported—many
never returned.




    As you descend the steps, the city around you disappears. Surrounded by
walls, you have become a prisoner. Your only freedom is your view of the
sky and the tiny glimpse of the river below. Enter the dark, single-file
chamber up ahead. Inside, the circular plaque in the floor reads, “They went
to the end of the earth and did not return.”
    The hallway stretching in front of you is lined with 200,000 lighted
crystals, one for each French citizen who died. Flickering at the far end is
the eternal flame of hope. The tomb of the unknown deportee lies at your
feet. Above, the inscription reads, “Dedicated to the living memory of the
200,000 French deportees shrouded by the night and the fog, exterminated
in the Nazi concentration camps.” The side rooms are filled with triangles—
reminiscent of the identification patches inmates were forced to wear—each
bearing the name of a concentration camp.
    From the side room on the left, stairs lead up to Rooms 1 and 2, where
you’ll find a powerful exhibit on life in a concentration camp (vividly
described in English). You’ll circle around to where stairs lead back to the
room of 200,000 crystals.
    Above the exit as you leave is the message you’ll find at many other
Holocaust sites: “Forgive, but never forget.”
• Return to ground level. Exit the garden, turn left, and cross the bridge
(Pont de l’Archevêché). When you reach the Left Bank, turn right along the
river and work your way along the south side of Notre-Dame. We’re now
turning our attention to the neighborhood around us, the...


LEFT BANK
 5   Left Bank Booksellers
You’re now on the Left Bank.
   The Rive Gauche, or the Left Bank of the Seine—“left” if you were
floating downstream—is old Paris at its most atmospheric. This side of the
river still has many of the twisting lanes and narrow buildings of medieval
times. (The Right Bank near the Seine is more modern and business-
oriented, with wide boulevards and stressed Parisians in suits.)
   Here along the riverbank, the “big business” is secondhand books,
displayed in the green metal stalls on the parapet. These literary
entrepreneurs pride themselves on their easygoing style. With flexible hours
and virtually no overhead, they run their businesses as they have since
medieval times.
    These booksellers (or bouquinistes; boo-keen-eest) have been a Parisian
fixture since the mid-1500s, when such shops and stalls lined most of the
bridges in Paris. In 1557, these merchants ran afoul of the authorities for
selling forbidden Protestant pamphlets in then-Catholic Paris. After the
Revolution, business boomed when entire libraries were liberated from rich
nobles.



                   Eateries Along This Walk
  The following spots make for a nice lunch or snack break:
  Ile St. Louis: Stop for gelato at Berthillon or Amorino Gelati, for
  crêpes and a view at the recommended Café Med, or select another of
  the island’s atmospheric eateries (see here).
  Ile de la Cité: Conveniently located across from Sainte-Chapelle’s
  entrance, L’Annexe Café offers reasonably priced café fare (and
  takeout coffee to sip while you wait in the church’s security line). For
     a full meal, consider Les Deux Palais, across from Sainte-Chapelle’s
     exit, or Au Bougnat, near Notre-Dame (for listings, see here).
     A few peaceful food refuges on dreamy Place Dauphine, near the end
     of this walk, are worth the wait if you have the time: The $$$ Caveau
     du Palais restaurant is a refined spot for a drink (cool bar/café) or a
     fine meal, inside or out (daily, 17 Place Dauphine, +33 1 43 26 04 28).
     If you feel more like plotting a revolution (while saving a few euros),
     try the funky $$ Ma Salle à Manger (closed Mon, across the square at
     #26, +33 1 43 29 52 34).
     Barges in the Seine: Docked near Notre-Dame are barges, some
     housing cafés with stunning views.
     Picnics: The small park behind Notre-Dame, at the Deportation
     Memorial, is good for a picnic, as is the tip of the Ile St. Louis. A short
     walk up the main drag on Ile St. Louis leads to a small grocery store.
     Place St. André-des-Arts: Two nice outdoor restaurants sit amid the
     bustle on this tree-filled square near Place St. Michel.


   Today, the waiting list to become one of Paris’ 250 bouquinistes is eight
years. Each bouquiniste is allowed four boxes, and the most-coveted spots
are awarded based on seniority. Rent is around €100 per year. Bouquinistes
are required to paint their boxes a standard green and stay open at least four
days a week, or they lose their spot. Notice how they guard against the rain
by wrapping everything in plastic. And yes, they do leave everything inside
when they lock up at night; metal bars and padlocks keep things safe.
Though their main items may be vintage books, these days tourists prefer
posters and magnets.
• At a gap in the green stalls directly across from Notre-Dame, find stairs
leading down to the river—good for losing crowds and for a terrific...
 6    Notre-Dame Side View
From this side, you can really appreciate both the church architecture and
the devastation wrought by the 2019 fire. Before the fire, you’d have seen a
green lead-covered roof topped with Viollet-le-Duc’s 300-foot steeple, and
several statues adorning its base.
 It takes 13 tourists to build a Gothic church: one steeple, six columns, and
                                 six buttresses.

    Those are gone completely, as is the lead roof and all windows—save
for the three massive rose windows (now covered for protection). But
what’s surprising is how much of the church survived. That’s a testament to
the medieval architects who designed this amazing structure. Their great
technological innovation is what we’ve come to call the Gothic style.
    In a glance, you can spot many of the elements of Gothic: pointed
arches, the lacy stone tracery of the windows, pinnacles, statues on
rooftops, and pointed steeples covered with the prickly “flames”
(Flamboyant Gothic) of the Holy Spirit. Most distinctive of all are the
flying buttresses. These 50-foot stone “beams” that stick out of the church
were the key to the complex Gothic architecture. The pointed arches built
inside the church cause the weight of the roof to push outward rather than
downward. The “flying” buttresses support the roof by pushing back
inward. Gothic architects were masters at playing architectural forces
against each other to build loftier and loftier churches, opening the walls for
stained-glass windows. The Gothic style was born here in Paris. Those
wooden structures you see supporting the flying buttresses show how they
were originally raised.
    Picture Quasimodo (the fictional hunchback) limping around along the
railed balcony at the base of the roof among the “gargoyles.” These
grotesque beasts sticking out from pillars and buttresses represent souls
caught between heaven and earth. They also function as rainspouts (from
the same French root word as “gargle”) when there are no evil spirits to
battle.
• Continue walking along the river. When you reach the bridge (Pont au
Double) at the front of Notre-Dame, head back up the stairs, veer left across
the street, and find a small park called Square Viviani (fill your water bottle
from fountain on left). Angle across the square and pass by Paris’ oldest
inhabitant—an acacia tree nicknamed Robinier, after the guy who planted it
in 1602. Imagine that this same tree might once have shaded the Sun King,
Louis XIV. Just beyond the tree you’ll find the small rough-stone church of
St. Julien-le-Pauvre. Leave the park, walking past the church, to tiny Rue
Galande.
 7   Medieval Paris
Picture Paris in 1250, when the church of St. Julien-le-Pauvre was still new.
You can pop into the church for a trip east a few hundred miles and back a
few centuries. Back outside, continue around the church a few steps. Notre-
Dame was nearly built, Sainte-Chapelle had just opened, the university was
expanding human knowledge, and Paris was fast becoming a prosperous
industrial and commercial center. The area around the church and along Rue
Galande gives you some of the medieval feel of ramshackle architecture
and old houses leaning every which way. In medieval days, people were
piled on top of each other, building at all angles, as they scrambled for this
prime real estate near the main commercial artery of the day—the Seine.
The smell of fish competed with the smell of neighbors in this knot of
humanity.




   Narrow dirt (or mud) streets sloped from here down into the mucky
Seine until the 19th century, when modern quays and embankments cleaned
everything up.
• Return toward the river, walking past the church and park on the cobbled
lane. Turn left on Rue de la Bûcherie and drop into the...
 8   Shakespeare and Company Bookstore
In addition to hosting butchers and fishmongers, the Left Bank has been
home to scholars, philosophers, and poets since medieval times. This funky
bookstore—a reincarnation of the original shop from the 1920s on Rue de
l’Odéon—has picked up the literary torch. Sylvia Beach, an American with
a passion for free thinking, opened Shakespeare and Company for the post-
WWI Lost Generation, who came to Paris to find themselves. American
writers flocked to the city for the cheap rent, fleeing the uptight,
Prohibition-era United States. Beach’s bookstore was famous as a meeting
place for Paris’ expatriate literary elite. Ernest Hemingway borrowed books
from it regularly. James Joyce struggled to find a publisher for his now-
classic novel Ulysses—until Sylvia Beach published it. George Bernard
Shaw, Gertrude Stein, and Ezra Pound also got their English fix at her shop.




   Today, the bookstore carries on that literary tradition—the owner,
Sylvia, is named after the original store’s founder. Struggling writers are
given free accommodations in tiny rooms with views of Notre-Dame.
Explore—the upstairs has a few seats, cots, antique typewriters, and cozy
nooks. Downstairs, travelers enjoy a great selection of used English books
—including my Paris and France guidebooks. Their cozy coffee shop sits
next door.
   Notice the green water fountain (1900) in front of the bookstore, one of
the many in Paris donated by the English philanthropist Sir Richard
Wallace. The hooks below the caryatids once held metal mugs for drinking
the water before the age of plastic (the mugs were removed in the 1950s).
Wallace donated the fountains after the Franco-Prussian War to give
residents free access to water as aqueducts had been destroyed. The four
nymphs represent sobriety, simplicity, kindness, and charity.




• Continue to Rue du Petit-Pont and turn left. This bustling north-south
boulevard (which becomes Rue St. Jacques) was the Romans’ busiest street
2,000 years ago, with chariots racing in and out of the city. (Roman-iacs
can view remains from the third-century baths, and a fine medieval
collection, at the nearby Cluny Museum).
   A block south of the Seine, turn right at the Gothic church of St. Séverin
and walk into the Latin Quarter.
 9   St. Séverin
Don’t ask me why, but building this church took a century longer than
building Notre-Dame. This is Flamboyant, or “flame-like,” Gothic, and you
can see how the short, prickly spires are meant to make this building flicker
in the eyes of the faithful. The church gives us a close-up look at gargoyles,
the decorative drain spouts that also functioned to keep evil spirits away.




    Inside you can see the final stage of Gothic, on the cusp of the
Renaissance. It’s also notable for carrying on the medieval tradition of
stained-glass windows into more modern times, while keeping the dominant
blues, greens, and reds popular in St. Séverin’s heyday. Walk to the apse
and admire the lone twisted Flamboyant Gothic column and the fan
vaulting. The apse’s windows (by Jean Bazaine, c. 1960) echo the fan-
vaulting effect in a modern, abstract way. Each colorful window represents
one of the seven sacraments—blue for baptism, yellow for marriage, etc.
The impressive organ filling the entrance wall is a reminder that this church
is still a popular venue for evening concerts (see gate for information
posters, buy tickets at door).
• At #22 Rue St. Séverin, you’ll find the skinniest house in Paris, two
windows wide. Rue St. Séverin leads right through the...

Latin Quarter
Although it may look more like the Greek Quarter today (cheap gyros
abound), this area is the Latin Quarter, named for the language you’d have
heard on these streets if you walked them in the Middle Ages. The
University of Paris (founded 1215), one of the leading educational
institutions of medieval Europe, was (and still is) nearby.
    A thousand years ago, the “crude” or vernacular local languages were
sophisticated enough to communicate basic human needs, but if you wanted
to get philosophical, the language of choice was Latin. Medieval Europe’s
class of educated elite transcended nations and borders. From Sicily to
Sweden, they spoke and corresponded in Latin. Now the most “Latin” thing
about this area is the beat you may hear coming from some of the
subterranean jazz clubs.
    Walking along Rue St. Séverin, you can still see the shadow of the
medieval sewer system. The street slopes into a central channel of bricks. In
the days before plumbing and toilets, when people still went to the river or
neighborhood wells for their water, flushing meant throwing it out the
window. At certain times of day, maids on the fourth floor would holler,
“Garde de l’eau!” (“Watch out for the water!”) and heave it into the streets,
where it would eventually wash down into the Seine.
    As you wander, remember that before Napoleon III commissioned Baron
Haussmann to modernize the city with grand boulevards (19th century),
Paris was just like this—a medieval tangle. The ethnic feel of this area is
nothing new—it’s been a melting pot and university district for almost 800
years.
• At the fork with Rue de la Harpe, bear slightly right to continue down Rue
St. Séverin another block until you come to...

10   Boulevard St. Michel
Busy Boulevard St. Michel (or “boul’ Miche”) is famous as the main artery
for Paris’ café and arts scene, culminating a block away (to the left) at the
intersection with Boulevard St. Germain. Although nowadays you’re more
likely to find leggings at 30 percent off, there are still many cafés,
boutiques, and bohemian haunts nearby.
    The Sorbonne—the University of Paris’ humanities department—is also
nearby, if you want to make a detour, though visitors are not allowed to
enter. (Turn left on Boulevard St. Michel and walk two blocks south. Gaze
at the dome from the Place de la Sorbonne courtyard.) Originally founded
as a theological school, the Sorbonne began attracting more students and
famous professors—such as St. Thomas Aquinas and Peter Abélard—as its
prestige grew. By the time the school expanded to include other subjects, it
had a reputation for bold new ideas. Nonconformity is a tradition here, and
Paris remains a world center for new intellectual trends.
• Also to the left is the Cluny Museum, which brings the era of Aquinas and
Abélard to life ( see the Cluny Museum Tour chapter). But to continue this
walk, cross Boulevard St. Michel. Just ahead is...

Place St. André-des-Arts
This tree-filled square is lined with cafés. In Paris, most serious thinking
goes on in cafés. For centuries these have been social watering holes, where
you can get a warm place to sit and stimulating conversation for the price of
a cup of coffee. Every great French writer—from Voltaire and Jean-Jacques
Rousseau to Jean-Paul Sartre and Jacques Derrida—had a favorite haunt.




   Paris honors its intellectuals. If you visit the Panthéon (described on
here)—several blocks south on Boulevard St. Michel and to the left—you’ll
find French writers (Voltaire, Victor Hugo, Emile Zola, and Rousseau),
inventors (Louis Braille), and scientists (including Marie and Pierre Curie)
buried in a setting usually reserved for warriors and politicians.
• Adjoining this square toward the river is the triangular Place St. Michel,
with a Métro stop and a statue of St. Michael killing a devil. Note: If you
were to continue west along Rue St. André-des-Arts, you’d find more Left
Bank action ( see the Left Bank Walk chapter).

11   Place St. Michel
You’re standing at the traditional core of the Left Bank’s artsy, liberal,
hippie, bohemian district of poets, philosophers, winos, and baba cools
(neo-hippies). Nearby, you’ll find international eateries, far-out bookshops,
street singers, pale girls in black berets, jazz clubs, and—these days—
tourists. Small cinemas show avant-garde films, almost always in the
version originale (v.o.). For colorful wandering and café-sitting, afternoons
and evenings are best. In the morning, it feels sleepy. The Latin Quarter
stays up late and sleeps in.




    In less commercial times, Place St. Michel was a gathering point for the
city’s malcontents and misfits. In 1830, 1848, and again in 1871, the
citizens took the streets from the government troops, set up barricades Les
Miz-style, and fought against royalist oppression. During World War II, the
locals rose up against their Nazi oppressors (read the plaques under the
dragons at the foot of the St. Michel fountain).
    In the spring of 1968, a time of social upheaval all over the world, young
students battled riot batons and tear gas by digging up the cobblestones on
the street and hurling them at police. They took over the square and
declared it an independent state. Factory workers followed their call to arms
and went on strike, challenging the de Gaulle government and forcing
change. Eventually, the students were pacified, the university was reformed,
and the Latin Quarter’s original cobblestones were replaced with pavement,
so future scholars could never again use the streets as weapons. Even today,
whenever there’s a student demonstration, it starts here.
• From Place St. Michel, look across the river and find the prickly steeple of
the Sainte-Chapelle church. Head toward it. Cross the river on Pont St.
Michel and continue north along the Boulevard du Palais. On your left,
you’ll see the doorway to Sainte-Chapelle.


SAINTE-CHAPELLE AND NEARBY
Security is strict at the Sainte-Chapelle complex because this is more than a
tourist attraction: France’s Supreme Court meets to the right of Sainte-
Chapelle in the Palais de Justice.
    You’ll need a timed-entry ticket to go inside (see details at the beginning
of this chapter), and the church entry may be hidden behind a line of ticket
buyers. Once past security, you’ll enter the courtyard outside Sainte-
Chapelle, where you’ll find information about upcoming church concerts.
• Enter the humble ground floor.

12   Sainte-Chapelle
This triumph of Gothic church architecture is a cathedral of glass like no
other. It was speedily built between 1242 and 1248 for King Louis IX—the
only French king who is now a saint—to house the supposed Crown of
Thorns (later moved to Notre-Dame’s treasury and now in safekeeping
since the fire). Its architectural harmony is due to the fact that it was
completed under the direction of one architect and in only six years—
unheard of in Gothic times. Recall that Notre-Dame took more than 200
years.
    Though the inside is beautiful, the exterior is basically functional. The
muscular buttresses hold up the stone roof, so the walls are essentially there
to display stained glass. The lacy spire is Neo-Gothic—added in the 19th
century. Inside, the layout clearly shows an ancien régime approach to
worship. The low-ceilinged basement was for staff and other common folks
—worshipping under a sky filled with painted fleurs-de-lis, a symbol of the
king. Royal Christians worshipped upstairs. The paint job, a 19th-century
restoration, helps you imagine how grand this small, painted, jeweled
chapel was. (Imagine Notre-Dame painted like this...) Each capital is
playfully carved with a different plant’s leaves.
• Climb the spiral staircase to the Chapelle Haute. Leave the rough stone of
the earth and step into the light.

Stained Glass
Fiat lux. “Let there be light.” From the first page of the Bible, it’s clear:
Light is divine. Light shines through stained glass like God’s grace shining
down to earth. Gothic architects used their new technology to turn dark
stone buildings into lanterns of light. The glory of Gothic shines brighter
here than in any other church.
    There are 15 separate panels of stained glass (6,500 square feet—two-
thirds of it 13th-century original), with more than 1,100 different scenes,
mostly from the Bible. These cover the entire Christian history of the world,
from the Creation in Genesis (first window on the left, as you face the
altar), to the coming of Christ (over the altar), to the end of the world (the
round “rose”-shaped window at the rear of the church). Each individual
scene is interesting, and the whole effect is overwhelming. Allow yourself a
few minutes to bask in the glow of the colored light before tackling the
individual window descriptions below.


                    Stained Glass Supreme
  Craftsmen made glass—which is, essentially, melted sand—using this
  recipe:
  • Melt one part sand with two parts wood ash.
  • Mix in rusty metals to get different colors—iron makes red; cobalt
    makes blue; copper, green; manganese, purple; cadmium, yellow.
  • Blow glass into a cylinder shape, cut lengthwise, and lay flat to cool.
  • Cut into pieces with an iron tool, or by heating and cooling a select
    spot to make it crack.
  • Fit pieces together to form a figure, using strips of lead to hold them
    in place.
  • Place masterpiece so high on a wall that no one can read it.




• Working clockwise from the entrance, look for these notable scenes, using
the map in this chapter as a reference. Don’t worry if you have trouble
making sense of the windows—you’re not alone. (The souvenir shop
downstairs sells a little book with color photos for further tutoring.) The
sun lights up different windows at various times of day. Overcast days give
the most even light. On bright, sunny days, some sections are glorious,
while others look like sheets of lead.
    The first window on the left (with scenes from Genesis) is always dark
because of a building butted up against it. Let’s pass over that one and turn
to the second window on the left.
    Life of Moses (second window, dark bottom row of diamond panels):
The first panel shows baby Moses in a basket, placed by his sister in the
squiggly brown river. Next he’s found by the pharaoh’s daughter. Then he
grows up. And finally, he’s a man, a prince of Egypt on his royal throne.
    More Moses (third window, in middle and upper sections): See how
many guys with bright yellow horns you can spy. Moses is shown with
horns as the result of a medieval mistranslation of the Hebrew word for
“rays of light,” or halo.
    Jesus’ Passion Scenes (directly over the altar and behind the canopy):
These scenes from Jesus’ arrest and Crucifixion were the backdrop for this
chapel’s raison d’être—the Crown of Thorns, which was originally
displayed on this altar. Stand close to the steps of the altar—about five
paces away—and gaze through the canopy where, if you look just above the
altar table, you’ll see Jesus, tied to a green column, being whipped. To the
immediate right is the key scene in this relic chapel—Jesus (in purple robe)
being fitted with the painful Crown of Thorns.
• Continuing clockwise, find the window on the right wall that’s four
circular scenes wide.
    Campaign of Holofernes: On the bottom row, focus on the second
circle from the left. It’s a battle scene (the campaign of Holofernes)
showing three soldiers with swords slaughtering three men. Examine the
details. The background is blue. The men have different-colored clothes—
red, blue, green, mauve, and white. You can actually see the folds in the
robes, the hair, and facial features. Look at the victim in the center—his
head is splotched with blood. Details like these were created either by
scratching on the glass or by baking on paint. It was a painstaking process
of finding just the right colors, fitting them together to make a scene...and
then multiplying by 1,100.
   Helena in Jerusalem (first window on the right wall, at the rear of the
nave near where you’ll exit): This window tells the story of how Christ’s
Crown of Thorns found its way from Jerusalem to Constantinople to this
chapel. Start in the lower-left corner, where the Roman emperor
Constantine (in blue, on his throne) waves goodbye to his Christian mom,
Helena. She arrives at the gate of Jerusalem (next panel to the right). The
other panels (though almost impossible for 21st-century eyes to follow) tell
the rest of the story: Helena discovers the Crown of Thorns and brings it
back to Constantinople. Nine hundred years later, French Crusader knights
invade the Holy Land and visit Constantinople. Finally, King Louis IX
returns to France with the sacred relic, and builds this church to house it.
   Rose Window (above entrance): This window (added 200 years later) is
the chapel’s climax, showing the final scene in human history. It’s Judgment
Day, with a tiny Christ in the center, presiding over a glorious moment of
wonders and miracles.

Altar
The altar was raised up high to better display the Crown of Thorns, the relic
around which this chapel was built. Notice the staircase: Access was limited
to the priest and the king, who wore the keys to the shrine around his neck.
Also note that there is no high-profile image of Jesus anywhere—this
chapel was all about the Crown.




   King Louis IX, convinced he’d found the real McCoy, spent roughly the
equivalent of €500 million for the Crown, €370 million for the gem-studded
shrine to display it in (later destroyed in the French Revolution), and a mere
€150 million to build Sainte-Chapelle to house it.
    Lay your camera on the ground and shoot the ceiling. Those pure and
simple ribs growing out of the slender columns are the essence of Gothic
structure.
• Exit Sainte-Chapelle. Back outside, as you walk around the church
exterior, look down to see the foundation and take note of how much Paris
has risen in the 750 years since Sainte-Chapelle was built. As you head
toward the exit of the complex, you’ll pass by the...




Palais de Justice
Sainte-Chapelle sits within a huge complex of buildings that has housed the
local government since ancient Roman times. It was the site of the original
Gothic palace of the early kings of France. The only surviving medieval
parts are Sainte-Chapelle and the Conciergerie prison.
    Most of the site is now covered by the giant Palais de Justice, built in
1776, home of the French Supreme Court. The motto Liberté, Egalité,
Fraternité over the doors is a reminder that this was also the headquarters
of the Revolutionary government. Here they doled out justice, condemning
many to imprisonment in the Conciergerie downstairs—or to the guillotine.
• Now pass through the big iron gate to the noisy Boulevard du Palais.
Cross the street to the wide, pedestrian-only Rue de Lutèce and walk about
halfway down.

13   Cité “Metropolitain” Métro Stop
Of the 141 original early-20th-century subway entrances, this is one of only
a few survivors—now preserved as a national art treasure. (New York’s
Museum of Modern Art even exhibits one.) It marks Paris at its peak in
1900—on the cutting edge of Modernism, but with an eye for beauty. The
curvy, plantlike ironwork is a textbook example of Art Nouveau, the style
that rebelled against the erector-set squareness of the Industrial Age. Other
similar Métro stations in Paris are Abbesses and Porte Dauphine.
   The flower and plant market on Place Louis Lépine is a pleasant detour.
On Sundays this square flutters with a busy bird market. And across the
way is the Préfecture de Police, where Inspector Clouseau of Pink Panther
fame used to work, and where the local Resistance fighters took the first
building from the Nazis in August 1944, leading to the Allied liberation of
Paris a week later.
• Pause here to admire the view. Sainte-Chapelle is a pearl in an ugly
architectural oyster. Double back to the Palais de Justice, turn right onto
Boulevard du Palais, and enter the Conciergerie (sidestep the ticket-buying
bottleneck with a Museum Pass or ticket bought in advance).

14   Conciergerie
Though barren inside, this former prison echoes with history. The
Conciergerie was the last stop for 2,780 victims of the guillotine, including
France’s last ancien régime queen, Marie-Antoinette. Before then, kings
had used the building to torture and execute failed assassins. (One of its
towers along the river was called “The Babbler,” named for the pain-
induced sounds that leaked from it.) When the Revolution (1789) toppled
the king, the progressive Revolutionaries proudly unveiled a modern and
more humane way to execute people—the guillotine. The Conciergerie was
the epicenter of the Reign of Terror—the year-long period of the Revolution
(1793-94) during which Revolutionary fervor spiraled out of control and
thousands were killed. It was here at the Conciergerie that “enemies of the
Revolution” were imprisoned, tried, sentenced, and marched off to Place de
la Concorde for decapitation.




Inside the Conciergerie
Pick up a free map and breeze through the one-way, well-described circuit.
You’ll start in the spacious, low-ceilinged Hall of Men-at-Arms (Room 1),
originally a guards’ dining room warmed by four big fireplaces (look up the
chimneys). During the Reign of Terror, this large hall served as a holding
tank for the poorest prisoners. Then they were taken upstairs (in an area not
open to visitors), where the Revolutionary tribunals grilled scared prisoners
on their political correctness.
    Continue to the raised area at the far end of the room (Room 4, today’s
bookstore). This was the walkway of the executioner, who was known
affectionately as “Monsieur de Paris.” Just past the bookstore, pause in
rooms (to the right) with displays on Revolutionary history. Continuing on,
you’ll pass the cell (on the left) where shackled suspects were processed by
the Office of the Keeper (or “Concierge”), who admitted prisoners,
monitored torture...and recommended nearby restaurants. The next cell is
where condemned prisoners combed their hair or touched up their lipstick
before their final public appearance—waiting for the open-air cart (tumbrel)
to pull up outside. The tumbrel would carry them to the guillotine, which
was on Place de la Concorde.
    Upstairs is a memorial room with the names of the 2,780 citizens
condemned to death by the guillotine. While most of the famous names
have been vandalized (Charlotte Corday, Robespierre, Louis XVI—who
was called “Capet: last king of France”), you may see Marie-Antoinette
(opposite the entry, 10 rows down, look for Capet Marie-Antoinette). Head
down the hallway past more cells that give a sense of the poor and cramped
conditions. Then comes a small set of displays. You’ll see old paintings of
the Conciergerie and some of the famous prisoners.
    Next, go downstairs, where—tucked behind heavy gray curtains—is a
tiny chapel built on the site where Marie-Antoinette’s prison cell originally
stood. The chapel’s three paintings tell her sad story: First, Marie (dressed
in widow’s black) stoically says goodbye to her grieving family as she’s led
off to prison. Next, still stoic, she awaits her fate. Finally, she piously kneels
in her cell to receive the Last Sacrament on the night before her beheading.
The chapel’s walls drip with silver-embroidered tears. It was made in
Marie’s honor by Louis XVIII, the brother of beheaded Louis XVI and the
first king to reclaim the throne after the Revolution.



                          Marie-Antoinette
  In 1789, as the Revolution was coming to a head, it was Queen Marie-
  Antoinette—even more than her husband, King Louis XVI—who
  became the focus of the citizens’ disgust.
    First off, she was foreign-born, known simply as “The Austrian.”
Reports flew that she spent extravagantly, plunging France into debt.
She was seen as a dragon lady who’d manipulated her husband against
the Revolution. Worst of all, a rumor spread (probably false) that when
Marie was told that the Parisians had no bread, she sneered, “Let them
eat cake!” (“Cake” was the burnt crusts of the bread oven.)
    Enraged and hungry, 6,000 Parisian women (backed by armed
men) marched through the rain to the royal palace at Versailles. The
Revolutionaries stormed the château, kidnapped the royal family, and
brought them back to Paris. They were placed under house arrest in
the Tuileries Palace (which once stood in the Tuileries Garden).
    In 1791, Marie and Louis engineered an escape to Austria to begin
a counterrevolution. They had one of their servants pretend to be a
  German baroness, while Louis disguised himself as her servant. (The
  irony must have been killing him.) But someone recognized Louis
  from his portrait on a franc note. The family was captured, put on trial
  as traitors to France, and the monarchy was abolished.
      Louis, Marie-Antoinette, and their eight-year-old son were tearfully
  split up and sent to separate prisons. Marie-Antoinette was taken to the
  Conciergerie.
      On January 21, 1793, King Louis XVI (excuse me, that’s “Citizen
  Capet”) was led to Place de la Concorde and laid face down on a slab.
  Shoop!—a thousand years of monarchy that dated back to before
  Charlemagne was decapitated. On October 16, Marie-Antoinette was
  also carted to Place de la Concorde. Genteel to the end, she apologized
  to the executioner for stepping on his foot. The blade fell, the blood
  gushed, and her head was shown to the crowd on a stick—an
  exclamation point for the new rallying cry: Vive la nation!


   The tour concludes outside in the “Cour de Femmes” courtyard, where
female prisoners were allowed a little fresh air. Look up and notice the
spikes still guarding from above...and be glad you can leave this place with
your head intact. It wasn’t so easy for enemies of the state. On October 16,
1793, Marie-Antoinette was awakened at 4:00 in the morning and led away.
She walked the corridor, stepped onto the cart, and was slowly carried to
Place de la Concorde, where she had her date with “Monsieur de Paris.”
• Back outside, turn left on Boulevard du Palais. On the corner is the city’s
oldest public clock. The mechanism of the present clock is from 1334, and
even though the case is Baroque, it keeps on ticking.
   Turn left onto Quai de l’Horloge and walk along the river, past the
“Babbler” tower. The bridge up ahead is Pont Neuf, where we’ll end this
walk. At the first corner, veer left into a sleepy triangular square called...

15   Place Dauphine
It’s amazing to find such coziness in the heart of Paris. This city of more
than two million is still a city of neighborhoods, a collection of villages.
The French Supreme Court building looms behind like a giant marble
gavel. Enjoy the village-Paris feeling in the park (young Parisians flock to
the square on weekend afternoons for pétanque and more). For eating
recommendations on this square, see the “Eateries Along this Walk”
sidebar, earlier.




• Continue through Place Dauphine. As you pop out the other end, you’re
face-to-face with a...

Statue of Henry IV
Henry IV (1553-1610) is not as famous as his grandson, Louis XIV, but
Henry helped make Paris what it is today—a European capital of elegant
buildings and quiet squares. He built the Place Dauphine (behind you), the
Pont Neuf (to the right), residences (to the left, down Rue Dauphine), the
Louvre’s long Grand Gallery (downriver on the right), and the tree-filled
Square du Vert-Galant (directly behind the statue, on the tip of the island).
The square is one of Paris’ make-out spots; its name comes from Henry’s
nickname, the Green Knight, as Henry was a notorious ladies’ man. The
park is a great place to relax, dangling your legs over the concrete prow of
this boat-shaped island.
• From the statue, turn right onto the old bridge. Pause at the little nook
halfway across.

16   Pont Neuf and the Seine
This “new bridge” is now Paris’ oldest. Built during Henry IV’s reign
(about 1600), its arches span the widest part of the river. Unlike other
bridges, this one never had houses or buildings growing on it. The turrets
were originally for vendors and street entertainers. In the days of Henry IV,
who promised his peasants “a chicken in every pot every Sunday,” this
would have been a lively scene. From the bridge, look downstream (west)
to see the next bridge, the pedestrian-only Pont des Arts. Ahead on the
Right Bank is the long Louvre museum. Beyond that, on the Left Bank, is
the Orsay. And what’s that tall black tower in the distance?




   Our walk ends where Paris began—on the Seine River. From Dijon to
the English Channel, the Seine meanders 500 miles, cutting through the
center of Paris. The river is shallow and slow within the city, but still
dangerous enough to require steep stone embankments (built 1910) to
prevent occasional floods.
   In summer, the riverside quais are turned into beach zones with beach
chairs and tanned locals, creating the Paris Plages (see here). The success of
the Paris Plages helped motivate the city to take the next step: to
permanently banish cars from long stretches of the riverside (between the
Orsay and Pont de l’Alma on the Left Bank and between the Louvre and
Place de la Bastille on the Right Bank), turning them into parks instead.
   The Seine is still the main artery of Paris. Besides tourist boats, it also
carries commercial barges with 20 percent of Paris’ transported goods. And
on the banks, sportsmen today cast into the waters once fished by Paris’
original Celtic inhabitants 2,000 years ago.




• We’re done. You can take a boat tour that leaves from near the base of
Pont Neuf on the island side (Vedettes du Pont Neuf; see here). Or you
could take our Left Bank Walk, which begins one bridge downriver.
