Louvre Tour

LOUVRE TOUR
Musée du Louvre
Orientation
Map: Louvre Overview
  SURVIVING THE LOUVRE
The Tour Begins
    GREECE (3000 BC-AD 1)
    Map: The Louvre—Pre-Classical Greece
    Map: The Louvre—Greek Statues
    THE LOUVRE AS A PALACE
    THE MEDIEVAL WORLD (1200-1500)
    Map: Medieval and Renaissance
    ITALIAN RENAISSANCE (1400-1600)
    FRENCH PAINTING (1780-1850)
    MORE ITALIAN RENAISSANCE
    NEAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES
    Map: Near Eastern Antiquities
Paris walks you through world history in three world-class museums—the
Louvre (ancient world to 1850), the Orsay (1848-1914, including
Impressionism), and the Pompidou (20th century to today). Start your “art-
yssey” at the Louvre. With more than 30,000 works of art on display, the
Louvre is a full inventory of Western civilization. To cover it all in one visit
is impossible. Let’s focus on the Louvre’s specialties—Greek sculpture,
Italian painting, and French painting.
    We’ll see “Venuses” through history, from prehistoric stick figures to the
curvy Venus de Milo to the wind-blown Winged Victory of Samothrace, and
from placid medieval Madonnas to the Mona Lisa to the symbol of modern
democracy. Those with a little more time can visit some impressive chunks
of stone from Mesopotamia—the “Cradle of Civilization” (modern-day
Iraq). As we traverse the centuries, we’ll see how each generation defined
beauty differently, and gain insight into long-ago civilizations by admiring
what they found beautiful.
                           Orientation
Cost: €17 timed-entry ticket required (purchase online in advance), covered
   by Museum Pass. Tickets are good all day and include special exhibits;
   reentry is not allowed (don’t leave the security check area as you travel
   between the wings of the museum).
Hours: Wed-Mon 9:00-18:00, closed Tue. Galleries start shutting down 30
   minutes before closing; last entry is 45 minutes before closing. The
   museum may stay open into the evening on Wed and Fri (until 21:45—
   check online for the latest).
Information: +33 1 40 20 53 17, recorded info +33 1 40 20 51 51,
   www.louvre.fr.
Reserved Entry Time Required: The Louvre requires all visitors—
   including Museum Pass holders—to reserve a time slot for your visit.
   You can generally book a reservation time up to a few hours before your
   visit; a day or more before is better in peak season. You’ll be able to
   enter at the pyramid up to 30 minutes before your assigned time.
Buying Tickets at the Louvre: If you arrive sans ticket or reservation (bad
   idea) and are allowed in (unlikely), in very quiet times it may be
   possible to buy a €15 timed-entry ticket at the door. When available,
   these tickets are sold in a side room under the pyramid. Line up for the
   next available self-service machine (machines only accept credit cards
   with a PIN) or ticket window. You’ll generally wait in a long ticket line.
Buying Museum Passes at the Louvre: The “Museum Pass Tabac” (a.k.a.
   La Civette du Carrousel) sells the Museum Pass for no extra charge
   (cash only). It’s just outside the Louvre entrance in the underground
   Carrousel du Louvre mall—to find it, follow Museum Pass signs inside
   the mall.
Renovations: Due to renovations, some sections are routinely closed one
   day a week (for example, the Near Eastern Antiquities section may be
   closed Wed; get the latest on the website or at the info desk). Other
   renovations affect room numbers—expect changes to the room numbers
   provided in this tour.
When to Go: Crowds can be miserable on Sun, Mon (the worst day), Wed,
   and in the morning (arrive 30 minutes before opening to secure a good
   place in line). Evening visits (when available) are quieter, and the glass
   pyramid glows after dark.
Getting There: Métro stop Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre is the closest.
   From the station, you can either exit above ground to go in the pyramid
   entrance or stay underground to use the Carrousel du Louvre entrance.
   Eastbound bus #69 stops along the Seine River; the best stop is labeled
   Quai François Mitterrand. Westbound #69 stops in front of the pyramid
   (see the “Louvre Overview” map for stop locations). You’ll find a taxi
   stand on Rue de Rivoli, next to the Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre
   Métro station.
Getting In: There are two entrances. Everyone must pass through security
   at the entrances.
      Main Pyramid Entrance: There is no grander entry than through the
   main entrance at the pyramid in the central courtyard. With your timed-
   entry ticket, you’ll scoot right in (find the line that corresponds to your
ticket type). Avoid the long line for those hoping to get a same-day
reservation.




   Underground Mall Entrance: The less crowded underground
entrance is accessed through the Carrousel du Louvre shopping mall.
Enter the mall at 99 Rue de Rivoli (the door with the shiny metal
awning), directly from the Métro stop Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre
(stepping off the train, exit to Musée du Louvre-Le Carrousel du
Louvre), or via the Tuileries Garden entrance close to the arch. Once
inside the mall, continue toward the inverted pyramid next to the
Louvre’s security entrance. (Don’t follow signs to the Passholders
entrance, which is a long detour away.)
   After passing through security, everyone proceeds to the grand space
beneath the glass pyramid with all the services.



            Eating at or near the Louvre
  The Louvre has plenty of good eating options. The tiny $$ Café
  Mollien is located near the end of our tour (on the terrace overlooking
  the pyramid, closes at 16:45). The practical and economic self-service
  $ Goguette cafeteria (with a Starbucks and a couple of satellites
  selling sandwiches and salads on the mezzanine) is up the escalator
  near the pyramid on the Richelieu wing side. $$$ Bistrot Benoit is
  under the pyramid. Some visitors discreetly munch a sandwich or
  snack at the tiny “fast-food tables” lining the wall on the mezzanine
  level.
      For more selection (after exiting the Louvre), walk to the
  underground shopping mall, the Carrousel du Louvre (daily 8:30-
  19:00), which has a food court upstairs with decent-value fast-food
  eateries, including—quelle horreur—a McDonald’s. The mall also has
  glittering boutiques, a post office, two Starbucks (vive globalization), a
  Métro stop (Mo: Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre), and a convenient
  exit (sortie) directly into the Tuileries Garden.
      Picnics are painting-perfect in the adjacent Palais Royal gardens, a
  block north of the museum (enter from Place du Palais Royal).
      For a post-Louvre lunch/retreat, head to the venerable $$ Café le
  Nemours, with elegant brass-and-Art Deco style and outdoor tables
  that get good afternoon sun (daily; leaving the Louvre, cross Rue de
  Rivoli and veer left to 2 Place Colette, adjacent to Comédie Française;
  +33 1 42 61 34 14). $$$ Le Fumoir is another classy place, with
  brown leather couches perfect for kicking back with a coffee or
  cocktail (good-value two-course lunch menu, daily, 6 Rue de l’Amiral
  de Coligny, near Louvre-Rivoli Métro stop, +33 1 42 92 00 24). $$
  Café la Palette is a 15-minute walk on the other side of the river, but
  worth it if you’re doing my Left Bank Walk (daily, 43 Rue de Seine,
  +33 1 43 26 68 15).


Getting Out: The exit under the pyramid is usually closed. Leave via the
   Richelieu wing (leading to Rue de Rivoli and the Palais Royal-Musée
   du Louvre Métro stop) or via the Carrousel du Louvre shopping mall.
Tours: Ninety-minute English-language guided tours leave from inside the
   Accueil des Groupes area, under the pyramid normally at 11:00 (and
   possibly at 14:00 in peak season); book in advance online, €12 plus
   admission, tour +33 1 40 20 52 63). Multimedia guides (€5) provide
   commentary on about 700 masterpieces.
        Download my free Louvre Museum audio tour, which
   complements the text in this chapter.
Length of This Tour: Allow at least two hours. With less time, string
   together the Venus de Milo, Winged Victory, Mona Lisa, and Coronation
   of Emperor Napoleon...and whatever else catches your eye along the
   way.
Baggage Check: It’s free to store your bag in slick self-service lockers
   under the pyramid. No bags bigger than a small day bag are allowed in
   the galleries. No bags bigger than airline carry-on size are allowed
   anywhere in the Louvre. Consider checking whatever you don’t need—
   even if it’s just a small bag—to make your visit more pleasant.
Services: WCs are located under the pyramid. Once you’re in the galleries,
   WCs are scarce.
Starring: Venus de Milo, Winged Victory, Mona Lisa, Leonardo da Vinci,
   Raphael, Michelangelo, the French painters, and many of the most
   iconic images of Western civilization.


SURVIVING THE LOUVRE
Start by picking up the free map (Plan/Information) at the information desk
beneath the glass pyramid as you enter and take a moment to orient
yourself.
    The Louvre, the largest museum in the Western world, fills three wings
of this immense, U-shaped palace. The Richelieu wing (north side) houses
Near Eastern antiquities (covered in the last part of this tour), decorative
arts, and French, German, and Northern European art. The Sully wing (east
side) has extensive French painting and collections of ancient Egyptian and
Greek art. The Denon wing (south side) houses Greek and Roman
antiquities, as well as Italian, French, and Spanish paintings—plus an
Islamic art exhibit.
    We’ll concentrate on the Denon and Sully wings, which hold many of
the superstars, including ancient Greek sculpture, Italian Renaissance
painting, and French Neoclassical and Romantic painting.
    The Louvre’s Map: The Louvre’s free map is detailed but confusing. To
get oriented, find the Mona Lisa: She’s on level 1 (first floor), in the Denon
wing’s Room 711. Our tour starts on level -1, under the pyramid. Then we
enter the Denon wing and turn left into the Greek antiquities in Room 170.
    Expect Changes: The sprawling Louvre is constantly shuffling its deck.
Rooms close, room numbers change, and pieces can be on loan or in
restoration. If you can’t find the artwork you’re looking for, ask the nearest
guard for its new location. Point to the photo in your book and ask, “Où est,
s’il vous plaît?” (oo ay, see voo play).
    The Bottom Line: You could spend a lifetime here. Zero in on the
biggies, and try to finish the tour with enough energy left to browse.



                        The Tour Begins
• From inside the big glass pyramid, head for the Denon wing. Ride the
escalator up one floor. After showing your ticket, continue ahead 25 paces,
take the first left, follow the Antiquités Grecques signs, and climb a set of
stairs to the brick-ceilinged Salle (Room) 170: Grèce Préclassique. Enter
prehistory.


GREECE (3000 BC-AD 1)
Pre-Classical Greek Statues
These statues are noble but crude. In the first glass cases, find Greek Barbie
dolls (3000 BC) that are older than the pyramids—as old as writing itself.
These prerational voodoo dolls whittle women down to their life-giving
traits. Halfway down the hall, a miniature woman (Dame d’Auxerre)
pledges allegiance to stability. Nearby, another woman (Core) is essentially
a column with breasts. These statues stand like they have a gun to their
backs—hands at sides, facing front, with sketchy muscles and mask-like
faces. “Don’t move.”
    The early Greeks, who admired statues like these, found stability more
attractive than movement. Like their legendary hero Odysseus, the Greek
people spent generations wandering, war-weary and longing for the
comforts of a secure home. The strength and sturdiness of these works
looked beautiful.
• Before moving on, note that the Islamic rooms are to the right. But we’ll
continue on with ancient Greece.
   Exit at the far end of the pre-Classical Greece galleries, and climb the
stairs one flight. At the top, veer left (toward 11 o’clock, cross through the
domed room), and continue into the Sully wing. After about 50 yards, turn
right into Salle 345, where you’ll find Venus de Milo floating above a sea of
worshipping tourists. It’s been said that among the warlike Greeks, this was
the first statue to unilaterally disarm.
Golden Age Greece
The great Greek cultural explosion that changed the course of history
unfolded over 50 years (starting around 450 BC) in Athens, a town smaller
than Muncie, Indiana. Having united Greece to repel a Persian invasion,
Athens rebuilt, with the Parthenon as the centerpiece of the city.
   The Greeks dominated the ancient world using brains, not brawn, and
their art shows their love of rationality, order, and balance. The ideal Greek
was well rounded—an athlete and a bookworm, a lover and a philosopher, a
carpenter who played the lyre, a warrior and a poet. In art, the balance
between timeless stability and fleeting movement made beauty.
   In a sense, we’re all Greek: Democracy, mathematics, theater,
philosophy, literature, and science were practically invented in ancient
Greece. Most of the art that we’ll see in the Louvre either came from or was
inspired by Greece.
Venus de Milo, a.k.a. Aphrodite, late second century BC
This goddess of love created a sensation when she was discovered in 1820
on the Greek island of Melos. Europe was already in the grip of a classical
fad, and this statue seemed to sum up all that ancient Greece stood for. The
Greeks pictured their gods in human form (meaning humans are godlike),
telling us they had an optimistic view of the human race. Venus’ well-
proportioned body captures the balance and orderliness of the Greek
universe.
   Split Venus down the middle from nose to toes and see how the two
halves balance each other. Venus rests on her right foot (a position called
contrapposto, or “counterpoise”), then lifts her left leg, setting her whole
body in motion. As the left leg rises, her right shoulder droops down. And
as her knee points one way, her head turns the other. Venus is a harmonious
balance of opposites, orbiting slowly around a vertical axis. The twisting
pose gives a balanced S-curve to her body (especially noticeable from the
back view) that Golden Age Greeks and succeeding generations found
beautiful.
    Other opposites balance as well, like the smooth skin of her upper half
that sets off the rough-cut texture of her dress (size 14). She’s actually made
from two different pieces of stone plugged together at the hips (the seam is
visible). The face is realistic and anatomically accurate, but it’s also
idealized, a goddess, too generic and too perfect. This isn’t any particular
woman, but Everywoman—all the idealized features that appealed to the
Greeks.
    Most “Greek” statues are actually later Roman copies. This is a rare
Greek original. This “epitome of the Golden Age” was sculpted three
centuries after the Golden Age, though in a retro style.
    What were her missing arms doing? Some say her right arm held her
dress, while her left arm was raised. Others say she was hugging a male
statue or leaning on a column. I say she was picking her navel.
• Orbit Venus. This statue is interesting and different from every angle.
Remember the view from the back—we’ll see it again later. Now make your
reentry to earth. Follow Venus’ gaze and browse around this long hall.

Gallery of Statues
Greek statues feature the human body in all its splendor. The anatomy is
accurate, and the poses are relaxed and natural. Around the fifth century
BC, Greek sculptors learned to capture people in motion and to show them
from different angles, not just face-forward. The undoubted master was
Praxiteles, whose lifelike statues set the tone for later sculptors. He
pioneered the classic contrapposto pose—with the weight resting on one
leg—capturing a balance between timeless stability and fleeting motion.
The stance is not only more lifelike, but also intrinsically beautiful. If the
statue has clothes, the robes drape down naturally, following the body’s
curves. The intricate folds become part of the art.
   In this gallery, you’ll see statues of gods, satyrs, soldiers, athletes, and
everyday people engaged in ordinary activities. For Athenians, the most
popular goddess was their patron, Athena. She’s usually shown as a warrior,
wearing a helmet and carrying a (missing) spear, ready to fight for her city.
A monumental version of Athena stands at one end of the hall—the goddess
of wisdom facing the goddess of love (Venus de Milo).
   Whatever the statue, Golden Age artists sought the perfect balance
between down-to-earth humans (with human flaws and quirks) and the
idealized perfection of Greek gods.
• Head to Salle 347 (also known as Salle de Diane), located behind the
Venus de Milo. (Facing Venus, find Salle 347 to your right, back the way
you came.) You’ll find two carved panels on opposite walls.
Parthenon Friezes, mid-fifth century BC
These stone fragments once decorated the exterior of the greatest Athenian
temple, the Parthenon (see the scale model). Built at the peak of the Greek
Golden Age, the temple glorified the city’s divine protector, Athena, and the
superiority of the Athenians, who were feeling especially cocky, having just
crushed their archrivals, the Persians. A model of the Parthenon shows
where the panels might have hung. The centaur panel would have gone
above the entrance. The panel of young women was placed under the
covered colonnade, but above the doorway (to see it in the model, you’ll
have to crouch way down and look up).
    The panel on the right side of the room shows a centaur (half-
human/half-horse) sexually harassing a woman, as these rude creatures
crashed a party of regular people. But the humans fought back and threw
out their enemy. The panel was meant to represent Athens defeating its
Persian invaders.
    The other relief shows the sacred procession of young women who
marched up the temple hill every four years with an embroidered shawl for
the 40-foot-high statue of Athena, the goddess of wisdom (statue pictured at
bottom of previous page). Though headless, the maidens speak volumes
about Greek craftsmanship. Carved in only a couple of inches of stone,
they’re amazingly realistic—more so than anything seen in the pre-
Classical period. They glide along horizontally (their belts and shoulders all
in a line), while the folds of their dresses drape down vertically. The man in
the center is relaxed, realistic, and contrapposto. Notice the veins in his
arm. The maidens’ pleated dresses make them look as stable as fluted
columns, but their arms and legs step out naturally—their human forms
emerging gracefully from the stone.
• Keep backtracking another 20 paces, turning left into Salle 409, the
Roman Antiquities room (Antiquités Romaines), for a...

Roman Detour (Salles 409-418)
Stroll among the Caesars and try to see the person behind the public
persona. Besides the many faces of the ubiquitous Emperor Inconnu
(“unknown”), you might spot Augustus (Auguste), the first emperor, and his
wily wife, Livia (Livie). Her son Tiberius (Tibère) was the Caesar that Jesus
Christ “rendered unto.” Caligula was notoriously depraved, curly-haired
Domitia murdered her husband, Hadrian popularized the beard, Trajan ruled
the Empire at its peak, and Marcus Aurelius (Marc Aurèle) presided
stoically over Rome’s slow fall.
    The pragmatic Romans (500 BC-AD 500) were great conquerors but bad
artists. One area in which they excelled was realistic portrait busts,
especially of their emperors, who were worshipped as gods on earth.
Fortunately for us, the Romans also had a huge appetite for Greek statues
and made countless copies. They took the Greek style and wrote it in capital
letters, adding a veneer of sophistication to their homes, temples, baths, and
government buildings.
    You’ll wander past several impressive sarcophagi while looping around
a massive courtyard (Salle 419) with an impressive mosaic floor and
beautiful wall-mounted mosaics from the ancient city of Antioch.
• To reach the Winged Victory continue clockwise through the Roman
collection, which eventually spills out at the base of the stairs leading up to
the first floor and the dramatic...

Winged Victory of Samothrace (Victoire de Samothrace), c. 190
BC
This woman with wings, poised on the prow of a ship, once stood on an
island hilltop to commemorate a naval victory. Her clothes are windblown
and sea-sprayed, clinging to her body. (Look at the detail in the folds of her
dress around the navel, curving down to her hips.) Originally, her right arm
was stretched high, celebrating the victory like a Super Bowl champion,
waving a “we’re number one” finger.
   This is the Venus de Milo gone Hellenistic, from the time after the
culture of Athens was spread around the Mediterranean by Alexander the
Great (c. 325 BC). As Victory strides forward, the wind blows her and her
wings back. Her feet are firmly on the ground, but her wings (and missing
arms) stretch upward. She is a pillar of vertical strength, while the clothes
curve and whip around her. These opposing forces create a feeling of great
energy, making her the lightest two-ton piece of rock in captivity.
    The earlier Golden Age Greeks might have considered this statue ugly.
Her rippling excitement is a far cry from the dainty Parthenon maidens and
the soft-focus beauty of Venus. And the statue’s off-balance pose, like an
unfinished melody, leaves you hanging. But Hellenistic Greeks loved these
cliff-hanging scenes of real-life humans struggling to make their mark.
    In the glass case nearby is Victory’s open right hand with an outstretched
finger, found in 1950, a century after the statue itself was unearthed. When
the French learned the hand was in Turkey, they negotiated with the Turkish
government for the rights to it. Considering all the other ancient treasures
that France had looted from Turkey in the past, the Turks thought it only
appropriate to give the French the finger.
• Enter the octagonal room to the left as you face the Winged Victory, with
Icarus bungee-jumping from the ceiling. Find a friendly window and look
out toward the pyramid.


THE LOUVRE AS A PALACE
Formerly a royal palace, the Louvre was built in stages over eight centuries.
The original medieval fortress was the part over your right shoulder (as you
face the pyramid), which is today’s Sully wing. Then the Tuileries Palace
was built about 500 yards away, in the now-open area past the pyramid and
the triumphal arch. Succeeding kings tried to connect these two palaces,
each monarch adding another section onto the long, skinny north and south
wings. Finally, in 1852, after three centuries of building, the two palaces
were connected, creating a rectangular Louvre. Nineteen years later, the
Tuileries Palace burned down during a riot, leaving the U-shaped Louvre
we see today.
    The glass pyramid was designed by the Chinese-born American architect
I. M. Pei (1989). Many Parisians initially hated the pyramid, just as they
had hated another new and controversial structure 100 years earlier—the
Eiffel Tower.
    In the octagonal room, find the plaque at the base of the dome. The
inscription reads: “Le Musée du Louvre, fondé le 16 Septembre, 1792.” The
museum was founded by France’s Revolutionary National Assembly—the
same people who brought you the guillotine. What could be more logical?
You behead the king, inherit his palace and art collection, open the doors to
the masses, and voilà! You have Europe’s first public museum.
• From the octagonal room, enter the Apollo Gallery (Galerie d’Apollon).

Apollo Gallery
This gallery gives us a feel for the Louvre as the glorious home of French
kings (before Versailles). Imagine a candlelit party in this room, drenched in
stucco and gold leaf, with tapestries of leading Frenchmen and paintings
featuring mythological and symbolic themes. The crystal vases, the inlaid
tables made from marble and semiprecious stones, and many other art
objects show the wealth of France, Europe’s number-one power for two
centuries. Portraits on the walls depict great French kings: Henry IV, who
built the Pont Neuf; Louis XIV, the Sun King; and François I, who brought
Leonardo da Vinci (and the Italian Renaissance) to France.
   Stroll past glass cases of royal dinnerware to the far end of the room. In
a glass case are the crown jewels. The display varies, but you may see the
jewel-studded crowns of Louis XV and the less flashy Crown of
Charlemagne (the only crowns to escape destruction in the Revolution),
along with the 140-carat Regent Diamond, which once graced crowns worn
by Louis XV, Louis XVI, and Napoleon.
• A rare WC is a half-dozen rooms away, near Salle 650 in the Sully wing.
The Italian collection (Peintures Italiennes) is on the other side of Winged
Victory. Cross back in front of Winged Victory and enter the Denon wing
and Salle 706, where you’ll find...

Two Botticelli Frescoes
Look at the paintings on the wall to the left. These pure maidens, like
colorized versions of the Parthenon frieze, give us a preview of how ancient
Greece would be “reborn” in the Renaissance.
• But first, the Medieval World. Continue into the large Salle 708.


THE MEDIEVAL WORLD (1200-1500)
Cimabue, The Madonna and Child in Majesty Surrounded by
Angels (La Vierge et l’Enfant en Majesté Entourés de Six Anges),
c. 1280
During the Age of Faith (1200s), almost every church in Europe had a
painting like this one. Mary was a cult figure—even bigger than the late-
20th-century Madonna—adored and prayed to by the faithful for bringing
Baby Jesus into the world. After the collapse of the Roman Empire (c. AD
500), medieval Europe was a poor and violent place, with the Christian
Church as the only constant in troubled times.
   Altarpieces tended to follow the same formula: somber iconic faces, stiff
poses, elegant folds in the robes, and generic angels. Violating the laws of
perspective, the angels at the “back” of Mary’s throne are the same size as
those holding the front. These holy figures are laid flat on a gold
background like cardboard cutouts, existing in a golden never-never land, as
though the faithful couldn’t imagine them as flesh-and-blood humans
inhabiting our dark and sinful earth.
• Do a 180 and find...
Giotto, St. Francis of Assisi Receiving the Stigmata (Saint
François d’Assise Recevant les Stigmates), c. 1295-1300
Francis of Assisi (c. 1181-1226), a wandering Italian monk of renowned
goodness, kneels on a rocky Italian hillside, pondering the pain of Christ’s
torture and execution. Suddenly, he looks up, startled, to see Christ himself,
with six wings, hovering above. Christ shoots lasers from his wounds to the
hands, feet, and side of the empathetic monk, marking him with the
stigmata. Francis went on to breathe the spirit of the Renaissance into
medieval Europe. His humble love of man and nature inspired artists like
Giotto to portray real human beings with real emotions, living in a physical
world of beauty.
    Like a good filmmaker, Giotto (c. 1266-1337) doesn’t just tell us what
happened, he shows us in the present tense, freezing the scene at its most
dramatic moment. Though the perspective is crude—Francis’ hut is smaller
than he is, and Christ is somehow shooting at Francis while facing us—
Giotto creates the illusion of three dimensions, with a foreground (Francis),
middle ground (his hut), and background (the hillside). Painting a 3-D
world on a 2-D surface is tough, and after a millennium of Dark Ages,
artists were rusty.
    In the predella (the panel of paintings beneath the altarpiece), birds
gather at Francis’ feet to hear him talk about God. Giotto catches the late
arrivals in midflight, an astonishing technical feat for an artist working
more than a century before the Renaissance. The simple gesture of Francis’
companion speaks volumes about his amazement. Breaking the stiff, iconic
mold for saints, Francis bends forward at the waist to talk to his fellow
creatures. The diversity of the birds—“red and yellow, black and white”—
symbolizes how all humankind is equally precious in God’s sight.
Meanwhile, the tree bends down symmetrically to catch a few words from
the beloved hippie of Assisi.
• The long Grand Gallery displays Italian Renaissance painting—some
masterpieces, some not.


ITALIAN RENAISSANCE (1400-1600)
Built in the late 1500s to connect the old palace with the Tuileries Palace,
the Grand Gallery displays much of the Louvre’s Italian Renaissance art.
From the doorway, look to the far end and consider this challenge: I hold
the world record for the Grand Gallery Heel-Toe-Fun-Walk-Tourist-Slalom,
going end to end in 1 minute, 58 seconds (only two injured). Time yourself.
Along the way, notice some of the features of Italian Renaissance painting:
• Religious: Lots of Madonnas, children, martyrs, and saints.
• Symmetrical: The Madonnas are flanked by saints—two to the left, two
   to the right, and so on.
• Realistic: Real-life human features are especially obvious in the
  occasional portrait.
• Three-Dimensional: Every scene gets a spacious setting with a distant
  horizon.
• Classical: You’ll see some Greek gods and classical nudes, but even
   Christian saints pose like Greek statues, and Mary is a Venus whose face
   and gestures embody all that was good in the Christian world.
• Look for the following masterpieces by Leonardo about 50 yards down the
Grand Gallery, on the left.

Leonardo da Vinci, The Virgin and Child with St. Anne (La
Vierge à l’Enfant Jésus avec Sainte-Anne), c. 1510
Three generations—grandmother, mother, and child—are arranged in a
pyramid, with Anne’s face as the peak and the lamb as the lower right
corner. Within this balanced structure, Leonardo sets the figures in motion.
Anne’s legs are pointed to our left. (Is Anne Mona? Hmm.) Her daughter
Mary, sitting on her lap, reaches to the right. Jesus looks at her playfully
while turning away. The lamb pulls away from him. But even with all the
twisting and turning, this is still a placid scene. It’s as orderly as the
geometrically perfect universe created by the Renaissance god.
    There’s a psychological kidney punch in this happy painting. Jesus, the
picture of childish joy, is innocently playing with a lamb—the symbol of his
inevitable sacrificial death.
    The Louvre has the greatest collection of Leonardos in the world—five
of them. Look for the neighboring Virgin of the Rocks and John the Baptist.
Leonardo was the consummate Renaissance Man; a musician, sculptor,
engineer, scientist, and sometime painter, he combined knowledge from all
these areas to create beauty. If he were alive today, he’d create a Unified
Field Theory in physics—and set it to music.
• Continue about 20 yards (past the crowded Mona Lisa room—where we’ll
head in a moment). On the right side, look for a masterpiece by Raphael.
Raphael, La Belle Jardinière, c. 1507
Raphael perfected the style Leonardo pioneered. This configuration of
Madonna, Child, and John the Baptist is also a balanced pyramid with hazy
grace and beauty. Mary is a mountain of maternal tenderness (the title
translates as “The Beautiful Gardener”) as she eyes her son with a knowing
look and holds his hand in a gesture of union. Jesus looks up innocently,
standing contrapposto like a chubby Greek statue. Baby John the Baptist
kneels lovingly at Jesus’ feet, holding a cross that hints at his playmate’s
sacrificial death. The interplay of gestures and gazes gives the masterpiece
both intimacy and cohesiveness, while Raphael’s blended brushstrokes
varnish the work with an iridescent smoothness.
    With Raphael, the Greek ideal of beauty—reborn in the Renaissance—
reached its peak. His work spawned so many imitators who cranked out
sickly sweet, generic Madonnas that we often take him for granted. Don’t.
This is the real thing.
• The Mona Lisa (La Joconde) is a few steps away, in the room just behind
that tall wooden door—Salle 711. Mona is alone behind glass on her own
false wall. Six million heavy-breathing people crowd in each year to
glimpse the most ogled painting in the world. (You can’t miss her. Just
follow the signs and the people...it’s the only painting you can hear. With all
the crowds, you can even smell it.) Choose your strategy: You can either
linger on the fringes and view Mona from a distance, or patiently press
forward awaiting your turn up front.

Leonardo da Vinci, Mona Lisa, a.k.a. La Joconde, 1503-1506
Leonardo was already an old man when François I invited him to France.
Determined to pack light, he took only a few paintings with him. One was a
portrait of Lisa del Giocondo, the wife of a wealthy Florentine merchant.
When Leonardo arrived, François immediately fell in love with the
painting, making it the centerpiece of the small collection of Italian
masterpieces that would, in three centuries, become the Louvre museum.
He called it La Gioconda (La Joconde in French)—a play on both her last
name and the Italian word for “happiness.” We know it as the Mona Lisa—
a contraction of the Italian for “my lady Lisa.”
    Mona may disappoint you. She’s smaller than you’d expect, darker,
engulfed in a huge room, and hidden behind a glaring pane of glass. So, you
ask, “Why all the hubbub?” Let’s take a closer look. As you would with any
lover, you’ve got to take her for who she is, not what you’d like her to be.
    The famous smile attracts you first. Leonardo used a hazy technique
called sfumato, blurring the edges of her mysterious smile. Try as you
might, you can never quite see the corners of her mouth. Is she happy? Sad?
Tender? Or is it a cynical supermodel’s smirk? All visitors read it
differently, projecting their own moods onto her enigmatic face. Mona is a
Rorschach inkblot...so, how are you feeling?
    Now look past the smile and the eyes that really do follow you (most
eyes in portraits do) to some of the subtle Renaissance elements that make
this painting work. The body is surprisingly massive and statue-like, a
perfectly balanced pyramid turned at an angle, so we can see its mass. Her
arm rests lightly on the armrest of a chair, almost on the level of the frame
itself, as if she’s sitting in a window looking out at us. The folds of her
sleeves and her gently folded hands are remarkably realistic and relaxed.
The typical Leonardo landscape shows distance by getting hazier and
hazier.
    Though the portrait is generally accepted as a likeness of Lisa del
Giocondo, other hypotheses about the sitter’s identity have been suggested,
including the idea that it’s Leonardo himself. Or she might be the Mama
Lisa. A recent infrared scan revealed that she has a barely visible veil over
her dress, which may mean (in the custom of the day) that she had just had
a baby.
    The overall mood is one of balance and serenity, but there’s also an
element of mystery. Mona’s smile and long-distance beauty are subtle and
elusive, tempting but always just out of reach, like strands of a street
singer’s melody drifting through the Métro tunnel. Mona doesn’t knock
your socks off, but she winks at the patient viewer.



                       Italian Renaissance
  A thousand years after Rome fell, plunging Europe into the Dark Ages,
  the Greek ideal of beauty was reborn in 15th-century Italy. The
  Renaissance—or “rebirth” of the culture of ancient Greece and Rome
  —was a cultural boom that changed people’s thinking about every
  aspect of life. In politics, it meant democracy. In religion, it meant a
  move away from Church dominance and toward the assertion of man
  (humanism) and a more personal faith. Science and secular learning
  were revived after centuries of superstition and ignorance. In
  architecture, it was a return to the balanced columns and domes of
  Greece and Rome.
     In painting, the Renaissance meant realism, and for the Italians,
  realism was spelled “3-D.” Artists rediscovered the beauty of nature
  and the human body. With pictures of beautiful people in harmonious
  3-D surroundings, they expressed the optimism and confidence of this
  new age.


• Before leaving Mona, step back and just observe the paparazzi scene. The
huge canvas opposite Mona is...

Paolo Veronese, The Marriage at Cana (Les Noces de Cana),
1562-1563
Stand 10 steps away from this enormous canvas to where it just fills your
field of vision, and suddenly...you’re in a party! Help yourself to a glass of
wine. This is the Renaissance love of beautiful things gone hog-wild.
Venetian artists like Veronese painted the good life of rich, happy-go-lucky
Venetian merchants.
    In a spacious setting of Renaissance architecture, colorful lords and
ladies, decked out in their fanciest duds, feast on a great spread of food and
drink, while the musicians fuel the fires of good fun. Servants prepare and
serve the food, jesters play, and animals roam. In the upper left, a dog and
his master look on. A sturdy linebacker in yellow pours wine out of a jug
(right foreground). The man in white samples some and thinks, “Hmm, not
bad,” while nearby a ferocious cat battles a lion. The wedding couple at the
far left is almost forgotten.
    Believe it or not, this is a religious work showing the wedding
celebration in which Jesus turned water into wine. And there’s Jesus in the
dead center of 130 frolicking figures, wondering if maybe a nonalcoholic
beverage might have been a better choice. With true Renaissance optimism,
Venetians pictured Christ as a party animal, someone who loved the created
world as much as they did.
    Now, let’s hear it for the band! On bass—the bad cat with the funny hat
—Titian the Venetian! And joining him on viola—Crazy Veronese!
• Exit behind Mona into the Salle Denon (Room 701). The dramatic
Romantic room is to your left, and the grand Neoclassical room is to your
right. These two rooms feature the most exciting French canvases in the
Louvre. Turn right into the Neoclassical room (Salle Daru, Room 702) and
kneel before the largest canvas in the Louvre.


FRENCH PAINTING (1780-1850)
Jacques-Louis David, The Coronation of Emperor Napoleon
(Sacre de l’Empereur Napoléon), 1806-1807
Napoleon holds aloft an imperial crown. This common-born son of
immigrants is about to be crowned emperor of a “New Rome.” He has just
made his wife, Josephine, the empress, and she kneels at his feet. Seated
behind Napoleon is the pope, who journeyed from Rome to place the
imperial crown on his head. But Napoleon feels that no one is worthy of the
task. At the last moment, he shrugs the pope aside, grabs the crown, holds it
up for all to see...and crowns himself. The pope looks p.o.’d.
   After the French people decapitated their king during the Revolution
(1793), their fledgling democracy floundered in chaos. France was united
by a charismatic, brilliant, temperamental, upstart general who kept his feet
on the ground, his eyes on the horizon, and his hand in his coat—Napoleon
Bonaparte. Napoleon quickly conquered most of Europe and insisted on
being made emperor (not merely king). The painter David (dah-VEED)
recorded the coronation for posterity.
   The radiant woman in the gallery in the background center wasn’t
actually there. Napoleon’s mother couldn’t make it to see her boy become
the most powerful man in Europe, but he had David paint her in anyway.
(There’s a key on the frame telling who’s who in the picture.)
   The setting for the coronation was the ultra-Gothic Notre-Dame
Cathedral. But Napoleon wanted a location that would reflect the glories of
Greece and the grandeur of Rome. So, interior decorators erected stage sets
of Greek columns and Roman arches to give the cathedral the architectural
political correctness you see in this painting. (The pietà statue on the right
edge of the painting remains in Notre-Dame to this day.)
   David was the new emperor’s official painter and propagandist, in
charge of color-coordinating the costumes and flags for public ceremonies
and spectacles. (Find his self-portrait with curly gray hair in the
Coronation, way up in the second balcony, peeking around the tassel
directly above Napoleon’s crown.) His “Neoclassical” style influenced
French fashion. Take a look at his Madame Juliet Récamier portrait on the
opposite wall, showing a modern Parisian woman in ancient garb and
Pompeii hairstyle reclining on a Roman couch. Nearby paintings, such as
The Oath of the Horatii (Le Serment des Horaces), are fine examples of
Neoclassicism, with Greek subjects, patriotic sentiment, and a clean, simple
style.
• As you double back toward the Romantic room, stop at...

Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, La Grande Odalisque, 1814
Take Venus de Milo, turn her around, lay her down, and stick a hash pipe
next to her, and you have the Grande Odalisque. OK, maybe you’d have to
add a vertebra or two.
   Using clean, polished, sculptural lines, Ingres (ang-gruh) exaggerates the
S-curve of a standing Greek nude. As in the Venus de Milo, rough folds of
cloth set off her smooth skin. Ingres gave the face, too, a touch of Venus’
idealized features, taking nature and improving on it. Contrast the cool
colors of this statue-like nude with Titian’s golden girls. Ingres preserves
Venus’ backside for posterior—I mean, posterity.




• Cross back through the Salle Denon and into Room 700, gushing with
French Romanticism.

Théodore Géricault, The Raft of the Medusa (Le Radeau de la
Méduse), 1819
In the artistic war between hearts and minds, the heart style was known as
Romanticism. Stressing motion and emotion, it was the flip side of cool,
balanced Neoclassicism, though they both flourished in the early 1800s.
    What better setting for an emotional work than a shipwreck? Clinging to
a raft is a tangle of bodies and lunatics sprawled over each other. The scene
writhes with agitated, ominous motion—the ripple of muscles, churning
clouds, and choppy seas. On the right is a deathly green corpse dangling
overboard. The face of the man at left, cradling a dead body, says it all—the
despair of spending weeks stranded in the middle of nowhere.




    This painting was based on the actual sinking of the ship Medusa off the
coast of Africa in 1816. About 150 people packed onto the raft. After
floating on the open seas for 12 days—suffering hardship and hunger, even
resorting to cannibalism—only 15 survived. The story was made-to-order
for a painter determined to shock the public and arouse its emotions. That
painter was young Géricault (ZHAIR-ee-ko). He interviewed survivors and
honed his craft, sketching dead bodies in the morgue and the twisted faces
of lunatics in asylums, capturing the moment when all hope is lost.
    But wait. There’s a stir in the crowd. Someone has spotted something.
The bodies rise up in a pyramid of hope, culminating in a flag wave. They
signal frantically, trying to catch the attention of the tiny ship on the
horizon, their last desperate hope...which did finally save them. Géricault
uses rippling movement and powerful colors to catch us up in the
excitement. If art controls your heartbeat, this is a masterpiece.
Eugène Delacroix, Liberty Leading the People (La Liberté
Guidant le Peuple), 1831
The year is 1830. King Charles has just issued the 19th-century equivalent
of the Patriot Act, and his subjects are angry. Parisians take to the streets
once again, Les Miz-style, to fight royalist oppressors. The people triumph
—replacing the king with Louis-Philippe, who is happy to rule within the
constraints of a modern constitution. There’s a hard-bitten proletarian with a
sword (far left), an intellectual with a top hat and a sawed-off shotgun, and
even a little boy brandishing pistols.




    Leading them on through the smoke and over the dead and dying is the
figure of Liberty, a strong woman waving the French flag. Does this symbol
of victory look familiar? It’s the Winged Victory, wingless and topless.
    To stir our emotions, Delacroix (del-ah-kwah) uses only three major
colors—the red, white, and blue of the French flag. France is the symbol of
modern democracy, and this painting has long stirred its citizens’ passion
for liberty. The French weren’t the first to adopt democracy in its modern
form (Americans were), nor are they the best working example of it, but
they’ve had to try harder to achieve it than any other country. No sooner
would they throw one king or dictator out than they’d get another. They’re
now working on their fifth republic.
    This symbol of freedom is a fitting tribute to the Louvre, the first
museum ever opened to the common rabble of humanity. The good things
in life don’t belong only to a small, wealthy part of society, but to everyone.
The motto of France is Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité—liberty, equality, and
brotherhood for all.
• Exit the room at the far end (past the Café Mollien) and go downstairs,
where you’ll bump into the bum of a large, twisting male nude looking like
he’s just waking up after a thousand-year nap.


MORE ITALIAN RENAISSANCE
Michelangelo, Slaves (Esclaves), 1513-1515
These two statues by the earth’s greatest sculptor are a bridge between the
ancient and modern worlds. Michelangelo, like his fellow Renaissance
artists, learned from the Greeks. The perfect anatomy, twisting poses, and
idealized faces appear as if they could have been created 2,000 years earlier.
    The so-called Dying Slave (also called the Sleeping Slave, looking like
he should be stretched out on a sofa) twists listlessly against his T-shirt-like
bonds, revealing his smooth skin. Compare the polished detail of the
rippling, bulging left arm with the sketchy details of the face and neck. With
Michelangelo, the body does the talking. This is probably the most sensual
nude that Michelangelo, the master of the male body, ever created.
    The Rebellious Slave fights against his bondage. His shoulders rotate
one way, his head and leg turn the other. He looks upward, straining to get
free. He even seems to be trying to release himself from the rock he’s made
of. Michelangelo said that his purpose was to carve away the marble to
reveal the figures God put inside. This slave shows the agony of that
process and the ecstasy of the result.
• Tour over! These two may be slaves of the museum, but you are free to go.
You’ve seen the essential Louvre. But no Louvre visit is complete without
first taking a photo alongside the statue located 20 paces away, which I
believe is titled “Apollo Taking Selfie.” Or, for romantics, continue to the
far corner of the room (on the right), and swoon at Antonio Canova’s
sculpture Psyche Revived by Cupid’s Kiss.
    To leave the museum, continue out this hall, take four steps down, notice
the iconic pyramid outside the windows on the left (where you’re heading),
and turn right, following signs down the stairs to the Sortie.
    But, of course, there’s so much more. After a break (or on a second visit
—and a second entry fee, even with the Museum Pass), consider a stroll
through a few rooms of the Richelieu wing, which contain some of the
Louvre’s most ancient pieces. Bible students, amateur archaeologists, and
veterans of the Iraq conflict may find the collection especially interesting.


NEAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES
Saddam Hussein was only the latest iron-fisted, palace-building conqueror
to fall in the long history of the region that roughly corresponds with
modern Iraq. Its origins stretch back to the dawn of time. Civilization began
6,000 years ago between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, in the area called
the Fertile Crescent.
    In the Richelieu wing, you can quickly sweep through 2,000 years of
this area’s ancient history, enjoying some of the Louvre’s biggest and oldest
artifacts. See how each new civilization toppled the previous one—pulling
down its statues, destroying its palaces, looting its cultural heritage, and
replacing it with victory monuments of its own...only to be toppled again by
the next wave of history.




   The iconoclasm continues to this day, as Islamist militants have
vandalized ancient artifacts at Nineveh and elsewhere—making the
Louvre’s collection all the more priceless. It’s interesting to note that while
Westerners make pilgrimages to the Greek and Renaissance sections of the
Louvre, visitors from the Middle East are drawn to this part of the
museum’s collection.
• From under the pyramid, enter the Richelieu wing. Show your ticket, then
take the first right. Go up one flight of stairs and one escalator to the
ground floor (rez-de-chaussée), where you’ll find the Near Eastern
antiquities. Walk straight off the escalator, enter Salle 236 (Mesopotamie
Archaïque), and come face-to-face with fragments of the broken...

Stela of the Vultures (Stèle des Vautours), 2600-2330 BC
As old as the pyramids, this Sumerian stela (ceremonial stone pillar) is
thought to be the world’s oldest surviving historical document. Its images
and words record the battle between the city of Lagash (100 miles north of
modern Basra) and its neighboring archrival, Umma.




   Circle around the partition to the other side of the stela. “Read” the stela
from top to bottom. Top level: Behind a wall of shields, a phalanx of
helmeted soldiers advances, trampling the enemy underfoot. They pile the
corpses (right), and vultures swoop down from above to pluck the remains.
Middle level: King Eannatum waves to the crowd from his chariot in the
victory parade. Bottom level: They dig a mass grave—one of 20 for the
36,000 enemies dead—while a priest (top of the fragment, in a skirt) gives
thanks to the gods. A tethered ox (see his big head tied to a stake) is about
to become a burnt sacrifice.
    The inscription on the stela is in cuneiform, the world’s first written
language, invented by the Sumerians.
• Continue into Salle 234, with the blissful...




Statue of Ebih-il, Superintendent of Mari (Statue de l’Intendant
Ebih-il), c. 2400 BC
Bald, bearded, blue-eyed Ebih-il (his name is inscribed on his shoulder) sits
in his fleece skirt, folds his hands reverently across his chest, and gazes
rapturously into space, dreaming of...Ishtar. A high-ranking dignitary, Ebih-
il placed this statue of himself in the goddess Ishtar’s temple to declare his
perpetual devotion to her.
    Ishtar was the chief goddess of many Middle Eastern peoples. As
goddess of both love and war, she was a favorite of horny soldiers. She was
a giver of life (this statue is dedicated “to Ishtar the virile”), yet also
miraculously a virgin. She was also a great hunter with bow and arrow, and
a great lover (“Her lips are sweet...her figure is beautiful, her eyes are
brilliant...women and men adore her,” sang the Hymn to Ishtar, c. 1600
BC).
    Ebih-il adores her eternally with his eyes made of seashells and lapis
lazuli. The smile on his face reflects the pleasure the goddess has just given
him, perhaps through one of the sacred prostitutes who resided in Ishtar’s
temple.
• Go up the five steps behind Ebih-il, and turn left into Salle 228, containing
a dozen statues of the same man.
Statue of Gudea, Prince of Lagash (Statue de Gudea, Prince de
Lagash), c. 2120 BC
Gudea (r. 2141-2122 BC), in his wool stocking cap (actually a royal
turban), folds his hands and prays to the gods to save his people from
invading barbarians. One of Sumeria’s last great rulers, the peaceful and
pious Gudea (his name means “the destined”) rebuilt temples (where these
statues once stood) to thank the gods for their help.




• Exit Salle 228 at the far end and enter Salle 227, with the large black stela
of Hammurabi.

Code of Hammurabi, King of Babylon (Code de Hammurabi, Roi
de Babylone), 1792-1750 BC
King Hammurabi (r. c. 1792-1750 BC) extended the reach of the great
Babylonian empire, which joined Sumer and Akkad (stretching from
modern-day Baghdad to the Persian Gulf). He proclaimed 282 laws, all
inscribed on this eight-foot black basalt stela—one of the first formal legal
documents, four centuries before the Ten Commandments. Stelas such as
this likely dotted Hammurabi’s empire, and this one may have stood in
Babylon before being moved to Susa, Iran.




   At the top of the stela, Hammurabi (standing and wearing Gudea’s hat of
kingship) receives the scepter of judgment from the god of justice and the
sun, who radiates flames from his shoulders. The inscription begins, “When
Anu the Sublime...called me, Hammurabi, by name...I did right, and
brought about the well-being of the oppressed.”
    Next come the laws, scratched in cuneiform down the length of the stela,
some 3,500 lines reading right to left. The laws cover very specific
situations, everything from lying, theft, and trade to marriage and medical
malpractice. The legal innovation was the immediate retribution for
wrongdoing, often with poetic justice. Here’s a sample:
    #1: If any man ensnares another falsely, he shall be put to death.
    #57: If your sheep graze another man’s land, you must repay 20 gur of
grain.
    #129: If a couple is caught in adultery, they shall both be tied up and
thrown in the water.
    #137: If you divorce your wife, you must pay alimony and child support.
    #218: A surgeon who bungles an operation shall have his hands cut off.


    Just Enough Geography and History for This
                      Tour
  The ancient region of Mesopotamia generally matches the contours of
  present-day Iraq. Modern Baghdad sits roughly in the middle, along
  the Tigris. The Sumerians inhabited the south, the Assyrians the north,
  and the Akkadians and Babylonians the center, around Baghdad.
  Here’s a brief timeline:
3500-2400 BC: Sumerian city-states flourish between the Tigris and
Euphrates rivers. Sumerians invent cuneiform writing.
2300 BC: Akkadians invade Sumer.
1750 BC: Hammurabi establishes the first Babylonian empire.
710 BC: Sargon II rules over a vast Assyrian-controlled empire,
encompassing modern Iraq, Israel, Syria, and Egypt.
612 BC: Babylonians revolt against the Assyrians and destroy their
capital of Nineveh, then build their own—Babylon.
    #282: If a slave shall say, “You are not my master,” the master can cut
off the slave’s ear.
    The most quoted laws—summing up the spirit of ancient Near Eastern
justice—are #196 (“If a man put out the eye of another man, his eye shall
be put out”) and #200 (“a tooth for a tooth”).
• Facing the front of the stela, veer ahead to the left and enter the large,
bright Salle 229, dominated by colossal winged bulls with human heads.
These sculptures—including five winged bulls and many relief panels along
the walls—are from the...



                            The Assyrians
  This Semitic people from the agriculturally challenged hills of
  northern Mesopotamia became traders and conquerors, not farmers.
  They conquered their southern neighbors and dominated the Near East
  for 300 years (c. 900-600 BC).
      Their strength came from a superb army (chariots, mounted
  cavalry, and siege engines), a policy of terrorism against enemies (“I
  tied their heads to tree trunks all around the city,” reads a royal
  inscription), ethnic cleansing and mass deportations of the vanquished,
  and efficient administration (roads and express postal service). They
  have been called “The Romans of the East.”


Palace of Sargon II
Sargon II, the Assyrian king (r. 721-705 BC), spared no expense on his
palace (see various reconstructions of the palace on plaques around the
room). In Assyrian society, the palace of the king—not the temple of the
gods—was the focus of life, and each ruler demonstrated his authority with
large residences.
    Sargon II actually built a whole new city for his palace, just north of the
traditional capital of Nineveh (modern-day Mosul). He called it Dur
Sharrukin (“Sargonburg”), and the city’s vast dimensions were 4,000 cubits
by—oh, excuse me—it covered about 150 football fields pieced together.
The whole city was built on a raised, artificial mound, and the 25-acre
palace itself sat even higher, surrounded by walls, with courtyards, temples,
the king’s residence, and a wedding cake-shaped temple (called a ziggurat)
dedicated to the god Sin.
• Start with the two big bulls supporting a (reconstructed) arch.

Winged Human-Headed Bulls (Taureau Androcéphale Ailé), c.
721-704 BC
These 30-ton, 14-foot alabaster bulls with human faces once guarded the
entrance to the throne room of Sargon II. A visitor to the palace back then
could have looked over the bulls’ heads and seen a 15-story ziggurat
(stepped-pyramid temple) towering overhead. The winged bulls were
guardian spirits, warding off demons and intimidating liberals.
    Between their legs are cuneiform inscriptions such as: “I, Sargon, King
of the Universe, built palaces for my royal residence...I had winged bulls
with human heads carved from great blocks of mountain stone, and I placed
them at the doors facing the four winds as powerful divine guardians...My
creation amazed all who gazed upon it.”
• We’ll see a few relief panels from the palace, working counterclockwise
around the room. Start with the panel just to the left of the two big bulls (as
you face them). Find the bearded, earringed man in whose image the bulls
were made.
King Sargon II and a Dignitary (Le Roi Sargon II et un Haut
Dignitaire), c. 710 BC
Sargon II, wearing a fez-like crown with a cone on the top and straps down
the back, cradles his scepter and raises his staff to receive a foreign
ambassador who has come to pay tribute. Sargon II controlled a vast
empire, consisting of modern-day Iraq and extending westward to the
Mediterranean and Egypt.




    Before becoming emperor, Sargon II was a conquering general who
invaded Israel (2 Kings 17:1-6). After a three-year siege, he took Jerusalem
and deported much of the population, inspiring the legends of the “Lost”
Ten Tribes. The prophet Isaiah saw him as God’s tool to punish the sinful
Israelites, “to seize loot and snatch plunder, and to trample them down like
mud in the streets” (Isaiah 10:6).
• On the wall to the left of Sargon are four panels depicting the...
Transport of the Cedars of Lebanon (Transport du Bois de
Cèdre du Liban), c. 713-706 BC
Boats carry the finest quality logs for Sargon II’s palace, crossing a wavy
sea populated with fish, turtles, crabs, and mermen. The transport process is
described in the Bible (1 Kings 5:9): “My men will haul them down from
Lebanon to the sea, and I will float them in rafts to the place you specify.”




• Continue counterclockwise around the room—past more big, winged
animals, past the huge hero, Gilgamesh, crushing a lion—until you reach
more relief panels. These depict...

Scenes of Court Life
The brown, eroded gypsum panels we see here were originally painted and
varnished. Placed side by side, they would have stretched over a mile. The
panels read like a comic strip, showing the king’s men parading in to serve
him.
   First, soldiers sheathe their swords and fold their hands reverently. A
winged spirit prepares them to enter the king’s presence by shaking a pine
cone to anoint them with holy perfume. Next, servants hurry to the throne
room with the king’s dinner, carrying his table, chair, and bowl. Other
servants ready the king’s horses and chariots. They all proceed forward,
ready to serve their master—the all-powerful ruler of the civilized world.




From Sargon to Saddam
Sargon II’s palace remained unfinished and was later burned and buried.
Sargon’s great Assyrian empire dissolved over the next few generations.
When the Babylonians revolted and conquered their northern neighbors
(612 BC), the whole Middle East applauded. As the Bible put it: “Nineveh
is in ruins—who will mourn for her?... Everyone who hears the news claps
his hands at your fall, for who has not felt your endless cruelty?” (Nahum
3:7, 19).
    The new capital was Babylon (50 miles south of modern Baghdad),
ruled by King Nebuchadnezzar, who conquered Judea (586 BC, the Bible’s
“Babylonian Captivity”) and built a palace with the Hanging Gardens, one
of the Seven Wonders of the World.
    Over the succeeding centuries, Babylon/Baghdad fell to Persians (539
BC), Greeks (Alexander the Great, 331 BC), Persians again (second century
BC), Arab Muslims (AD 634), Mongol hordes (Genghis Khan’s grandson,
1258), Iranians (1502), Ottoman Turks (1535), British-controlled kings
(1921), and military regimes (1958), the most recent headed by Saddam
Hussein (1979).
   After toppling Saddam Hussein in 2003, President George W. Bush
declared, “Mission accomplished!” After five thousand years of invasions,
violence, and regime change, Iraq was finally...well, maybe not.
