Day Trip: Versailles

VERSAILLES
Château de Versailles
  GETTING THERE
  PLANNING YOUR TIME
Orientation
Map: Versailles
 The Tour Begins
 The Château
 Map: Versailles Château
    THE KING’S WING
    THE QUEEN’S WING
 The Gardens
 Trianon Palaces and Domaine de Marie-Antoinette
 Map: Domaine de Marie-Antoinette
    GRAND TRIANON
    DOMAINE DE MARIE-ANTOINETTE
 Town of Versailles
    Map: Versailles Town Hotels & Restaurants
    SLEEPING IN VERSAILLES
    EATING IN VERSAILLES
Every king’s dream, Versailles (vehr-“sigh”) was the residence of French
monarchs and the cultural heartbeat of Europe for about 100 years—until
the Revolution of 1789 changed all that. The Sun King (Louis XIV) created
Versailles, spending freely from the public treasury to turn his dad’s hunting
lodge into a palace fit for the gods (among whom he counted himself).
Louis XV and Louis XVI spent much of the 18th century gilding Louis
XIV’s lily. In 1837, about 50 years after the royal family was evicted by
citizen-protesters, King Louis-Philippe (then a constitutional monarch
rather than a divine one) opened the palace as a museum. Today you can
visit parts of the huge palace and wander through acres of manicured
gardens sprinkled with fountains and studded with statues. Europe’s next-
best palaces are just Versailles wannabes.
    Worth ▲▲▲, Versailles offers three blockbuster sights. The main
attraction is the palace itself, called the Château. Here you walk through
dozens of lavish, chandeliered rooms once inhabited by Louis XIV and his
successors, starring the magnificent Hall of Mirrors. Next come the
expansive Gardens behind the palace, a landscaped wonderland crossed
with footpaths and dotted with statues and fountains. Finally, at the far end
of the Gardens, is the pastoral area called the Trianon Palaces and
Domaine de Marie-Antoinette (a.k.a. Trianon/Domaine), a vast walled
enclosure designed for frolicking blue bloods and featuring several small
palaces and Marie’s Hamlet—perfect for getting away from the mobs at the
Château.




            Kings and Queens and Guillotines
  Versailles is the architectural embodiment of the ancien régime, when
  society was divided into rulers and the ruled, when you were born to
  be rich or to be poor. To some, Versailles is the pinnacle of
civilization; to others, it’s a sign of a civilization in decay. Either way,
it remains one of Europe’s most impressive sights.
    Versailles was the residence of the king and the seat of France’s
government for a hundred years. Louis XIV (r. 1643-1715) moved
from the Louvre, the previous royal residence, and built an elaborate
palace in the forests and swamps of Versailles, 10 miles west of Paris.
The reasons for the move were personal—Louis XIV loved the
outdoors and disliked the sniping environs of stuffy Paris—but also
political.




   Louis XIV was creating the first modern, centralized state. At
Versailles, he consolidated his government’s scattered ministries so
that he could personally control policy. More important, he obliged
France’s nobles to be in residence at Versailles. Living directly under
Louis’ control, the “domesticated” aristocracy couldn’t interfere with
the way he ran things.
   With 18 million people united under one king (England had only
5.5 million), a booming economy, and a powerful military, France was
Europe’s number-one power and Versailles was its cultural heartbeat.
Throughout Europe, when you said “the king,” you meant the French
king—Louis XIV. Every king wanted a palace like Versailles.
Everyone learned French. French taste in clothes, hairstyles, table
manners, theater, music, art, and kissing spread across the Continent.
That cultural dominance continued, to some extent, right up to the
20th century.

Louis XIV
At the center of all this was Europe’s greatest king. He was a true
Renaissance Man, a century after the Renaissance: athletic, good-
looking, a musician, dancer, horseman, statesman, patron of the arts,
and lover. For all his grandeur, he was one of history’s most polite and
approachable kings, a good listener who could put even commoners at
ease in his presence.
   Louis XIV called himself the Sun King because he gave life and
warmth to all he touched. He was also thought of as Apollo, the Greek
god of the sun. Versailles became the personal temple of this god on
earth, decorated with statues and symbols of Apollo, the sun, and
Louis XIV himself. The classical themes throughout underlined the
divine right of France’s kings and queens to rule without limit.
   Louis XIV was a hands-on king who personally ran affairs of state.
All decisions were made by him. Nobles, who in other countries were
the center of power, became virtual vassals dependent on Louis’
generosity. For 70-some years he was the perfect embodiment of the
absolute monarch. He summed it up best himself with his famous
expression—“L’état, c’est moi!”: “The state, that’s me!”

Another Louis or Two to Remember
Three kings lived in Versailles during its century of glory. Louis XIV
built it and established French dominance. Louis XV, his great-
  grandson, carried on the tradition and policies, but without the Sun
  King’s flair. During Louis XV’s reign (1715-1774), France’s power
  abroad was weakening, and there were rumblings of rebellion from
  within.
      France’s monarchy was crumbling, and the time was ripe for a
  strong leader to reestablish the old feudal order. They didn’t get one.
  Instead, they got Louis XVI (r. 1774-1792), a shy, meek bookworm,
  the kind of guy who lost sleep over revolutionary graffiti...because it
  was misspelled. Louis XVI married a sweet girl from the Austrian
  royal family, Marie-Antoinette, and together they retreated into the
  idyllic gardens of Versailles while revolutionary fires smoldered. Each
  had their final day on Paris’ Place de la Concorde, thanks to the
  brutally efficient guillotine.


   Visiting Versailles can seem daunting because of its size and hordes of
visitors. But if you follow my tips, a trip here during even the busiest times
is manageable.


GETTING THERE
By Train: The town of Versailles is 35 minutes southwest of Paris. Take
RER/Train-C from any of these stations: Gare d’Austerlitz, St. Michel,
Musée d’Orsay, Invalides, Pont de l’Alma, or Champ de Mars. Use your
Navigo Découverte pass, buy a four-zone all-day Easy pass, or, if paper
tickets are still available, buy a round-trip Versailles Rive Gauche/Château
ticket from a ticket machine or ticket window (about €7.20 round-trip,
credit card or coins, 4/hour). Not all trains go to Versailles: Check the
departure board, which will list the next train to “Versailles Rive
Gauche/Château” and its track.
    Board your train and relax. (It’s a good time to read the “Kings and
Queens and Guillotines” sidebar in this chapter for some background.) On
all RER/Train-C Versailles-bound trains, Versailles Rive Gauche/Château is
the final stop.
    To reach the Château, follow the flow: Turn right out of the station, then
left at the first boulevard, and walk 10 minutes.
    Returning to Paris: To return to Paris from the Versailles Rive
Gauche/Château train station, just hop on the next train—all trains
departing this station zip back to the city, stopping at all stations along line
C. The monitor above the turnstiles shows how many minutes until the next
train leaves and from which track. And remember, your RER/Train-C ticket
covers any connecting Métro ride once you’re back downtown.
    By Taxi: The 30-minute ride (without traffic) between Versailles and
Paris costs about €65.
    By Tour: Minivan tours will pick you up at your hotel and whisk you
painlessly to the Château and back. Paris Webservices tours are excellent
(around €120/person, RS%—see here for details). Big-bus tour companies
do Versailles day trips from Paris for around €30/person (transportation
only) or about €90/person with guided tour and entry (get details at your
hotel or www.pariscityvision.com).
    By Car: Get on the périphérique freeway that circles Paris, and take the
toll-free A-13 autoroute toward Rouen. Exit at Versailles, follow signs to
Versailles Château, and avoid the hectic Garden lots by parking in the big
pay lot at the foot of the Château on Place d’Armes (about €5/hour, €36/11
hours).


PLANNING YOUR TIME
Versailles merits a full sightseeing day. In general, allow 1.5 hours each for
the Château, the Gardens (includes time for lunch), and the
Trianon/Domaine. Add another two hours for round-trip transit, and you’re
looking at nearly an eight-hour day.
   Versailles is all about crowd management; a well-planned visit can make
or break your experience. Take this advice to heart. Versailles is much more
enjoyable with a relaxed, unhurried approach. Here’s what I’d do on a first
visit to avoid the worst lines and crowds:
• Get an individual ticket or Le Passeport pass in advance and choose
  your Château entry time (see next). If you have a Paris Museum Pass,
  you have several options—see “Using the Paris Museum Pass,” later.
• In high season, avoid holidays, Sundays, Tuesdays, and Saturdays—in
   that order—when crowds smother the palace interior. Thursdays and
   Fridays are best.
• Leave Paris by 8:00, get in line before the palace opens at 9:00, and
  follow my self-guided tour of the Château interior. Have lunch. Spend the
  afternoon touring the Gardens and the Trianon Palaces/Domaine de
  Marie-Antoinette. To shorten your visit, skip the Trianon/Domaine, which
  takes 1.5 hours to see, plus a 30-minute walk each way.
• An alternate plan is to arrive later in the morning and see the
  Trianon/Domaine first. Arrive at Versailles around 11:00 and go directly
  to the Trianon/Domaine to be there when it opens at noon: Either walk
  directly there through the Gardens (do not enter the Château or stand in
  any line for the Château) or catch the petit train tram (see the “Getting
  Around the Gardens” sidebar later in this chapter). Then work your way
  back through the Gardens to the Château, arriving after the crowds have
  died down (usually by 14:00, later on Sun).
• If you’re a late riser, leave Paris around 12:30 and start at the Château
   after the morning rush and end at the Trianon/Domaine.



                            Orientation
Cost and Reservations: A timed-entry ticket is required to enter the
   Château. Reserve ahead (no fee) and book your entry time on the
   Versailles website. You can also purchase Versailles tickets at any Paris
   TI or at FNAC department stores (small fee). If you have a Paris
   Museum Pass, see “Using the Paris Museum Pass,” later.
      Château: €18 (Château only) or €20 Le Passeport ticket (includes
   Trianon/Domaine; €27 on Garden Spectacle days), both tickets come
   with timed entry and audioguide to the Château. Free for kids 17 and
   under, and free on the first Sun of the month Nov-March.
      Trianon Palaces and Domaine de Marie-Antoinette: €12, covers
   all the buildings within this walled enclosure. Free for kids 17 and
   under, and free on the first Sun of the month Nov-March.
      Gardens: Free on weekdays April-Oct, except when there are events
   in the Gardens (likely on Tue and Fri-Sun in high season—see
   “Spectacles in the Gardens,” later). The Gardens are free daily Nov-
   March. You can enter the Gardens directly from the passageway to the
   left of the main Château entrance (see the “Versailles Château” map).
Hours: The Château is open Tue-Sun 9:00-18:30, Nov-March until 17:30,
   closed Mon year-round.
      The Trianon Palaces and Domaine de Marie-Antoinette are open
   Tue-Sun 12:00-18:30, Nov-March until 17:30, closed Mon year-round
   (off-season only the two Trianon Palaces and the Hamlet are open, not
   other outlying buildings), last entry 45 minutes before closing.
      The Gardens are open daily 8:00-20:30, Nov-March until 18:00, but
   may close earlier for special events.
Information: Use the excellent website to book your entry and check for
   updates—www.chateauversailles.fr. The free Versailles app includes
   interactive maps that work without an internet connection. The palace’s
   general contact number is +33 1 30 83 78 00. At the Château, an
   information office is to the left as you face the palace.
Using the Paris Museum Pass: The Paris Museum Pass covers the most
   important parts of the complex (Château and Trianon/Domaine); it does
   not include the Gardens on Spectacle days. To enter the Château using
   the pass, you must book an entry time (“Palace Ticket”—free) on the
   Versailles website.
Buying Tickets in Versailles: If you arrive in Versailles without a pass or
   ticket—and reserved entry time—you may have to wait (sometimes
   hours or days) to enter the Château. If you have internet access, try the
   website, then these options:
      The Versailles TI sells tickets (10 percent fee; you’ll pass the TI on
   your walk from the train station to the palace—it’s just past the fancy
   Hôtel at 2 bis Avenue de Paris, open Tue-Sun 8:30-19:00, Mon 9:30-
   18:00, shorter hours in winter).
      Get Your Guide usually has space on its guided tours (€55—twice
   the price of booking your own tickets and tour yourself), which include
   entry to the Château but not the Domaine de Marie-Antoinette or
   Gardens if it’s a fee day. Their office is across from the train station,
   under the stone arch at #10, www.getyourguide.co.uk).
      Your last option is the busy Château ticket-sales office (to the left as
   you face the palace). Ticket windows accept American credit cards.
   Once you know your entry time, you can kill time by wandering the
   gardens.
Security Checkpoints: There are two security checkpoints: at the
   Château’s courtyard entry and again at the Château entrance (longest
   lines 10:00-12:00).
Pickpockets: Assume pickpockets are working the tourist crowds.
Tours: The 1.5-hour English guided tour of the Château gives you access
   to a few extra rooms (the itinerary varies) and lets you skip the security
   line at the Château entrance (€10, generally at least 5 tours in English
   between 9:00 and 15:00 April-Oct; off-season likely only at 9:30 and
   14:00). Book in advance on the palace website, or reserve immediately
   upon arrival at the guided-tours office (in the wing to the left of the
   Château—but location in flux; ask if you don’t see it). Tours often sell
   out by 12:00 (and sometimes by 10:00), though more are usually
   available than indicated online.
      A free and worthwhile audioguide to the Château is included in your
   admission. To avoid waiting at the audioguide desk, download the free
   “Palace of Versailles” app and listen to the audioguide on your phone
   (download in advance).
         Download my free Versailles audio tour. (Note that my tour and
   the official audioguide complement each other—”A” students enjoy
   listening to both.)
Spectacles in the Gardens: The Gardens and fountains at Versailles come
   alive at selected times, offering a glimpse into Louis XIV’s remarkable
   world. The Sun King had his engineers literally reroute a river to fuel
   his fountains and feed his plants. Even by today’s standards, the
   fountains are impressive. Check the Versailles website for current hours
   and to find out what else might be happening during your visit.
      The Gardens’ fountains are in full squirt during a production called
   Les Grandes Eaux Musicales, with 55 fountains gushing for an hour in
   the morning and up to two hours in the afternoon; individual fountains
   run periodically throughout the day (the impressive Neptune fountain
   runs every 15 minutes); it’s all accompanied by loud classical music
   (€9.50; April-Oct Sat-Sun 11:00-12:00 & 15:30-17:00, also Tue May-
   June 11:00-12:00 & 14:30-16:30. On varied weekdays April-Oct, you
   get the music but no fountains (called Les Jardins Musicaux, €8.50).
   For all garden events, check www.chateauversailles.fr. Pay or show
   proof of payment at the entrance to the Gardens.
      And finally, on Saturday nights in summer, Les Grandes Eaux
   Nocturnes lets you meander past a thousand lights, illuminated groves,
   and shimmering pools while the fountains play to the sound of the Sun
   King’s music. Your experience ends with a fireworks show over the
   largest fountain pool (€29, Sat early June-mid-Sept 20:30-23:00,
   fireworks at 22:50). On these nights, the Royal Serenade option lets you
   go into the palace with costumed characters (€42 combo-ticket).
Baggage Check: Free and located just after Château entry security. You
   must retrieve your items one hour before closing (maximum size is
   same as airlines allow for carry-on bags). Large bags and baby strollers
   are not allowed in the Château and the two Trianons (use a baby
   backpack).
Services: WCs are plentiful and well signed in the Château, but fewer and
   farther between in the Gardens.
Eating: Near the Château entry, the $ Grand Café d’Orléans offers good-
   value self-service meals (sandwiches and small salads, great for
   picnicking in the Gardens). In the Gardens, you’ll find several cafés and
   snack stands with fair prices. One is located near the Latona Fountain
   (less crowded) and others are in an atmospheric cluster at the Grand
   Canal (more crowds and more choices, including two restaurants).
      Across from the train station, there’s a McDonald’s and a Starbucks
   (both with WCs and Wi-Fi). For more eating options in the town of
   Versailles, see the end of this chapter.
Starring: Luxurious palaces, endless gardens, Louis XIV, Marie-
   Antoinette, and the ancien régime.


                       The Tour Begins
On this self-guided tour, we’ll see the Château (the State Apartments of the
king as well as the Hall of Mirrors), the landscaped Gardens in the
“backyard,” and the Trianon Palaces and Domaine de Marie-Antoinette,
located at the far end of the Gardens. If your time is limited or you don’t
enjoy walking, I give you permission to skip the Trianon/Domaine, which is
a hefty 30-minute hike (each way) from the Château.
                           The Château
• Stand in the huge courtyard and face the palace. The golden Royal Gate
in the center of the courtyard—nearly 260 feet long and decorated with
100,000 gold leaves—is a replica of the original. The entrance to the
Château is marked Entrance A (where the line usually is). Before entering
(or while standing in line), take in the Château and the open-air courtyard
on the other side of the golden Royal Gate.

Original Château and Courtyard
The section of the palace with the clock is the original château, once a small
hunting lodge where little Louis XIV spent his happiest boyhood years.
Naturally, the Sun King’s private bedroom (the three arched windows
beneath the clock) faced the rising sun. The palace and grounds are laid out
on an east-west axis.
   Once king, Louis XIV expanded the lodge by attaching wings, creating
the present U-shape. Later, the long north and south wings were built. The
total cost of the project has been estimated at half of France’s entire GNP
for one year.
    Think how busy this courtyard must have been 300 years ago. As many
as 5,000 nobles were here at any one time, each with an entourage. Riding
in sedan-chair taxis, they’d buzz from games to parties to amorous
rendezvous. Servants ran about delivering secret messages and roast legs of
lamb. Horse-drawn carriages arrived at the fancy gate with their finely
dressed passengers, having driven up the broad boulevard that ran directly
from Paris (the horse stables still line the boulevard). Incredible as it seems,
both the grounds and most of the palace were public territory, where even
the lowliest peasants could come to gawk—provided they passed through a
metal detector and followed a dress code. Then, as now, there were hordes
of tourists, pickpockets, palace workers, and men selling wind-up children’s
toys.
• As you enter the Château, you’ll find an information desk (get a map) and
bag check. Follow the crowds directly across the courtyard, where you’ll go
back inside. If you haven’t already downloaded the official Versailles app,
line up here for your free (and worth-the-wait) audioguide. Now make your
way to the start of our tour.
    On the way, you’ll pass through a dozen ground-floor rooms. The first
offers a glimpse through a doorway at the impressive Royal Chapel, which
we’ll see again upstairs. The next rooms have interesting videos of palace
history and models of Versailles at different stages of growth. The second
floor has skippable paintings of Louis XIV, XV, XVI, and more. Climb the
stairs and keep following the flow. You’ll eventually reach a palatial
golden-brown room, with a doorway that overlooks the Royal Chapel. Let
the tour begin.

Royal Chapel
Dut-dutta-dah! Every morning at 10:00, the organist and musicians struck
up the music, these big golden doors opened, and Louis XIV and his family
stepped onto the balcony to attend Mass. While Louis looked down on the
golden altar, the lowly nobles on the ground floor knelt with their backs to
the altar and looked up—worshipping Louis worshipping God. Important
religious ceremonies took place here, including the marriage of young
Louis XVI to Marie-Antoinette.
    In the vast pagan “temple” that is Versailles—built to glorify one man,
Louis XIV—this Royal Chapel is a paltry tip of the hat to that “other”
god...the Christian one. It’s virtually the first, last, and only hint of
Christianity you’ll see in the entire complex. Versailles celebrates Man, not
God, by raising Louis XIV to almost godlike status, the personification of
all good human qualities. In a way, Versailles is the last great flowering of
Renaissance humanism and a revival of the classical world.
• Enter the next room, an even more sumptuous space with a fireplace and a
colorful painting on the ceiling.

Hercules Drawing Room
Pleasure ruled. The main suppers, balls, and receptions were held in this
room. Picture elegant partygoers in fine silks, wigs, rouge, lipstick, and fake
moles (and that’s just the men) as they dance to the strains of a string
quartet.




    On the wall opposite the fireplace is an appropriate painting showing
Christ in the middle of a Venetian party. The work—by Paolo Veronese, a
gift from the Republic of Venice—was one of Louis XIV’s favorites, so the
king had the room decorated around it. Stand by the fireplace for the full
effect: The room’s columns, arches, and frieze match the height and style of
Veronese’s painted architecture, which makes the painting an extension of
the room.
    The ceiling painting, ringed by a balustrade, creates the effect of a
sunroof opening up to heaven. Hercules (with his club) hurries up to heaven
on a chariot, late for his wedding to the king of the gods’ daughter. The
scene echoes real life—Louis XIV built the room for his own daughter’s
wedding reception. The style is pure Baroque, a riot of 142 exuberant
figures depicted at all angles by Louis’ court painter, Charles Le Brun.
• From here on it’s a one-way tour—getting lost is not allowed. Follow the
crowds into the small green room with a goddess in pink on the ceiling. The
names of the rooms generally come from the paintings on the ceilings.




THE KING’S WING
Salon of Abundance
If the party in the Hercules Room got too intense, you could always step in
here for some refreshments. Silver trays were loaded with liqueurs, exotic
stimulants (coffee), juice, chocolates, and, on really special occasions,
three-bean salad.
    The ceiling painting shows the cornucopia of riches poured down on
invited guests.
    Around the edges of the ceiling are painted versions of the king’s actual
treasures and royal dinnerware—golden bowls, urns, and gravy boats. The
two black chests of drawers are from Louis’ furniture collection (most of it
was lost in the Revolution). They rest on heavy bases and are heavily
ornamented—the so-called Louis XIV style.
    Louis himself might be here. He was a gracious host who enjoyed letting
his hair down at night. If he took a liking to you, he might sneak you
through those doors there (in the middle of the wall) and into his own
private study, or “cabinet of curiosities,” where he’d show off his collection
of dishes, medals, jewels, or...the Mona Lisa, which hung on his wall.
Louis’ favorite show-and-tell items are now in the Louvre.
    The paintings on the walls are of Louis XIV’s heirs. He reigned for more
than 70 years and outlived three of them, finally leaving the crown to his
pink-cheeked, five-year-old great-grandson, Louis XV (on the right).

Venus Room
Love ruled at Versailles. In this room, couples would cavort beneath the
goddess of love floating on the ceiling. Venus sends down a canopy of
flowery garlands to ensnare mortals in delicious amour. Another ceiling
painting (above the statue, in a rectangular frame) symbolizes the marriage
of Louis XIV and Marie-Thérèse, shown in their wedding-limo chariot.
   Baroque artists loved to mix their media to fool the eye. Notice how in
the paintings at both ends of the room, the painted columns match the real
ones, extending this grand room into mythical courtyards.
   Don’t let the statue of a confident Louis XIV as a Roman emperor fool
you. He started out as a poor little rich kid with a chip on his shoulder. His
father died before Louis was old enough to rule, and, during the regency
period, the French parlements treated little Louis and his mother like trash.
They were virtual prisoners, humiliated in their home, the Royal Palace in
Paris (today’s Louvre). There they eked by with bland meals, hand-me-
down leotards, and pointed shoes. After Louis XIV attained power and
wealth, he made Versailles a pleasure palace, with happy hours held in this
room every evening. There was one topic you never discussed in Louis’
presence: poverty. Maybe Versailles was his way of saying, “Living well is
the best revenge.”




Diana Room
Here in the billiards room, Louis and his men played on a table that stood in
the center of the room, while ladies sat surrounding them on Persian-carpet
cushions, and music wafted in from next door. Louis was a good pool
player, a sore loser, and a king—thus, he rarely lost.
   The famous bust of Louis by Giovanni Lorenzo Bernini (in the center)
shows a handsome, dashing, 27-year-old playboy-king. His gaze is steady
amid his windblown cloak and hair. Young Louis loved life. He hunted
animals by day (notice Diana the Huntress, with her bow, on the ceiling)
and chased beautiful women at night.




    Games were actually an important part of Louis’ political strategy,
known as “the domestication of the nobility.” By distracting the nobles with
the pleasures of courtly life, he was free to run the government his way.
Billiards, dancing, and concerts were popular, but the biggest distraction
was gambling, usually a card game similar to blackjack. Louis lent money
to the losers, making them even more indebted to him. The good life was an
addiction, and Louis kept the medicine cabinet well-stocked.
    As you move into the next room, notice the fat walls that hid thin
servants, who were to be at their master’s constant call—but out of sight
when not needed.

Mars Room
Also known as the Guard Room (as it was the room for Louis’ Swiss
bodyguards), this red room is decorated with a military flair. On the ceiling
is Mars, the Greek god of war, in a chariot pulled by wolves. The bronze
cupids in the corners are escalating from love arrows to heavier artillery.
But it’s not all war. Louis loved music and playing his guitar, and enjoyed
concerts here in the Mars Room nearly every evening.
    Out the window are sculpted gardens in the style of a traditional Italian
villa—landscaped symmetrically, with trimmed hedges and cone-shaped
trees lining walkways that lead to fountains.
    As you wander, you’ll notice that the palace feels bare (except for the
wall-to-wall tourists), but remember that entire industries were created to
decorate the place with carpets, mirrors, furniture, and tapestries. Most of
the furniture we see today is not original, but is from the same period.
Mercury Room
Louis’ life was a work of art, and Versailles was the display case.
Everything he did was a public event designed to show his subjects how it
should be done. This room may have served as Louis’ official (not actual)
bedroom, where the Sun King would ritually rise each morning to warm his
subjects.
   From a canopied bed (like this 18th-century one), Louis would get up,
dress, and take a seat for morning prayer. Meanwhile, the nobles would
stand and watch, in awe of his piety, nobility, and clean socks. At breakfast,
they murmured with delight as he deftly decapitated his boiled egg with a
knife. And when Louis went to bed at night, the dukes and barons would
fight over who got to hold the candle while he slipped into his royal
jammies. Bedtime, wake-up, and meals were all public rituals.

Apollo Room
This was the grand throne room. Louis held court from a 10-foot-tall, silver-
and-gold canopied throne on a raised platform placed in the center of the
room (the platform is there, though not the throne). Even when the king was
away, passing courtiers had to bow to the empty throne.
   Everything in here reminds us that Louis XIV was not just any ruler, but
the Sun King, who lit the whole world with his presence. On the ceiling, the
sun god Apollo (representing Louis) drives his chariot, dragging the sun
across the heavens to warm the four corners of the world (counterclockwise
from above the exit door): 1) Europe, with a sword; 2) Asia, with a lion; 3)
Africa, with an elephant; and 4) good ol’ America, a Native American
maiden with a crocodile. Notice the ceiling’s beautifully gilded frame and
Goldfinger maidens.
    The famous portrait by Hyacinthe Rigaud over the fireplace gives a
more human look at Louis XIV. He’s shown in a dancer’s pose, displaying
the legs that made him one of the all-time dancing fools of kingery (see a
photo of this portrait on here). At night, they often held parties in this room,
actually dancing around the throne.
    Louis XIV (who was 63 when this was painted) had more than 300 wigs
like this one, and he changed them many times a day. This fashion first
started when his hairline began to recede, then sprouted all over Europe,
and even spread to the American colonies in the time of George
Washington.
    Louis XIV may have been treated like a god, but he was not an overly
arrogant man. His subjects adored him because he was a symbol of
everything a man could be, the fullest expression of the Renaissance Man.
Compare the portrait of Louis XIV with the one across the room of his last
successor, Louis XVI—same arrogant pose, but without the inner
confidence to keep his head on his shoulders.
• Continue into the final room of the King’s Wing.

War Room
“Louis Quatorze was addicted to wars,” and the room depicts his victories
—in marble, gilding, stucco, and paint. France’s success made other
countries jealous and nervous. At the base of the ceiling (in semicircular
paintings), we see Germany (with the double eagle), Holland (with its
ships), and Spain (with a red flag and roaring lion) ganging up on Louis
XIV. But Lady France (center of ceiling), protected by the shield of Louis
XIV, hurls thunderbolts down to defeat them. The relief on the wall shows
Louis XIV on horseback, triumphing over his fallen enemies.
   Versailles was good propaganda. It showed the rest of the world how
rich and powerful France was. A visit to the Château and Gardens sent
visitors reeling. And Louis XIV’s greatest triumph may be the next room,
the one that everybody wrote home about.

Hall of Mirrors
No one had ever seen anything like this hall when it was opened. Mirrors
were still a great luxury at the time, and the number and size of these
monsters was astounding. The hall is nearly 250 feet long. There are 17
arched mirrors, matched by 17 windows letting in that breathtaking view of
the Gardens. Lining the hall are 24 gilded candelabra, eight busts of Roman
emperors, and eight classical-style statues (seven of them ancient). The
ceiling decoration chronicles Louis’ military accomplishments, topped off
by Louis himself in the central panel (with cupids playing cards at his
divine feet) doing what he did best—triumphing. Originally, two huge
carpets mirrored the action depicted on the ceiling.




    Imagine this place lit by the flames of thousands of candles, filled with
ambassadors, nobles, and guests dressed in silks and powdered wigs. At the
far end of the room sits the king, on the canopied throne moved in
temporarily from the Apollo Room. Servants glide by with silver trays of
hors d’oeuvres, and an orchestra fuels the festivities. The mirrors reflect an
age when beautiful people loved to look at themselves. It was no longer a
sin to be proud of good looks and fine clothes, or to enjoy the good things
in life: laughing, dancing, eating, drinking, flirting, and watching the sun set
into the distant canal.
    From the center of the hall you can fully appreciate the epic scale of
Versailles. The huge palace (by architect Louis Le Vau), the fantasy interior
(by Charles Le Brun), and the endless gardens (by André Le Nôtre) made
Versailles le best. In 1871, after the Prussians defeated the French, Otto von
Bismarck declared the establishment of the German Empire in this room.
And in 1919, Germany and the Allies signed the Treaty of Versailles, ending
World War I (and, some say, starting World War II) right here, in the Hall of
Mirrors.
• Backtrack a few stops to find the door that leads into the heart of the
palace, to the...

King’s Bedroom and Council Rooms
Pass through a first large room to find Louis XIV’s bedroom. It’s
elaborately decorated, and the decor changed with the season. On the wall
behind the impressive bed, a golden Lady France watched over her king as
he slept. The balustrade separated the courtiers from the king. Though this
was Louis’ actual bedroom, it was also a somewhat public space where he
received visitors. The two rooms on either side of the bedroom—right next
to where the king slept—were large halls for ambassadorial receptions and
cabinet meetings.




   Find an uncovered window and notice how this small room is at the
exact center of the immense horseshoe-shaped building, overlooking the
main courtyard and—naturally—facing the rising sun in the east. It
symbolized the exact center of power in France. Imagine the humiliation on
that day in 1789 when Louis’ great-great-great-grandson, Louis XVI, was
forced to stand here and acknowledge the angry crowds that filled the
square demanding the end of the divine monarchy.
• Return to the Hall of Mirrors, and continue to the end, being sure to enjoy
views of the garden. Enter the...

Peace Room
By the end of the Sun King’s long life, he was tired of fighting. In this
sequel to the War Room, peace is granted to Germany, Holland, and Spain
as cupids play with the discarded cannons, and swords are transformed into
violins. Louis XIV advised his great-grandson to “be a peaceful king.”
   The oval painting above the fireplace shows 19-year-old Louis XV
bestowing an olive branch on Europe. Beside him is his Polish wife, Marie
Leszczyńska, cradling their baby twin daughters. On Sundays the queen
held chamber-music concerts here for family and friends (notice the gilded
music motifs).
• The Peace Room marks the beginning of the suite of rooms where
France’s queens lived, slept, ate, and entertained.


THE QUEEN’S WING
The Queen’s Wing is a mirror image of the King’s Wing. The King’s Wing
was mostly ceremonial and used as a series of reception rooms; the Queen’s
Wing is more intimate.
• Enter the first room of the Queen’s Wing, with its canopied bed.

Queen’s Bedchamber
It was here that the queen rendezvoused with her husband. Two queens died
here, and this is where 19 princes were born. The chandelier is where two of
them were conceived. (Just kidding.) Royal babies were delivered in public
to prove their blue-bloodedness.
    True, Louis XIV was not the most faithful husband. There was no
attempt to hide the fact that the Sun King warmed more than one bed, for he
was above the rules of mere mortals. Adultery became acceptable—even
fashionable—in court circles. The secret-looking door on the left side of the
bed was for Louis’ late-night liaisons—it led straight to his rooms.
    Some of Louis XIV’s mistresses became more famous and powerful
than his rather quiet queen, but he was faithful to the show of marriage and
had genuine affection for his wife. Louis XIV made a point of sleeping with
the queen as often as possible, regardless of whose tiara he tickled earlier in
the evening.
    This room looks just like it did in the days of the last queen, Marie-
Antoinette, who substantially redecorated the entire wing. That’s her bust
over the fireplace, and the double eagle of her native Austria in two of the
corners. The big mahogany chest to the left of the bed held her jewels.
    The large canopied bed is a reconstruction. The bed, chair, and wall
coverings switched with the seasons. This was the cheery summer pattern.

Salon of the Nobles
Here, in this mint green room, the wife of Louis XV and her circle of
friends met, under paintings by Boucher—popular with the queen for their
pink-cheeked Rococo exuberance. Discussions ranged from politics to
gossip, food to literature, fashion to philosophy. All three of Versailles’
rulers considered themselves enlightened monarchs who promoted the arts
and new ideas. Louis XIV laughed at the anti-authoritarian plays of
Molière, and Louis XV gave free room and board here to the political
radical Voltaire. Ironically, these discussions planted the seeds of liberal
thought that would grow into the Revolution.

Queen’s Antechamber
The royal family dined publicly in this room (also called the Grand
Couvert), while servants and nobles fluttered around them, admired their
table manners, and laughed at the king’s jokes. A typical dinner consisted of
four soups, two whole birds stuffed with truffles, mutton, ham slices, fruit,
pastries, compotes, and preserves.
    You may see a portrait of luxury-loving, “let-them-eat-cake” Marie-
Antoinette, who became a symbol of decadence to the peasants. The portrait
at the far end is a public-relations attempt to soften her image by showing
her with three of her children.
Queen’s Guard Room
On October 5, 1789, a mob of revolutionaries—perhaps appalled by their
queen’s taste in wallpaper—stormed the palace. They were fed up with the
ruling class leading a life of luxury in the countryside while they were
starving in the grimy streets of Paris.
    The king and queen locked themselves in. Some of the revolutionaries
gained access to this upper floor. They burst into this room where Marie-
Antoinette was hiding, overcame her bodyguards, and dragged her off along
with her husband. (Some claim that, as they carried her away, she sang,
“Louis, Louis, oh-oh...we gotta go now.”)
    The enraged peasants then proceeded to ransack the place as revenge for
the years of poverty and oppression they’d suffered. (The stripped palace
was refurnished a decade later under Napoleon and eventually turned into a
national museum.) Marie-Antoinette and Louis XVI were later taken to
Place de la Concorde in Paris, where they knelt under the guillotine and
were made a foot shorter at the top.
    Did the king and queen deserve it? Were the revolutionaries destroying
civilization or clearing the decks for a new and better one? Was Versailles a
symbol of progress or decadence?

Coronation Room
No sooner did the French throw out a king than they got an emperor. The
Revolution established democracy, but it was shaky in a country that wasn’t
used to it. In the midst of the confusion, the upstart general Napoleon
Bonaparte took control and soon held dictatorial powers.




   This room captures the glory of the Napoleonic years, when Bonaparte
conquered most of Europe. In the huge canvas, we see him crowning
himself emperor of a new, revived “Roman” Empire. (The original by
Jacques-Louis David now hangs in the Louvre; this is a later but lesser-
quality copy by the master himself.)
   Turn and face the windows to see the portrait (between the windows on
the right) of a dashing, young, charismatic Napoleon in 1796, when he was
just a general in command of the Revolution’s army in Italy. Above the
young Napoleon is a portrait of Josephine—his wife and France’s empress.
Compare the young Napoleon with the adjacent portrait from 10 years later
—looking less like a revolutionary and more like a Louis. Above the older
Napoleon is a portrait of Empress Marie-Louise, his second wife.




    In David’s Distribution of Eagles (opposite the Coronation), the
victorious general, in imperial garb, passes out emblems of victory to his
loyal troops. In The Battle of Aboukir (opposite the window, see photo),
Joachim Murat, Napoleon’s general and brother-in-law, looks bored as he
slashes through a tangle of dark-skinned warriors. His horse, though, has a
look of, “What are we doing in this mob? Let’s get out of here!” Let’s.
• This ends our tour of the Château. From here, head down the stairs,
skipping the long gallery of famous French battles. Consider a break in the
Salon de Thé Angelina, with a self-service sandwich bar, and an elegant
sit-down restaurant featuring a decadent hot chocolate and the Mont Blanc
—a chestnut-cream meringue with whipped cream.
   Continuing downstairs to the exit, you’ll reach the audioguide-return
desk, WCs, and checked bag pick-up.
   Exit the palace (once you leave, you can’t return without going through
security again) and turn right into the Gardens (les Jardins), located behind
the Château.


                           The Gardens
Louis XIV was a divine-right ruler. One way he proved it was by
controlling nature like a god. These lavish grounds—elaborately planned,
pruned, and decorated—showed everyone that Louis was in total command.
Louis loved his gardens and, until his last days, presided over their care. He
personally led VIPs through them and threw his biggest parties here. With
their Greco-Roman themes and incomparable beauty, the Gardens further
illustrated his immense power.
    The Gardens are vast. For some, a stroll through the landscaped shrubs
around the Château and quick view down the Royal Drive is plenty. But it’s
worth the 10-minute walk down the Royal Drive to the Apollo Basin and
back (even if you don’t continue further to the Trianon/Domaine). To trace
the route of this tour, see the “Versailles” map earlier in this chapter.
• Entering the Gardens, make your way into the king’s spacious backyard.
Angling right, you’ll pass by artificial ponds, reclining river-god statues,
and cookie-cutter patterns of shrubs and green cones. As you walk, consider
that a thousand orange trees were once stored beneath your feet in
greenhouses. On sunny days, they were wheeled out in their silver planters
and scattered around the grounds. The warmth from the Sun King was so
great that he could even grow orange trees in chilly France.
   You’ll eventually reach the top step of a staircase overlooking the
Gardens. Face away from the palace and take in the jaw-dropping...

View Down the Royal Drive
This, to me, is the most stunning spot in all of Versailles. With the palace
behind you, it seems as if the grounds stretch out forever. Versailles was
laid out along an eight-mile axis that included the grounds, the palace, and
the town of Versailles itself, one of the first instances of urban planning
since Roman times and a model for future capitals, such as Washington,
DC, and Brasilia.
    Looking down the Royal Drive (also known as “The Green Carpet”),
you see the round Apollo fountain in the distance. Just beyond that is the
Grand Canal. The groves on either side of the Royal Drive were planted
with trees from all over, laid out in an elaborate grid, and dotted with
statues and fountains. Of the original 1,500 fountains, 300 remain.
    Looking back at the palace, you can see the Hall of Mirrors—it’s the
middle story, with the arched windows.
• Stroll down the steps to get a good look at the frogs and lizards that fill the
round...



                 Getting Around the Gardens
  On Foot: It’s a 45- to 60-minute walk from the palace, down to the
  Grand Canal, past the two Trianon palaces, to the Hamlet at the far end
  of Domaine de Marie-Antoinette. Allow more time if you stop along
  the way. After the slow Château shuffle, stretching your legs out here
  feels pretty good.
  By Bike: There’s a bike-rental station by the Grand Canal. A bike
  won’t save you that much time (you can’t take it inside the grounds of
  the Trianon/Domaine; park it nearby while you tour inside). Instead,
  simply enjoy pedaling around the greatest royal park in all of Europe
  (about €9/hour or €20/half-day, a bit more for electric bikes, kid-size
  bikes and tandems available, daily 10:00-18:30).
  By Petit Train: The slow-moving tram leaves from behind the
  Château (see map on here) and makes a one-way loop, stopping at the
  Grand Trianon and Petit Trianon (entry points to Domaine de Marie-
  Antoinette), then the Grand Canal before returning to the Château
  (€8.5 round-trip, €4.60 one-way, free for kids 10 and under, 2-4/hour,
  Tue-Sun 11:30-19:00, Mon 11:00-17:00, shorter hours in winter). The
  round-trip ticket allows you to hop off at one stop and back on at the
  next, following the one-way loop (€4 audioguide available)
  By Golf Cart: These make for a fun drive through the Gardens,
  complete with music and a relaxing commentary. But you can’t go
  wherever you want—the cart shuts off automatically if you diverge
  from the prescribed route. You can’t drive it in the Trianon/Domaine,
  but you can park it outside the entrance while you sightsee inside. Be
  warned: There are steep late fees. To go out to the Hamlet, sightsee
  quickly, and get back within your allotted hour, rent a cart at the Grand
  Canal and put the pedal to the metal (€38/hour, €9/15 minutes after
  that, 4-person limit per cart, rental stations by the canal and behind the
  Château—near the Gardens entrance). You must return your cart to the
  place you started.


Latona Basin
Everything in the garden has a symbolic meaning. The theme of Versailles
is Apollo, the god of the sun, associated with Louis XIV. This round
fountain tells the story of the birth of Apollo and his sister, Diana. On top of
the fountain are Apollo and Diana as little kids with their mother, Latona
(they’re facing toward the Apollo fountain). Latona, an unwed mother, was
insulted by the local peasants. She called on the king of the gods, Zeus (the
children’s father), to avenge the insult. Zeus swooped down and turned all
the peasants into the frogs and lizards that ring the fountain.




• As you walk down past the basin toward the Royal Drive, you’ll pass by
“ancient” statues done by 17th-century French sculptors. You’ll see statues
of gods, nymphs, mythological heroes, allegories of the seasons, and huge
Roman-style vases. A cheap snack kiosk and WCs are close by. Find the
Colonnade, hidden in the woods on the left side of the Royal Drive, about
three-fourths of the way to the Apollo Basin (you’ll spot it off the main path
through an opening).

Colonnade
Versailles had no prestigious ancient ruins, so the king built his own. This
prefab Roman ruin is a 100-foot circle of 64 red-marble columns supporting
pure white arches. The arches are decorated with cherubs playing harps. In
the center stands a statue of Pluto (Greek god of the Underworld) carrying
off Proserpine while her mom gets trampled. Surrounding the whole thing
are small birdbath fountains (imagine them all spouting water). Nobles
would picnic in the shade to the tunes of a string quartet and pretend that
they were the enlightened citizens of the ancient world.




Apollo Basin
The fountains of Versailles were once its most famous attraction, a marvel
of both art and engineering. This one was the centerpiece, showing the sun
god—Louis XIV—in his sunny chariot as he starts his journey across the
sky. The horses are half-submerged, giving the impression, when the
fountains play, of the sun rising out of the mists of dawn. Apollo’s
entourage includes dolphins leading the way and Tritons blowing their
conch shells. Most of the fountains were turned on only when the king
walked by, but this one played constantly for the benefit of those watching
from the palace. Look into the water to see the substantial pipes that feed
this powerful fountain.
   All the fountains are gravity-powered. They work on the same principle
as blocking a hose with your finger to make it squirt. Underground streams
(pumped into Versailles by Seine River pressure) feed into smaller pipes at
the fountains, which shoot the water high into the air.
   Looking back at the palace from here, realize that the distance you just
walked is only a fraction of this vast complex of buildings, gardens, and
waterways. Be glad you don’t have to mow the lawn.

Grand Canal
Why visit Venice when you can just build your own? In an era before
virtual reality, this was the next best thing to an actual trip. Couples in
gondolas would pole along the waters accompanied by barges with
orchestras playing “O Sole Mio.” The canal is actually cross-shaped; you’re
looking at the longest part, one mile from end to end. Of course, this, too, is
a man-made body of water with no function other than to please. Originally,
authentic gondoliers, imported with their boats from Venice, lived in a little
settlement next to the canal.
    These days, the Grand Canal hosts eateries, rental boats, bike and golf-
cart rentals, and a petit train tram stop (see the “Getting Around the
Gardens” sidebar, earlier).
• Next stop, the Trianon Palaces and Domaine de Marie-Antoinette, a
walled-off part of the Gardens accessible only with a ticket. To get to our
tour’s starting point at the Grand Trianon, veer right past the second Grand
Canal restaurant (see the “Versailles” map, earlier), and follow the dirt
path along a looooong, tree-lined strip of lawn that leads uphill 500 yards
to the Grand Trianon (a 15-minute walk). It’s possible to take a bike, golf
cart, or petit train as far as the Grand Trianon entry, but you’ll need to walk
inside.


  Trianon Palaces and Domaine de Marie-
                Antoinette
Versailles began as an escape from the pressures of kingship. But in a short
time, the Château became as busy as Paris ever was. Louis XIV needed an
escape from his escape, so he built a smaller palace out in the boonies.
Later, his successors retreated still farther from the Château and French
political life, ignoring the real world that was crumbling all around them.
They expanded the Trianon area, building a fantasy world of palaces,
ponds, pavilions, and pleasure gardens—the enclosure called Marie-
Antoinette’s Domaine.




  If you’re monitoring your time and energy, note that it’s a 1.5-hour
commitment to see the whole Trianon/Domaine, plus a 30-minute walk
back to the Château and a 10-minute walk from there to the Versailles Rive
Gauche/Château train station.




• You can enter/exit at only three spots: near the palace known as the Grand
Trianon (where we’ll enter), near the Petit Trianon palace, or way around
back on the far side of the Hamlet.


GRAND TRIANON
• Enter the Grand Trianon and pass through its security checkpoint. Pick up
the free palace brochure and follow the simple one-way route through the
rooms (basic English information posted in most rooms). Read your flier as
you follow this tour to get the most out of your visit (some rooms may be
closed).

Exterior
Delicate, pink, and set amid gardens, the Grand Trianon was the perfect
summer getaway. This was the king’s private residence away from the main
palace. Louis XIV usually spent a couple of nights a week here (more in the
summer) to escape the sniping politics, strict etiquette, and 24/7 scrutiny of
official court life.
    Louis XIV built the palace (1670-1688) near the tiny peasant village of
Trianon (hence the name) and faced it with blue-and-white ceramic tiles.
When those began disintegrating almost immediately, the palace was
renovated with pink marble. It’s a one-story structure of two wings
connected by a colonnade, with gardens in back.




Interior
The rooms are a complex overlay of furnishings from many different kings,
dauphins, and nobles who lived here over the centuries. Louis XIV alone
had three different bedrooms. Concentrate on the illustrious time of Louis
XIV (1688-1715) and Napoleon Bonaparte (1810-1814). Use your map
(which has room numbers on it) to find these highlights.
• From the gift shop, pass down a long hall to the Boudoir of the Empress
(Room 1) and the...
   Mirrors Salon (Room 2): This spacious living room has the original
white walls and mirrors of Louis XIV, and the Empire-style furniture of
Napoleon (unornamented, high-polished wood, with classical motifs).
Napoleon inhabited the Grand Trianon with his second wife, Empress
Marie-Louise, and his mother—the women in the left wing, the emperor in
the right.




    Bedroom of the Empress (Room 3): This spacious red-and-white room
is best known as being Louis XIV’s bedroom. Louis built the Grand Trianon
as home for his chief mistress, while his wife lived in the Château. Imagine
waking up in this big bed with your lover, throwing back the curtain, and
looking out the windows at the gardens. These light, airy, many-windowed
rooms were cheery even when skies were gray, a strong contrast to the
heavy-metal decor in the mother Château. The adjoining room (divided by
classical columns) was the dressing room.
• Pass through Rooms 4 and 5, and exit into the open-air colonnade
(Peristyle) that connects the two wings. Originally, this pink-columned
passageway had windows, an enormously expensive luxury that allowed
visitors to enjoy the gardens even in bad weather. Entering the right wing of
the palace, you walk across the impressive red-white-black marble floor of
the Round Salon (Room 6), and detour right (if open) to find the...




    Emperor’s Family Drawing Room (Room 7): This room had many
different uses over the years: a theater for Louis XIV, a game room for
Louis XV, and Napoleon’s family room. After Napoleon was defeated and
France’s royalty returned, King Louis-Philippe I lived here. In Room 8,
admire the impressive canopied bed.
• Backtrack to the Round Salon and continue on through a series of rooms,
passing through Louis-Philippe’s billiards room, until you reach a room
decorated in green malachite.
    Malachite Room (Room 11): This was Napoleon’s living room, and his
library was next door. You’ll see the impressive green basin, vases, and
candelabras made of Russian malachite given to Napoleon by Czar
Alexander I. Another czar, Peter the Great, who lodged in the Grand
Trianon in 1717 and then returned home, was inspired to build the Peterhof
—a similarly lavish summer palace near St. Petersburg known as the
“Russian Versailles.”




    • Next, amble through the elegant Cotelle Gallery, with works that show
the gardens in the 17th century, then exit into the gardens. Look back. The
facade of pink, yellow, and white is a welcome contrast to the imposing
Baroque facade of the main palace. The landscaping is similar to the
Château—cone-shaped trees, ponds, and hedges—but everything is mini-
sized. The flower gardens were changed daily for the king’s pleasure—for
new color combinations and new “nasal cocktails.”
DOMAINE DE MARIE-ANTOINETTE
• Our next stop is the French Pavilion. To get there from the Grand Trianon
gardens, walk clockwise around the perimeter of the Grand Trianon. Make
it a tight, 180-degree loop, hugging the palace on your right, and follow
signs to the Petit Trianon. A path leads across a footbridge. Directly ahead,
you’ll see the...

French Pavilion
This small, cream-colored building (generally closed) with rooms fanning
out from the center was one more step away from the modern world. Inside
is a circular room with four small adjoining rooms. With its red-white-gold
decor, flower-draped chandelier, and starburst floor, it’s a small jewel of
interior design. Big French doors let in a cool breeze. Here Marie-
Antoinette spent summer evenings with family and a few friends, listening
to music or playing parlor games. She and her friends explored all avenues
of la douceur de vivre, the sweetness of living.
• Up ahead is the large, cube-shaped Petit Trianon palace. Head toward the
Petit Trianon, but midway there, turn left, where you can peek into...
Marie-Antoinette’s Theater
Marie-Antoinette adored the theater and was an aspiring performer herself.
In this intimate playhouse, far from the rude intrusions of the real world, the
queen and her friends acted out plays. The soft blue decor, gold trim, and
upholstered walls and benches give the theater a dollhouse feel. Though
small, it has everything you’d find in a major opera house: stage, orchestra
pit, balconies, a painted backdrop setting a peasant scene, ornate gold
ceiling, and raked seating for 100.




• Continue to the Petit Trianon, through the oh-so-bucolic gardens. If you’d
like to cut this tour short, you could skip ahead and visit the Petit Trianon
now. Otherwise, turn left and follow paths uphill to a pond graced with a
tiny palace.

Belvedere, Rock, and Grotto
The octagonal Belvedere palace is as much windows as it is walls. When
the doors were open, it could serve as a gazebo for musicians, serenading
nobles in this man-made alpine setting. The interior has a marble-mosaic
floor and walls decorated with birds and delicate, Pompeii-esque garlands.
To the left of the Belvedere is the “Rock,” a fake mountain that pours water
into the pond. To the right of the Belvedere (you’ll have to find it) is the
secret Grotto.
• Facing the Belvedere, turn right (east), following the pond’s meandering
stream. Continue gamboling along the paths. In the distance you’ll spy a
complex of buildings, with a round, fanciful tower and a smattering of
rustic, half-timbered buildings. Head there to find the Hansel-and-Gretel-
like...




Hamlet
Marie-Antoinette longed for the simple life of a peasant—not the hard labor
of real peasants, who sweated and starved around her, but the fairy-tale
world of simple country pleasures. She built this complex of 12 thatched-
roof buildings fronting a lake as her own private “Normand” village.
   The main building is the Queen’s House—actually two buildings
connected by a wooden skywalk. It’s the only one without a thatched roof.
Like any typical peasant farmhouse, it had a billiard room, library, elegant
dining hall, and two living rooms.
   This was an actual working farm with a dairy (walk past the lighthouse
tower), a water mill, a pigeon coop (in a thatched cottage called Le
Colombier), and domestic animals. Beyond the lighthouse tower (La Tour
de Marlborough—departure point for boat trips on the pond), you’ll see
where the queen’s servants kept cows, goats, chickens, and ducks. The
harvest was served at Marie-Antoinette’s table. Marie-Antoinette didn’t do
much work herself, but she “supervised,” dressed in a plain, white muslin
dress and a straw hat. Though the royal family is long gone, kid-pleasing
animals still inhabit the farm, and beaucoup fat fish swim languid circles in
the pond.
• Head back toward the Petit Trianon. Along the way (in about five
minutes), you’ll see the white dome of the...

Temple of Love
A circle of 12 marble Corinthian columns supports a dome, decorating a
path where lovers could stroll. Underneath there’s a statue of Cupid making
a bow (to shoot arrows of love) out of the club of Hercules. It’s a delightful
monument to a society where the rich could afford that ultimate luxury,
romantic love.
• And, finally, you’ll reach the...




Petit Trianon
This gray, cubical building from the 1760s is a masterpiece of Neoclassical
architecture, built by the same architect (Ange-Jacques Gabriel) who
created the Opera House in the main palace. It has four distinct facades,
each a perfect and harmonious combination of Greek-style columns,
windows, and railings. Walk around it and find your favorite.
   Louis XV built the Petit Trianon as a place to rendezvous with his
mistress Madame de Pompadour. He later gave it to his next mistress,
Countess du Barry. After the crown passed to Louis XVI, it became the
principal residence of Marie-Antoinette, who was uncomfortable with the
court intrigue in the big Château. As you tour the Petit Trianon, you’ll see
portraits and historical traces of this intriguing cast of characters.




   Ground Floor (Rooms 1-8): Breeze through these less interesting
rooms, seeing the pantry (with the Sevres china dinnerware of these royals)
and Louis XV’s big billiard table (a reconstruction). Then head upstairs.
   Antechamber (Room 9): This otherwise bare room has a portrait of the
palace’s most famous resident—Marie-Antoinette, holding a rose.
   Grand Dining Room (Room 10): Imagine a meal here, enjoying all the
bounties of the season. The four big paintings depict the four seasons, and
the various pleasures each offers. On the mantle is a bust of Marie-
Antoinette.
   Small Dining Room (Room 11): See portraits of Louis XV in a red
military coat (left) and his mistress, Madame de Pompadour (right).
Madame de Pompadour was the cultural heartbeat of Versailles, a patron of
the arts and the progressive ideas of the Enlightenment.
   Salon de Compagnie (Room 12): The red-and-white-upholstered music
room has a number of period instruments, including a harp and harpsichord.




    Queen’s Bedroom (Room 13): Here you see Marie-Antoinette’s pastel-
mint bedroom much as it appeared back in 1788. It has her small bed
(though this is a reconstruction) with a flowery canopy and matching
Tootsie Roll pillows and drapes. Next door is her dressing room. Notice the
ingenious sliding mirrors. She could slide them in place to block the
windows (to dress discreetly), or slide them away (for great views of the
gardens).
    As you exit, don’t miss the ultimate luxury—her small bathroom with a
state-of-the-art hole in a wooden plank.
    Marie-Antoinette made the Petit Trianon her home base. On the lawn
outside, she installed a carousel. Despite her bad reputation with the public,
Marie-Antoinette was a sweet girl from Vienna who never quite fit in with
the fast, sophisticated crowd at Versailles. At the Petit Trianon, she could
get away and re-create the charming home life that she remembered from
her childhood. Here she played, while in the cafés of faraway Paris,
revolutionaries plotted the end of the ancien régime.
• Our tour is over. Here are your options for getting back: The main
Château is a 30-minute walk straight out the exit to the southeast (plus
another 10 minutes to reach the train station). Or you can ride the petit
train from here back to the Château. It leaves from just outside the wall at
the Petit Trianon. For a slightly shorter walk back to the train station by
way of downtown Versailles, follow the “Versailles” map earlier in this
chapter.



                      Town of Versailles
    The town of Versailles offers a classic, small French town experience
that doesn’t feel touristy—and it’s a good overnight stop, especially for
drivers. Park in the palace’s main lot on Place d’Armes while looking for a
hotel, or leave your car there overnight (see “Versailles” map for location).
    The pleasant town center—around Place du Marché Notre-Dame—hosts
a thriving open market defined by four L-shaped halls. The two halls closest
to the palace (Carré à la Marée and Carré aux Herbes, Tue-Sat 7:30-13:00
& 15:30-19:00, Sun 7:30-13:00, closed Mon) are worth a wander. The
square itself hosts regular markets (food market Sun, Tue, and Fri mornings
until 13:30; clothing market all day Wed-Thu and Sat). Nearby streets have
a variety of reasonably priced restaurants, cafés, and shops.
    Tourist Information: The TI is near the Rive Gauche/Château train
station (2 bis Avenue de Paris, open Tue-Sun 8:30-19:00, Mon 9:30-18:00,
shorter hours in winter, +33 1 39 24 88 88, www.versailles-tourisme.com).


SLEEPING IN VERSAILLES
$ Hôtel le Cheval Rouge,*** built in 1676 as Louis XIV’s stables, now
boards tourists. Tucked into a corner of Place du Marché, this modest hotel
has a big courtyard with cheap pay parking and sufficiently comfortable
rooms at good rates. Superior rooms are well worth the slightly higher price
(40 rooms, no air-con, 18 Rue André Chénier, +33 1 39 50 03 03,
www.chevalrougeversailles.fr, chevalrouge@sfr.fr).
    $ Hôtel Ibis Versailles,*** across from the Rive Gauche/Château
station, offers a good weekend value and modern comfort, with 85 air-
conditioned rooms (good buffet breakfast open to public and served daily
until 10:00; pay parking, 4 Avenue du Général de Gaulle, +33 1 39 53 03
30, www.ibishotel.com, h1409@accor.com).


EATING IN VERSAILLES
In the Versailles town center, the best choices are along traffic-free Rue de
Satory (veer right as you leave the Château) or on the lively Place du
Marché (a 15-minute walk from the Château; veer left as you leave), with a
supermarket nearby. This market square is lined with colorful and
inexpensive eateries with good seating inside and out. Troll the various
options or try one of these:
    $$ La Place Crêperie, located just off the Place d’Armes by the
Château, serves good crêpes (decent lunch menu, 17 Rue Colbert, +33 1 85
15 22 80).
    $$ Le Bœuf à la Mode is the place in Versailles to enjoy traditional
French cuisine (meat is their forté) in a warm setting (upstairs seating is
best, daily, Place du Marché, +33 1 39 50 31 99).
    $ La Boulangerie Guinon has mouthwatering sandwiches, salads,
quiches, and more (Tue-Sat until 20:00, Sun until 13:30, closed Mon, 60
Rue de la Paroisse).
    Breakfast: The Hôtel Ibis Versailles, across from the train station to the
right, offers a good buffet breakfast daily until 10:00. It’s great for early
birds who want to fuel up before sightseeing. Starbucks may appeal to
others (across from the station to the left).
