Sights: Marais Neighborhood & Montmartre

MARAIS NEIGHBORHOOD AND NEARBY
The Marais neighborhood extends along the Right Bank of the Seine, from
the Bastille to the Pompidou Center. The main east-west axis is formed by
Rue St. Antoine, Rue des Rosiers (the heart of Paris’ Jewish community),
and Rue Ste. Croix de la Bretonnerie. The centerpiece of the neighborhood
is the stately Place des Vosges. Helpful Métro stops are Bastille, St-Paul,
and Hôtel de Ville.




    Don’t waste time looking for the Bastille, the prison of Revolution fame.
It’s Paris’ most famous nonsight. The building is long gone, and just the
square remains, good only for its nightlife and as a jumping-off point for the
Marais Walk or a stroll through La Coulée Verte.
       The Marais Walk chapter connects the following sights with a fun,
fact-filled stroll.
▲▲Carnavalet Museum (Musée Carnavalet)
Housed in three floors of an elegant mansion, this museum delves into the
history of Paris—all wonderfully explained with English descriptions,
making it quite user-friendly (once you figure out the confusing floorplan).
A fine statue of Louis XIV greets you in the elegant courtyard, as if saying,
“Hey, this place is underrated, free, and gives the best history lesson
anywhere for those wanting to better understand Paris.”
   Inside, French history unfolds in a series of stills—like a Ken Burns
documentary, except you have to walk. You get a good overview of
everything—from Louis XIV-period rooms, to Napoleon, to the belle
époque. There’s even a delightful basement exhibit on prehistoric, ancient
Roman, and medieval Paris. But I’d focus on the museum’s highlight: the
French Revolution and the 19th century. In fact, the museum was
established on the 100th anniversary of the French Revolution, and it
features surviving treasures and artifacts from that turning point in Western
democracy. A thoughtful visit here gives valuable context to what you’ll see
throughout the rest of your Paris sightseeing.
   Cost and Hours: Free, Tue-Sun 10:00-18:00, closed Mon, 16 Rue des
Francs Bourgeois, Mo: St-Paul, www.carnavalet.paris.fr.
   Visiting the Museum: Upon entry, lock up your coat and bag. While
there are other sections in the museum, I find the following exhibits most
important and interesting. From the first room on the ground floor, climb
the curvy wooden staircase. At the top, go straight down a corridor and
climb a second curvy wooden staircase. On the top floor, straight ahead is
the section called “The French Revolution to the 21st Century.” A small
painting of the Declaration of the Rights of Man (the French answer to the
US Declaration of Independence) welcomes you to a long, winding, and
chronological exhibit on the French Revolution. Each room starts with a
concise historic recap, with displays that are both fascinating and well-
described in English. You’ll see the roots of revolution, divine monarchs
and angry masses, the Bastille prison, royals who lost their heads,
revolutionary heroes, the Reign of Terror, and Napoleon.
   Popping out the other end, you’ve survived the Revolution. Another
curvy wooden staircase leads down to another fascinating era: “Paris 1852
to Today.” Following Sens de la Visite signs, you’ll wind through a series
of rooms that illustrate the foundations of the Paris we know and love
today. The exhibit starts with Baron Haussmann and his late-19th-century
redesign of the city, then traces the fin de siècle and beyond: can-can
dancers, the Eiffel Tower, hot-air balloons, the belle époque, Art Nouveau,
and the Impressionists.
    Cap your visit with some ancient history. Signs lead to the exit (sortie)
and a humble staircase leading into a medieval cellar. Here you’ll find
artifacts, art, and carvings from megalithic Paris (4000 BC), helping you
envision the tribes that first settled on the island in the Seine. You’ll also
learn about the ancient Roman city of Lutetia (which became Paris) and
medieval life here, illustrating the rise of this great city.

▲Picasso Museum (Musée Picasso)
Whatever you think about Picasso the man, as an artist he was unmatched
in the 20th century for his daring and productivity. This museum rotates its
huge collection of Picasso works to host an ever-changing calendar of
Picasso-themed exhibits.
    Cost and Hours: €14, covered by Museum Pass, free on first Sun of
month; open Tue-Fri 10:30-18:00, Sat-Sun from 9:30, closed Mon, last
entry 45 minutes before closing; 5 Rue de Thorigny, Mo: St-Sébastien-
Froissart, St-Paul, or Chemin Vert, +33 1 42 71 25 21,
www.museepicassoparis.fr.

▲Jewish Art and History Museum (Musée d’Art et Histoire du
Judaïsme)
This is a fine museum of historical artifacts and rare ritual objects spanning
the Jewish people’s long cultural heritage. It emphasizes the cultural unity
maintained by this continually dispersed population. You’ll learn about
Jewish traditions and see exquisite costumes and objects central to daily life
and religious practices. Novices may find the displays beautiful and
thought-provoking but not especially meaningful. Those with a background
in Judaism or who take the time with the thoughtful audioguide and posted
information will be rewarded.
    Cost and Hours: €10, includes audioguide, covered by Museum Pass,
free on first Sat of month Oct-June; Tue-Fri 11:00-18:00, Sat-Sun from
10:00, open later during special exhibits—Wed until 21:00 and Sat-Sun
until 19:00, closed Mon year-round, last entry 45 minutes before closing; 71
Rue du Temple, Mo: Rambuteau or Hôtel de Ville a few blocks farther
away, RER/Train-B: Châtelet-Les Halles; +33 1 53 01 86 60,
www.mahj.org.
    Visiting the Museum: Before entering, visitors undergo a thorough
security check. Once inside, your visit starts with a black-and-white display
of Jewish life in Paris just before World War II. One floor up, you’re
greeted by a centuries-old Torah scroll that introduces the exhibit. The next
room covers the early Middle Ages (AD 500-1000), when Judaism
flourished in France. A row of excavated gravestones attests to Jews living
peacefully on the Ile de la Cité. Then came the Crusade of 1096 and several
centuries of persecution, pogroms, and expulsions under Christian kings
like “Saint” Louis IX. Continuing on, you’ll see displays on Jewish rituals
—getting married under a canopy, menorahs lit during Hanukkah, and gift-
giving during Purim. There’s a full-size sukkah (tabernacle), a structure for
celebrating the harvest festival, and models of various synagogue styles.
    Upstairs, you’ll find many exquisite silver-and-jeweled ritual objects:
Torah scrolls and their rich cloth coverings, pointers for reading the Torah,
and rams’ horns blown at Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. You’ll see a few
paintings by famous Jewish artists, including Marc Chagall, Amedeo
Modigliani, and Chaïm Soutine. The museum brings the Jewish story up to
modern times. French Jews were “Emancipated” during the Enlightenment
of the 1700s. But anti-Semitism lingered, as illustrated by the final exhibit:
the Dreyfus Affair (c. 1900). A French officer was accused of treason. Was
he guilty, or merely guilty of being Jewish?

Holocaust Memorial (Mémorial de la Shoah)
This sight, commemorating the lives of the more than 76,000 Jews deported
from France in World War II, has several facets: a WWII deportation
memorial, a museum on the Holocaust, and a Jewish resource center.
Displaying original deportation records, the museum takes you through the
history of Jews in Europe and France, from medieval pogroms to the Nazi
era. But its focal point is underground, where victims’ ashes are buried.
    Cost and Hours: Free, Sun-Fri 10:00-18:00, Thu until 22:00, closed Sat
and certain Jewish holidays, 17 Rue Geoffroy l’Asnier, +33 1 42 77 44 72,
www.memorialdelashoah.org.
    Visiting the Memorial: To the right of the entrance, on the Allée des
Justes, notice the large bronze wall plaque honoring those who risked their
lives for Jewish people. The entry courtyard (after the security check)
contains a cylinder evoking concentration camp smokestacks. Down three
steps, large stone walls are engraved with the names of French Jews
deported during the war.
    Enter the building (with an information desk, bookstore, and exhibits),
and pick up the Mémorial de la Shoah brochure. Go downstairs one floor to
the crypt, which has a large Star of David in black marble. Ashes from some
of the six million victims of Nazi brutality are buried underneath the star, in
soil brought from Israel. Behind you is a small corridor containing the
original French police files from the arrest, internment, and deportation of
Paris’ Jews. (Since 1995, the French have acknowledged the Vichy
government’s complicity in the Nazis’ local ethnic cleansing.)
   Go downstairs another floor to the permanent exhibition. Photos and
videos (most with English explanations) present an introduction to Judaism
and the history of Jews in Europe (including pogroms) and in France
(including the notorious Dreyfus affair, concerning a Jewish officer unjustly
imprisoned for treason). The well-devised displays start with a floor map
showing the distribution of the Jewish population in Europe before World
War II. Next, you’ll trace the rise of Nazism, the deportations and France’s
collaboration with them (12,884 Parisians were once rounded up in a single
day and 76,000 were deported from throughout France), the death camps,
and the liberation at the end of the war. The moving finale is a brightly lit
collage of children lost to the Holocaust.

▲▲Pompidou Center (Centre Pompidou)
One of Europe’s greatest collections of far-out modern art is housed in the
Musée National d’Art Moderne. While this sprawling arts center is huge,
most visitors focus on the fourth and fifth floors of this colorful exoskeletal
building. Created ahead of its time, the modern and contemporary art in this
collection is still waiting for the world to catch up. After so many
Madonnas-and-children, a piano smashed to bits and glued to the wall can
be refreshing.
    The Pompidou Center and the square that fronts it are lively, with lots of
people, street theater, and activity inside and out—a perpetual street fair.
Kids of any age enjoy the fun, colorful fountain (an homage to composer
Igor Stravinsky) next to the Pompidou Center. The exterior escalators lead
to a great city view from the top (ticket or Museum Pass required).
    Cost and Hours: €14, €11 for those 18-25, free for kids 17 and under,
free on first Sun of the month, €5 for escalator to sixth-floor view (but no
museum entry); Museum Pass covers permanent collection and sixth-floor
panoramic views (plus occasional special exhibits); permanent collection
open Wed-Mon 11:00-21:00, closed Tue, ticket counters close at 20:00; rest
of the building open until 22:00 (Thu until 23:00); arrive after 17:00 to
avoid crowds (mainly for special exhibits); café on mezzanine, pricey view
restaurant on level 6, Mo: Rambuteau or Hôtel de Ville, +33 1 44 78 12 33,
www.centrepompidou.fr.
      See the Pompidou Center Tour chapter.

La Coulée Verte Promenade-Park
This elevated viaduct was used for train tracks from 1853 to 1969 and is
now a three-mile narrow garden walk and a delightful place for a refreshing
stroll or run. Botanists appreciate the well-maintained and varying
vegetation. From west (near Opéra Bastille) to east, the first half of the path
is elevated until the midway point, the pleasant Jardin de Reuilly (a good
stopping point for most, near Mo: Dugommier), then it continues at street
level—with separate paths for pedestrians and cyclists—out to Paris’ ring
road, the périphérique.
    Cost and Hours: Free, opens Mon-Fri at 8:00, Sat-Sun at 9:00, closes at
sunset (17:30 in winter, 20:30 in summer). It runs from Place de la Bastille
(Mo: Bastille) along Avenue Daumesnil to the suburb of St. Mandé (Mo:
Michel Bizot or Porte Dorée), passing within a block of Gare de Lyon.
    Getting There: To get to the park from Place de la Bastille (exit the
Métro following Sortie Rue de Lyon signs), walk a looooong block down
Rue de Lyon, hugging the Opéra on your left. Find the low-key entry and
steps up the red-brick wall a block after the Opéra.

▲▲Père Lachaise Cemetery (Cimetière du Père Lachaise)
Littered with the tombstones of many of the city’s most illustrious dead, this
is your best one-stop look at Paris’ fascinating, romantic past residents.
More like a small city, the cemetery is big and confusing, but my self-
guided tour directs you to the graves of Frédéric Chopin, Molière, Edith
Piaf, Oscar Wilde, Gertrude Stein, Jim Morrison, Héloïse and Abélard, and
many more.
    Cost and Hours: Free, Mon-Fri 8:00-18:00, Sat from 8:30, Sun from
9:00, closes at 17:30 in winter; two blocks from Mo: Gambetta (do not go
to Mo: Père Lachaise) and two blocks from bus #69’s last stop (see the Bus
#69 Sightseeing Tour chapter); +33 1 55 25 82 10, searchable map available
at unofficial website: www.pere-lachaise.com.
      See the Père Lachaise Cemetery Tour chapter or download my free
audio tour for a tomb-by-tomb tour of the most illustrious of these
permanent Parisians.

Victor Hugo’s House (Maison Victor Hugo)
France’s literary giant lived in this house on Place des Vosges from 1832 to
1848. Hugo stayed in many places during his life, but he was here the
longest. He moved to this apartment after the phenomenal success of The
Hunchback of Notre-Dame, and it was while living here that he wrote much
of Les Misérables (when he wasn’t entertaining Paris’ elite). After climbing
up two floors, you’ll visit well-decorated rooms re-creating different phases
of Hugo’s life and passions, from his celebrity years, to his 19-year exile
during the repressive reign of Napoleon III (Hugo said “When freedom
returns, I will return”), to his final years as a national treasure. Rooms are
littered with personal possessions and paintings of Hugo and his family and
of some of his most famous character creations. Posted explanations in
English provide sufficient context to grasp the importance of Hugo to
France.




   Cost and Hours: Free, fee for optional special exhibits, Tue-Sun 10:00-
18:00, closed Mon, peaceful courtyard café, good WCs, 6 Place des Vosges;
Mo: Bastille, St-Paul, or Chemin Vert; +33 1 42 72 10 16,
http://maisonsvictorhugo.paris.fr.


MONTMARTRE
Paris’ highest hill, rated ▲▲ and topped by Sacré-Cœur Basilica, is best
known as the home of cabaret nightlife and bohemian artists. Struggling
painters, poets, dreamers, and drunkards came here for cheap rent, untaxed
booze, rustic landscapes, and views of the underwear of high-kicking
cancan girls at the Moulin Rouge. These days, the hill is equal parts charm
and kitsch—still vaguely village-like but mobbed with tourists and
pickpockets—especially on sunny weekends. Come for a bit of history, a
getaway from Paris’ noisy boulevards, and the view.
      Connect the following sights with this book’s Montmartre Walk (to
locate the sights, see the map in that chapter).

▲Sacré-Cœur
You’ll spot Sacré-Cœur (Sacred Heart), the onion-domed white basilica
atop Montmartre, from most viewpoints in Paris. Though it looks ancient,
the impressive and iconic basilica is less than 150 years old (built 1875-
1919). With a climbable dome, Sacré-Cœur sits atop Paris’ highest natural
point (430 feet).
    After the disastrous Franco-Prussian war and subsequent bloodshed
between the monarchist French government and Parisian insurgents
(Communards), France was humbled and devastated. This basilica was built
by Roman Catholics as penance for years of rebellion violence centered in
the Montmartre area. The exterior of the basilica is laced with gypsum,
which gives it its bleached-bone pallor. Inside, you’ll enjoy wonderful
mosaics, a statue of St. Thérèse, a scale model of the church, and three
stained-glass windows dedicated to Joan of Arc. Pause near the Stations of
the Cross mosaic to give St. Peter’s bronze foot a rub, or for a panoramic
view of Paris, climb 260 feet up the tight spiral stairs to the top of the dome.
