Left Bank Walk

LEFT BANK WALK
From the Seine to Luxembourg Garden
Map: Left Bank Walk
Orientation
The Walk Begins
   1 Pont des Arts
     2 Statue of Voltaire
    3 Roger-Viollet

    5 George Sand’s House

    6 Café la Palette

    7 Toy Store (Jouets)

    8 Richard Wagner’s House

    9 Delacroix Museum

    10 Abbey Mansion

    11 Heart of the Left Bank

    12 Café le Procope

    13 Odéon Cinemas

    14 St. Germain-des-Prés

    15 Les Deux Magots Café and Café de Flore

    16 Rue des Canettes

    17 St. Sulpice

    18 Luxembourg Garden

    Map: Luxembourg Garden
The Left Bank is as much an attitude as it is an actual neighborhood. But
this walk—from the Seine to St. Germain-des-Prés to Luxembourg Garden
—captures some of the artistic, intellectual, and countercultural spirit long
associated with the south side of the river.
    We’ll pass through an upscale area of art galleries, home-furnishing
boutiques, antique dealers, bookstores, small restaurants, classic cafés,
evening hot spots, and the former homes of writers, painters, and
composers. Though trendy for a long time now, the area still has the offbeat
funkiness that has always defined the Rive Gauche. (Gauche, meaning
“left,” has come to imply social incorrectness, like giving a handshake with
the wrong—left—hand.)




   Use this walk as a series of historical markers as you explore the Left
Bank of today. The walk leads you through a fascinating neighborhood and
dovetails perfectly with a shopping stroll (see “Sèvres-Babylone to St.
Sulpice” on here) or downtime at Luxembourg Garden (where this walk
ends). It also works well following a visit to the Louvre or after the Historic
Paris Walk, and it’s ideal for connoisseurs of contemporary art.
                            Orientation
Length of This Walk: Allow two hours for the whole walk, which covers a
    little over a mile. With less time, end the walk at St. Germain-des-Prés,
    which has good Métro and bus connections.
When to Go: Evenings are pleasant. Many art galleries don’t open until
    afternoon, but remain open until 19:00 or later.
Delacroix Museum: €7, free on first Sun of month, covered by Museum
    Pass, Wed-Mon 9:30-17:30, first Thu of the month until 21:00, closed
    Tue, good WC.
St. Germain-des-Prés Church: Free, daily 8:00-19:45.
St. Sulpice Church: Free, daily 7:30-19:30, Sun organ recitals (see here).
Luxembourg Garden: Free, daily dawn until dusk.
Getting There: Mo: Pont Neuf or Louvre-Rivoli or bus #69 work well.
    From any of these stops, make your way to the Pont des Arts, next to
    the Louvre.



                       The Walk Begins
• Start on the pedestrian-only bridge across the Seine, the Pont des Arts.
 1   Pont des Arts
Before dozens of bridges crossed the Seine, the two riverbanks were like
different cities—royalty on the right bank, commoners on the left. Today
this link offers one of the most captivating views in Paris.
    This bridge has always been pedestrian only...and long a popular
meeting point for lovers. For years, romantic couples wrote their names on
a padlock, “locked” their love forever to the bridge’s metal railings, and
tossed the key in the Seine. Unromantic city engineers became worried that
the heavy locks were jeopardizing the bridge’s structural integrity (a whole
panel fell into the Seine in 2015) and installed glass panels that make this
show of devotion impossible. The city is advising disappointed lovers to
take selfies kissing in front of the bridge’s railings instead.
    The Pont des Arts leads to the domed Institut de France building, where
40 linguists meet periodically to decide whether it’s acceptable to call email
“le mail” (as the French commonly do), or whether it should be the French
word courriel (which linguists prefer). The Académie Française, dedicated
to halting the erosion of French culture, is wary of new French terms with
strangely foreign sounds—like le week-end, le marketing, le fast-food, and
c’est cool.
    Besides the Académie Française, the Institut houses several other
Académies, such as the Académie des Beaux-Arts, which is dedicated to
subjects appropriate for the Left Bank, such as music and painting.
• Leave the bridge and cross the busy street. Angle toward the right side of
the Institut de France and walk through the passageway between #25 and
#27. Once on the other side of the Institut, you should be met by a statue in
a street-corner garden (unless it’s still removed for cleaning).
 2   Statue of Voltaire
“Jesus committed suicide.” The mischievous philosopher Voltaire could
scandalize a party with a wicked comment like that, delivered with an
enigmatic smile and a twinkle in his eye (meaning if Christ is truly God, he
could have prevented his crucifixion). Voltaire—a commoner more
sophisticated than the royalty who lived across the river—introduces us to
the Left Bank.
   Born François-Marie Arouet (1694-1778), he took up “Voltaire” as his
one-word pen name. Although Voltaire mingled with aristocrats, he was
constantly in trouble for questioning the ruling class and for fueling ideas
that would soon spark a revolution. He did 11 months in the Bastille prison,
then spent 40 years in virtual exile from his beloved Paris. Returning as an
old man, he got a hero’s welcome so surprising it killed him.
• From here we’ll head south down Rue de Seine to Boulevard St. Germain,
making a few detours along the way. The first stop is a charcoal-colored
storefront at 6 Rue de Seine.
 3   Roger-Viollet
Look in the windows at black-and-white photos of Paris’ storied past. The
display changes often, but you might see a half-built Eiffel Tower, glitterati
of yesteryear (Colette, Simone de Beauvoir, Jean Cocteau), Hitler in Paris,
and so on. Many more photos are tucked away inside the binders lining the
walls, labeled alphabetically. This humble shop is the funky origin of a
worldwide press agency (similar to Getty Images) dealing in historic
photographs. The family of photographer Henri Roger expanded his
photographs into an archive of millions of photos, chronicling Paris’
changes through the years. After his death in 1985, they bequeathed the
business and the collections to the city of Paris. You can shop inside (Mon-
Sat 11:00-19:00, closed Sun) or order photos on their website
(www.parisenimages.fr).


                     Wilde in the Left Bank
  Oscar Wilde (1854-1900), the Irish playwright with the flamboyant
  clothes and outrageous wit, died in a Left Bank hotel on November 30,
  1900 (don’t blame the current owners).
      Just five years earlier, he’d been at his peak. He had several plays
  running simultaneously in London’s West End and had returned to
  London triumphant from a lecture tour through America. Then news of
  his love affair with a lord leaked out, causing a scandal, and he was
  sentenced to two years in prison for “gross indecency.” Wilde’s wife
  abandoned him, refusing to let him see their children again.
      After his prison term, a poor and broken Wilde was exiled to Paris,
  where he succumbed to an ear infection and died in a (then) shabby
  hotel room. Among his last words in the run-down place were: “Either
  this wallpaper goes, or I do.”
      Wilde is buried in Paris ( see the Père Lachaise Cemetery Tour
  chapter).


• Continue down Rue de Seine, which cuts through a neighborhood of art
galleries and upscale shops selling lamps, sconces, vases, bowls, and
statues for people who turn their living rooms into art.
   At the first intersection, a half-block detour to the right leads to 4
Oscar Wilde’s hotel (#13), where he died in 1900. The sight itself is hardly
worth the walk there, but the story of how Wilde ended up here is
fascinating (see the sidebar).
   Continuing along Rue de Seine, a plaque at #31 marks...
 5   George Sand’s House
In 1831 George Sand (1804-1876) left her husband and two children and
moved into this apartment, determined to become a writer. During the year
she lived here, she wrote articles for Le Figaro while turning her real-life
experiences with men into a sensational novel, Indiana, which made her a
celebrity and allowed her to afford a better apartment.
    George Sand is known for her novels, her cross-dressing (men’s suits,
slicked-down hair, cigars—and trading in her married name, Amantine-
Lucile-Aurore Dudevant, for a man’s name), and for her complex love
affair with a sensitive pianist from Poland, Frédéric Chopin.
• At 43 Rue de Seine is...
 6   Café la Palette
Though less famous than more historic cafés, this is a “real” one, where a
café crème, beer, or glass of wine at an outdoor table is not outrageous. It’s
one café where I prefer sitting inside—the 100-year-old, tobacco-stained
wood paneling and faded Art Nouveau decor lend an ambience of Left
Bank cool. Toulouse-Lautrec would have liked it here. Have something to
drink at the bar, admire your surroundings, and snoop about the place—
notice the artist palettes above the bar. Nothing seems to have changed
since it was built in 1903, except the modern espresso machine (open
daily).




• At the fork, veer right down small Rue de l’Echaudé. Four doors up, at 6
Rue de l’Echaudé, is a...
 7   Toy Store (Jouets)
French and American kids share many of the same toys and storybook
characters: Babar the Elephant, Maisy Mouse, Tintin, the Smurfs, Madeline,
Asterix, and the Little Prince. This store features figurines of these and
other whimsical folk.
   In The Little Prince (1943), written by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, a pilot
crashes in the Sahara, where a mysterious little prince takes him to various
planets, teaching him about life from a child’s wise perspective.
   In his actual life, “Saint-Ex” (1900-1944) was indeed a daring aviator
who had survived wrecks in the Sahara. After France fell to the Nazis, he
fled to America, where he wrote and published The Little Prince. He
returned to Europe, then disappeared while flying a spy mission for the
Allies. Lost for six decades, his plane was finally found off the coast of
Marseille. The cause of the crash remains a mystery, part of a legend as
enduring in France as Amelia Earhart’s is in the US.
• At the intersection with Rue Jacob, a half-block detour to the right leads
to #14.
 8   Richard Wagner’s House
Having survived a storm at sea on the way here, the young German
composer (1813-1883) spent the gray winter of 1841-1842 in Paris in this
building writing The Flying Dutchman, an opera about a ghost ship. It was
the restless young man’s lowest point of poverty. Six months later, a
German company staged his first opera (Rienzi), plucking him from
obscurity and leading to a production of The Flying Dutchman that
launched his career.
   Now the premises are occupied by a trendy boutique.
• Backtrack a few steps along Rue Jacob, then turn right and walk south on
Rue de Furstenberg to a tiny, pleasant, tree-bordered square. At #6 is the...
 9   Delacroix Museum
The painter Eugène Delacroix (1798-1863) lived here on this peaceful
square. Today, his home is a bite-sized museum with paintings and
memorabilia. It’s a delightful detour for his fans, skippable for most, and
free with the Museum Pass (good WC, see listing on here).
    Delacroix lived a full and successful life. An ambassador’s son, he
studied at the Beaux-Arts (which we saw earlier) and exhibited at the Salon.
His Liberty Leading the People (1831) was an instant classic, a symbol of
French democracy. Trips to North Africa added exotic Muslim elements to
his palette. He hobnobbed with aristocrats and bohemians like George Sand
and Frédéric Chopin (both of whom he painted). He painted large-scale
murals for the Louvre, Hôtel de Ville, and Luxembourg Palace. In 1857,
nearing 60 and in failing health, Delacroix moved in here. He was seeking a
quiet home/studio where he could concentrate on his final great works for
the Church of St. Sulpice (which we’ll see later).
• Continue uphill as Rue de Furstenberg runs directly into...

10   Abbey Mansion
This building (1586) was the administrative center for the vast complex of
monks gathered around the nearby church of St. Germain-des-Prés. Today,
it’s a Catholic school.
• Facing the Abbey Mansion, turn left on Rue de l’Abbaye and start
working your way east. Along the way is a wine shop, at 6 Rue de Bourbon-
Le-Château, called La Dernière Goutte—“The Last Drop.” They welcome
both connoisseurs and yokels for an unsnooty look at France’s viniculture
(tastings and classes listed on chalkboard; Tue-Sat 11:00-20:00, Mon from
15:30, closed midday Mon-Fri). At the T-intersection with Rue de Buci, turn
left. You’ve arrived at what is, arguably, the geographical (if not spiritual)...


                              Art Galleries
  You’ll see many arts-oriented shops in this vibrant neighborhood.
  There are fine-art galleries selling paintings and statues, art-supply
  stores, antique dealers, and chic boutiques for the latest in interior
  design.
      Paris’ art scene thrives. In the 20th century, the city attracted many
  of the foreigners who pioneered modern art (such as Picasso, Chagall,
  and Modigliani). Artists here still get respect not always given to
  artists in the States (“So you’re an artist, huh? And what’s your real
  job?”). Paris remains a clearinghouse of creative ideas...and fine art is
  big business, too. Lots of money passes through this city. Oil-rich
  sultans come here looking for trendy new works to hang over their
  sofas back home. Museum curators from America troll these Left
  Bank streets, taking notes on what’s hot. Many travelers come here to
  enjoy the finer things in life. If they come across something they love,
  they pull out their plastic and make it their own. You could do the
  same. Paris is one city in the world where art supply does not
  necessarily outstrip art demand.
      You’re welcome to window shop or enter the galleries. Remember
  the niceties of shopping in Paris. Always say, “Bonjour, Madame” (or
  Monsieur) when entering, and “Au revoir, Madame” (or Monsieur)
  when leaving. “Je regarde” means “I’m just looking.” “Je voudrais
  acheter” means “I would like to buy.” Most clerks speak sufficient
  English and are happy to help or to let you browse. If you stroll
  neighborhoods in the evening, you’re likely to pass what looks like a
  cocktail party spilling out of an art gallery. These “art openings,”
  called vernissages, are sometimes private, though usually open to the
  public (even Americans). Be bold and join the party if you come
  across one.


11   Heart of the Left Bank
Explore. Rue de Buci (bew-see) is perennially busy hosting pâtisseries and
a produce market by day and bars by night. Mixing earthiness and elegance,
it’s a quintessential Left Bank scene. Continue east through the café
cauldron of Rue de Buci, which crosses a busy five-corner intersection and
becomes Rue St. André-des-Arts. Notice the tall wood beams that pierce the
roof of the Atlas Café while keeping the wall behind upright, and the fake-
flower-festooned café opposite. That’s so “Left Bank.”




• Cross Rue de l’Ancienne Comédie and soon turn right into the covered
passageway called Cour du Commerce St. André. Stroll a half-block down
this colorful alleyway, past shops and enticing eateries. On your right,
you’ll pass the back door of...
12   Café le Procope
Founded in 1686, Le Procope is one of France’s oldest continuously
operating restaurants, and was one of Europe’s first places to sample an
exotic new stimulant—coffee—recently imported from the Muslim culture.
   In the 1700s, Le Procope caffeinated the Revolution. Voltaire reportedly
drank 30 cups a day, fueling his intellectual passion. Benjamin Franklin
recounted war stories about America’s Revolution. Robespierre, Danton,
and Marat plotted coups over cups of double-short soy mochaccinos. And a
young lieutenant named Napoleon Bonaparte ran up a tab he never paid.
See portraits of some of the café’s most famous regulars in the windows.




   Located midway between university students, royalty, and the
counterculture Comédie Française, Le Procope attracted literary types who
loved the free newspapers, writing paper, and quill pens. Today, the one-
time coffeehouse is a full-service restaurant (affordable if mediocre menus,
open daily). If you’re interested in a meal ($$) surrounded by memorabilia-
plastered walls (and tourists), enter through the red-draped opening.
• Continue down the cobbled lane until it spills out onto Boulevard St.
Germain at an intersection (and Métro stop) called Odéon.
13   Odéon Cinemas
When night falls, the neon signs buzz to life, and Paris’ many lovers of film
converge here for the latest releases at several multiplexes in the area.
• Cross Rue de l’Ancienne Comédie to the right. Looking south up Rue de
l’Odéon as you cross, notice the classical columns and pyramidal roofline
of the Théâtre de l’Odéon, the descendant of the original Comédie
Française (now housed in the Palais Royal). Continue walking west along
busy Boulevard St. Germain for six blocks, passing Café Vagenande
(famous for its plush Art Nouveau interior) and other fashionable, noisy
cafés with outdoor terraces. You’ll reach (on your right) the large stone
church and square of...
14   St. Germain-des-Prés
Paris’ oldest church, dating from the 11th century (the square bell tower is
original), stands on a site where a Christian church has stood since the fall
of Rome. (The first church was destroyed by Vikings in the 885-886 siege.)
The restored interior is still painted in the medieval manner. The church is
Romanesque, with round—not pointed—arches over the aisles of the nave.
   The square outside is one of Paris’ great gathering spots on warm
evenings. The church is often lit up and open late.
• On Place St. Germain-des-Prés, you’ll find two venerable cafés—once
meccas of creative coffee drinking, today just filled with tourists and
milking their fabled past.

15   Les Deux Magots Café and Café de Flore
Since opening in 1885, “The Two Chinamen Café” (wooden statues inside)
has taken over from Le Procope as the café of ideas. From Oscar Wilde’s
Aestheticism (1900) to Picasso’s Cubism (1910s) to Hemingway’s spare
prose (1920s) to Sartre’s Existentialism (with Simone de Beauvoir and
Albert Camus, 1940s and ’50s) to rock singer Jim Morrison (early 1970s),
worldwide movements have been born in the simple atmosphere of these
two cafés. Café de Flore, once frequented by Picasso, is more hip, but Deux
Magots is more inviting (for details, see the Eating in Paris chapter). Across
the street is Brasserie Lipp, a classic brasserie where Hemingway wrote
much of A Farewell to Arms.
• From the Church of St. Germain-des-Prés, cross Boulevard St. Germain
and head a block south on Rue Bonaparte (walking past BNP Paribas
bank). Jog left on Rue du Four, then right on...

16   Rue des Canettes
Small, mid-priced restaurants, bars, and comfortable brewpubs make the
streets in this area a popular nightspot for Parisians. Chez
Georges/Comptoir des Canettes (at #11) is the last outpost of funkiness
(and how!) in an increasingly gentrified neighborhood. Georges stays up
very late, so you won’t find much action here until the afternoon.
• Continue south on Rue des Canettes to the church of...
17   St. Sulpice
The impressive Neoclassical arcaded facade, with two round, half-finished
towers, is modeled on St. Paul’s in London. It has a remarkable organ and
offers Sunday-morning recitals. The lone café on the square in front (Café
de la Mairie) is always lively and perfectly located for a break.
    Inside, circle the church counterclockwise, making a few stops. In the
first chapel on the right, find Delacroix’s three murals (on the chapel’s
ceiling and walls) of fighting angels, completed during his final years while
he was fighting a lengthy illness. They sum up his long career, from
Renaissance/Baroque roots to furious Romanticism to proto-Impressionism.
    The most famous is the agitated Jacob Wrestling the Angel. The two
grapple in a leafy wood that echoes the wrestlers’ rippling energy. Jacob
fights the angel to a standstill, bringing him a well-earned blessing for his
ordeal. Figures to the right of the tree roots include the shepherd Laban and
his daughter Rachel (Jacob’s future wife). Get close and notice the thick
brushwork that influenced the next generation of Impressionists—each leaf
is a single brushstroke, often smudging two different colors in a single
stroke. The “black” of the piled clothes in the foreground—notice the
French flag among them—is built from rough strokes of purple, green, and
white. (Too much glare? Take a couple of steps to the right to view it.)




   On the opposite wall, Heliodorus Chased from the Temple has the
smooth, seamless brushwork of Delacroix’s prime. After Syrian Heliodorus
has killed the king and launched a coup, he has entered the sacred Jewish
Temple in Jerusalem trying to steal the treasure. Angry angels launch
themselves at him, sending him sprawling. The vibrant, clashing colors,
swirling composition, and over-the-top subject are trademark Delacroix
Romanticism. On the ceiling, The Archangel Michael drives demons from
heaven.
    Walking up the right side of the church, pause at the fourth chapel, with
a statue of Joan of Arc and wall plaques listing hundreds upon hundreds of
names. These are France’s WWI dead—from this congregation alone.
    In the chapel at the far end of the church, behind the altar, ponder the
cryptic symbolism of Mary and Child lit by a sunburst, standing on an orb,
and trampling a snake, while a stone cloud tumbles down to a sacrificial
lamb.
    Continue around the church. On the wall of the north transept is an
Egyptian-style obelisk used as a gnomon, or part of a sundial. At Christmas
Mass, the sun shines into the church through a tiny hole—it’s opposite the
obelisk, high up on the south wall (in the upper-right window pane). The
sunbeam strikes a mark on the obelisk that indicates the winter solstice.
Then, week by week, the sunbeam moves down the obelisk and across the
bronze rod in the floor, until, at midsummer, the sun lights up the area near
the altar. (For a while, this corner of the church was busy with fans of The
Da Vinci Code.)
    In the final chapel before the exit, you should see on display a copy of
the Shroud of Turin (the original is in Turin, Italy). This famed burial cloth
is purported to have wrapped the body of Christ, who left it with a
mysterious, holy stain of his image.
• Back out on Place St. Sulpice, take note that several interesting shopping
streets branch off from here. (See the “Sèvres-Babylone to St. Sulpice”
boutique stroll in the Shopping in Paris chapter.)
    To complete this walk, turn left out of the church and continue south on
Rue Henry de Jouvenel, which soon turns into Rue Férou and takes you
directly to Luxembourg Garden. You’ll pass a wall inscribed with a
quotation from one of France’s most famous poems, “Le Bateau Ivre,” by
Arthur Rimbaud (1854-1891). He describes the feeling of drifting along
aimlessly, like a drunken boat: “Comme je descendais... As I floated down
calm rivers, I could no longer feel the control of my handlers...”




   Drift along to Luxembourg Garden, at the Musée du Luxembourg (an art
exhibition space), and circle to the right around the fence until you find an
open entrance.

18   Luxembourg Garden
Paris’ most interesting and enjoyable garden/park/recreational area, le
Jardin du Luxembourg is a great place to watch Parisians at rest and play.
This 60-acre garden, dotted with fountains and statues, is the property of the
French Senate, which meets here in Luxembourg Palace. Although it seems
like something out of a movie, it’s a fact that France’s secret service
(Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure) is “secretly” headquartered beneath
Luxembourg Garden. (Don’t tell anyone.)
    The palace was created in 1615 by Marie de Médici. Recently widowed
(by Henry IV) and homesick for Florence, she built the palace as a re-
creation of her girlhood home, the Pitti Palace. When her son grew to be
Louis XIII, he drove his mother from the palace, exiling her to Germany.
    Luxembourg Garden has special rules governing its use (for example,
where cards can be played, where dogs can be walked, where joggers can
run, and when and where music can be played). The radiant flower beds are
completely changed three times a year, and the boxed trees are brought out
of the orangerie in May. In the southwest corner of the gardens, you can see
beehives that have been here since 1872. Honey is made here for the
orangerie. Close by, check out the apple and pear conservatory, with more
than 600 varieties of fruit trees.
