France: Past & Present

FRANCE: PAST & PRESENT
French History
   CELTS AND ROMANS (52 BC-AD 500)
   DARK AGES (500-1000)
   BORDER WARS WITH ENGLAND (1066-1500)
   RENAISSANCE AND RELIGIOUS WARS (1500s)
    LOUIS XIV, THE ABSOLUTE MONARCH (1600s)
    DECADENCE AND REVOLUTION (1700s)
    ELECTED EMPERORS AND CONSTITUTIONAL KINGS (1800s)
    WAR AND DEPRESSION (1900-1950)
    POSTWAR FRANCE (1950-2000)
 France Today

                         French History
CELTS AND ROMANS (52 BC-AD 500)
Julius Caesar conquered the Parisii, turning Paris from a tribal fishing
village into a European city. The mix of Latin (southern) and Celtic
(northern) cultures, with Paris right in the middle, defined the French
character.

Sights
• Cluny Museum (Roman baths)
• Louvre (Roman antiquities)
• Paris Archaeological Crypt (in front of Notre-Dame)


DARK AGES (500-1000)
Roman Paris fell to German pirates known as the Franks (hence “France”),
and later to the Vikings (a.k.a. Norsemen, which became “Normans”).
During this turbulent time, Paris was just another island-state (“Ile de
France”) in the midst of many warring kingdoms. The lone bright spot was
the reign of Charlemagne (AD 768-814), who briefly united the Franks,
giving a glimpse of the modern nation-state of France.
Sights
• Cluny Museum (artifacts)
• Statue of Charlemagne (in front of Notre-Dame)


BORDER WARS WITH ENGLAND (1066-1500)
In 1066, the Norman duke William the Conqueror invaded and conquered
England. This united England, Normandy, and much of what is today
western France; sparked centuries of border wars; and produced many kings
of England who spoke French. In 1328 King Charles IV died without an
heir, and the Norman king of England tried to claim the throne of France,
which led to more than a century of Franco-Anglo battles, called the
Hundred Years’ War. Rallied by the teenage visionary Joan of Arc in 1429,
the French finally united north and south, and drove the English across the
Channel in 1453. Modern France was born, with Paris as its capital.


                           Paris Almanac
  Population: Paris is the capital and largest city in France. About 2.3
  million people live in the city center (10 million in the greater Paris
  region).
  Currency: Euro.
  Nickname: The City of Light.
  City Layout: Paris is sliced by the Seine River, with the Right Bank
  to the north and the Left Bank to the south (orient yourself by looking
  downstream—the Left Bank is to your left, the Right Bank to your
  right). The city is divided into 20 boroughs, called arrondissements.
  Transportation Basics: The Métro is the most-used public
  transportation in Paris, with 16 lines, 300 stations, and nearly 5 million
  passengers each day. Mayor Anne Hidalgo, continuing a trend to
  reduce vehicular traffic, has called for a total ban on diesel cars by
  2024, expanded traffic-free areas, and added more bike lanes. She has
  also proposed free public transit for residents. Today only 40 percent
  of Parisians own cars.
  Tourist Tracks: Paris is the world’s top tourist destination, attracting
  more than 30 million visitors a year. Of its 3,800 historical
  monuments, the most popular are the Louvre (more than 9 million
  people tour it each year) and the Eiffel Tower (more than 7 million).
  But Mona can’t hold a candle to Mickey—Disneyland Paris gets 16
  million visitors a year.
  Culture Count: Most Parisians, including those of French ancestry,
  were born outside of the city—and roughly one in five residents of
  greater Paris was born outside France (and one in three has at least one
  immigrant parent). The city has significant populations from Africa,
  China, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East.
  Famous Residents: Brigitte Bardot, Juliette Binoche, Carla Bruni,
  Sofia Coppola, Catherine Deneuve, Jean-Luc Godard, Rickie Lee
  Jones, Diane Kruger, Tony Parker, Roman Polanski, Mick Jagger,
  Kristin Scott Thomas, Audrey Tautou, and Emmanuel Macron.


Sights
• Notre-Dame Cathedral
• Sainte-Chapelle
• Cluny Museum (tapestries)
• Carnavalet Museum
• Sorbonne
• Latin Quarter


RENAISSANCE AND RELIGIOUS WARS (1500s)
A strong, centralized France emerged, with French kings setting Europe’s
standard. François I made Paris a cultural capital, inviting Leonardo and
Mona Lisa to visit. Catholics and Protestants fought openly, with 2,000
Parisians slaughtered in the St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre in 1572. The
Wars of Religion subsided for a while when the first Bourbon king, Henry
IV, took the throne in 1589 after converting to Catholicism. In 1598, he
signed the Edict of Nantes, which instituted freedom of religious worship.

Sights
• Louvre (palace and Renaissance art)
• Pont Neuf
• Place des Vosges
• Fontainebleau


LOUIS XIV, THE ABSOLUTE MONARCH (1600s)
Louis XIV solidified his power, neutered the nobility, revoked the Edict of
Nantes, and moved the capital to Versailles, which also became the center
of European culture. France’s wealth sparked “enlightened” ideas that
became the seeds of democracy.

Sights
• Versailles and Vaux-le-Vicomte
• Hôtel des Invalides
• Paintings by Nicolas Poussin and Claude Lorrain


DECADENCE AND REVOLUTION (1700s)
This was the age of Louis XV, Louis XVI, Marie-Antoinette, Voltaire, Jean-
Jacques Rousseau, Maximilien de Robespierre, and Napoleon. A financial
crunch from wars and royal excess drove the French people to revolt. On
July 14, 1789, they stormed the Bastille. A couple of years later, the First
French Republic arrested and then beheaded the king and queen. Thousands
lost their heads—guillotined if suspected of hindering the Revolution’s
progress. A charismatic commoner promising stability rose amid the chaos:
Napoleon Bonaparte.

Sights
• Versailles
• Place de la Concorde and Place de la Bastille



                Typical Church Architecture
  History comes to life when you visit a centuries-old church. Even if
  you wouldn’t know your apse from a hole in the ground, learning a
  few simple terms will enrich your experience. Note that not every
  church has every feature, and a “cathedral” isn’t a type of church
  architecture, but rather a designation for a church that’s a governing
  center for a local bishop.




  Aisles: Long, generally low-ceilinged arcades that flank the nave
  Altar: Raised area with a ceremonial table (often adorned with
  candles or a crucifix), where the priest prepares and serves the bread
  and wine for Communion
  Apse: Space behind the altar, sometimes bordered with small chapels
  Barrel Vault: Continuous round-arched ceiling that resembles an
  extended upside-down U
  Choir: Intimate space reserved for clergy and choir, located within the
  nave near the high altar and often screened off
  Cloister: Covered hallways bordering a square or rectangular open-air
  courtyard, traditionally where monks and nuns got fresh air
  Facade: Exterior of the church’s main (west) entrance, usually highly
  decorated
  Groin Vault: Arched ceiling formed where two equal barrel vaults
  meet at right angles
  Narthex: Area (portico or foyer) between the main entry and the nave
  Nave: Long central section of the church (running west to east, from
  the entrance to the altar) where the congregation sits or stands during
  the service
  Transept: One of the two parts forming the “arms” of the cross in a
  traditional cross-shaped floor plan; runs north-south, perpendicularly
  crossing the east-west nave
  West Portal: Main entry to the church (on the west end, opposite the
  main altar)


• Conciergerie
• Champs-Elysées
• Paintings by Watteau, Boucher, Fragonard, and David (Louvre)


ELECTED EMPERORS AND CONSTITUTIONAL
KINGS (1800s)
Napoleon conquered Europe, crowned himself emperor, invaded Russia,
was defeated on the battlefields of Waterloo, and ended up exiled to an
island in the Atlantic. The monarchy was restored, but rulers toed the
democratic line—or were deposed in the popular uprisings of 1830 and
1848. The latter uprising resulted in the Second French Republic, whose
first president was Napoleon’s nephew. He rewrote the constitution with
himself as Emperor Napoleon III, and presided over a wealthy, middle-class
nation with a colonial empire in slow decline. The disastrous Franco-
Prussian War in 1870 ended his reign, leading to the Third Republic.
France’s political clout was fading, even as Paris remained the world’s
cultural center during the belle époque—the “beautiful age.”
Sights
• Arc de Triomphe
• Baron Haussmann’s wide boulevards
• Eiffel Tower
• Les Invalides and Napoleon’s Tomb
• Pont Alexandre III
• Grand Palais and Petit Palais
• Montmartre
• Opéra Garnier
• Paintings by Ingres and Delacroix (Louvre)
• Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings (Manet, Monet, Renoir,
   Degas, Toulouse-Lautrec, Cézanne, and so on) at the Orsay, Marmottan,
   and Orangerie museums
WAR AND DEPRESSION (1900-1950)
France began the turn of the 20th century as top dog, but two world wars
with Germany (and the earlier Franco-Prussian War) wasted the country.
France had millions of casualties in World War I, sank into an economic
depression, and was easily overrun by Hitler in World War II. Paris, now
dirt cheap, attracted foreign writers and artists.
   This was the age of Pablo Picasso, Maurice Ravel, Claude Debussy, Erik
Satie, Igor Stravinsky, Vaslav Nijinsky, Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott
Fitzgerald, Gertrude Stein, Ezra Pound, Jean-Paul Sartre, Edith Piaf, and
Maurice Chevalier.

Sights
• Army Museum
• Picasso Museum
• Deportation Memorial and Holocaust Memorial
• Pompidou Center (art from this period)


POSTWAR FRANCE (1950-2000)
After the war, France reestablished a democracy with the Fourth Republic.
But France’s colonial empire dissolved after bitter wars in Algeria and
Vietnam, which helped mire an already unsteady government. Wartime hero
Charles de Gaulle was brought back in 1958 to assist with France’s
regeneration. He rewrote the constitution, beginning the Fifth (and current)
Republic. Immigrants from former colonies flooded Paris. The turbulent
’60s, progressive ’70s, socialist-turned-conservative ’80s, and the middle-
of-the-road ’90s bring us to the début de siècle, or the beginning of the 21st
century.

Sights
• Montparnasse Tower
• La Défense
• Louvre’s pyramid
• Pompidou Center (modern art)
• Les Halles



                          France Today
Today, the sociopolitical issues in France are—as in many countries—the
economy, terrorism, relationship with the European Union, immigration,
and managing Covid.
    French unemployment remains high (just under 10 percent, even higher
for youth) and growth has flatlined. France hasn’t balanced its books since
1974, and public spending, at over half of GDP, chews up a bigger chunk of
output than in any other eurozone country. The overwhelming challenge for
French leadership is to address its economic problems while maintaining
the high level of social services that French people have come to expect.
The French want to continue the benefits of their generous social system,
but are they willing to work to an older age (the current retirement age is
62) and pay the taxes required?
    France also has its economic strengths: a well-educated workforce, an
especially robust service sector and high-end manufacturing industry, and
more firms big enough to rank in the global Fortune 500 than any other
European country. Ironically, while France’s economy may be one of the
world’s largest—and the French want all the creature comforts of a
consumer economy—they remain skeptical about the virtues of capitalism
and the work ethic. Globalization conflicts in a fundamental way with
French values—many fear losing what makes their society unique in the
quest for a bland, globalized world. Business conversation outside the office
is generally avoided, as it implies a fascination with money that the French
find vulgar. It’s considered gauche even to ask what someone does for a
living (in part because they think there’s much more to a person than their
occupation). In France, CEOs are not glorified as celebrities—chefs are.
    The French believe that the economy should support social good, not
vice versa, and that people are entitled to secure jobs from which they
cannot be fired easily. This has produced a cradle-to-grave social security
system of which the French are proud. But if you’re considering starting a
business in France, you’re on the wrong track—taxes are formidable (figure
a total small-business tax rate of around 66 percent—and likely to increase).
And this job-security entitlement makes it difficult for employers to find
motivated staff. You’ll feel this impact in small hotels and restaurants where
owners run themselves ragged trying to do everything themselves.
    As part of the 27-member European Union, the “United States of
Europe” that has successfully dissolved borders, France’s governments have
been decidedly pro-EU and critical to the EU’s success. But many French
are Euroskeptics, afraid that EU meddling threatens their job security and
social benefits. The Brexit vote in 2016 focused attention on France. Would
a Frexit follow? The EU can survive sans Britain but probably not sans
France. For now, that possibility seems to have been shelved with President
Macron, who is pro-EU.
    French voters are notorious for their belief in the free market’s heartless
cruelty. France is routinely plagued with strikes, demonstrations, and
slowdowns as workers try to preserve their rights in the face of a
competitive global economy.
    Meanwhile, immigration is shifting the country’s ethnic and cultural
makeup in ways that challenge French society. Ten percent of France’s
population is now of North African descent—mainly immigrants from
former colonies. Many immigrants are Muslim, raising cultural questions in
this heavily Catholic society with a history of official state secularism. In
2011 the government (quite controversially) made it illegal for women to
wear a full, face-covering veil (niqāb) in public. Debates continue about
whether banning the veil enforces democracy—or squelches diversity.
    In 2015, Paris was hit with a double-whammy of Islamist terrorist
attacks—at the offices of the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, and then at
the Bataclan theater. In 2016, an attack in Nice shook the entire country.
Armed soldiers now patrol rail stations and streets. The French have had to
come to grips with the realization that many of the attackers were French
citizens as well as immigrants. These attacks raised serious questions about
immigration, policing, class divisions, and what it means to be French.
    France is governed by a president elected by popular vote every five
years. The president then selects the prime minister, who in turn chooses the
cabinet ministers. Collectively, this executive branch is known as the
gouvernement. The parliament consists of a Senate (348 seats) and
Assemblée Nationale (577 seats).
    In France, voters have an array of political parties to choose from,
making compromise and coalition-building essential to keeping power.
Even the biggest parties rarely get more than one-third of the seats in
parliament. And, because the parliament can force the gouvernement to
resign at any time, it’s essential that the gouvernement work with them.
    To understand the current political landscape and the most recent
election, it’s helpful to consider the 2012 and 2017 elections. (French
elections last only several months, with just a few TV debates.)
    In 2012, socialist François Hollande defeated center-right incumbent
Nicolas Sarkozy. But when Hollande’s term became fraught with scandal,
rocked by terrorist events, and weighed down by a flat economy, Hollande
opted against running for reelection in 2017. That left the field wide open.
    The 2017 election was a wild ride, with events never seen before in
France. Eleven candidates competed in the French version of a primary,
reducing the field to two for the final vote. For the first time since de
Gaulle, neither of the two finalists were from the traditional right and left
parties. (Imagine a US presidential election sans Republican or Democratic
candidates.) Emmanuel Macron, a centrist businessman, had no party
affiliation and had never held elected office. Marine Le Pen represented the
far-right National Front party, once a pariah party tarnished by accusations
of anti-Semitism.
    Le Pen rallied support by proposing to limit immigration and step back
from the EU. Macron proposed a moderate stay-the-course plan that
attracted both liberals and moderate conservatives. The tone of the debates
was uncharacteristically nasty for genteel France. In the end, the French
overwhelmingly chose the moderate path. Macron won with a whopping 66
percent of the vote. Still, Le Pen’s result was the best yet for a National
Front candidate.
    Elected at 39 (and looking even younger), Macron became France’s
youngest leader since Napoleon Bonaparte. His success was completely
unpredicted. He won as an outsider, representing a change from traditional
party politics. (Sound familiar?)
    After an almost flawless first year in office, Macron’s second year was a
different story. While he was internationally respected for his commitment
to multilateralism and for combating climate change, his popularity among
the French dropped from 64 percent to below 30 percent in 2018. The
working class felt abandoned by Macron, calling him “the president of the
rich” (thanks to more business-friendly policies). His proposal to fund
climate-change initiatives by raising the tax on gasoline led to the first true
crisis of his presidency: “yellow vest” anti-government protests. In late
2019 and early 2020, a four-month transportation strike created havoc
throughout France. Shortly after, the Covid-19 pandemic shut down the
country—and most of Europe. Macron’s measures to combat Covid—
including tough restrictions on residents leaving their homes, and severe
limits on travel—did not increase his popularity, but he seems to have
emerged as well as any nation’s leader.
    Macron approached the 2022 presidential election with a strong lead in
the polls, running against a broad range of candidates. Once again, Macron
and Le Pen emerged as the two finalists—a repeat of the 2017 election.
