Army Museum & Napoleon's Tomb Tour

ARMY MUSEUM & NAPOLEON’S
TOMB TOUR
Musée de l’Armée
Orientation
  OVERVIEW
The Tour Begins
    NAPOLEON’S TOMB
    Map: Army Museum & Napoleon’s Tomb
    WORLD WAR I
    WORLD WAR II
    FROM LOUIS XIV TO NAPOLEON I, 1643-1814
    Map: Army Museum—From Louis XIV to Napoleon I
    THE REST OF THE ARMY MUSEUM
If you’re considering trying to conquer Europe to become its absolute
dictator, come here before gathering your army. Hitler did, but still went out
and made the same mistakes as his role model. (Hint: Don’t invade Russia.)
Napoleon’s tomb rests beneath the golden dome of Les Invalides church.
    In addition to the tomb, the complex of Les Invalides—a former
veterans’ hospital built by Louis XIV—has various military collections,
together called the Army Museum. You’ll see medieval armor, Napoleon’s
horse stuffed and mounted, Louis XIV-era uniforms and weapons, and
much more. The best part is the section dedicated to the two world wars,
especially World War II. Visiting the different sections, you can watch the
art of war unfold from stone axes to Axis powers.



                            Orientation
Cost: €14, covered by Museum Pass (show it at the entrance to each sight
   or exhibit), admission includes Napoleon’s Tomb and all museum
   collections within the Invalides complex. Special exhibits and evening
   concerts are extra. Children are free, but you must line up to get them a
   ticket. The sight is also free for military personnel in uniform.
Hours: Daily 10:00-18:00; Napoleon’s Tomb stays open Tue until 21:00.
Information: +33 1 44 42 38 77, www.musee-armee.fr.
Getting There: The museum and tomb are at Hôtel des Invalides, with its
   hard-to-miss golden dome (129 Rue de Grenelle). Ride the Métro (Mo:
   La Tour Maubourg, Varenne, or Invalides), or take a bus: #69 from the
   Marais and Rue Cler area or #63 from the St. Germain-des-Prés area
   (buses #82 and #92 also serve the sight). The museum is a 10-minute
   walk from Rue Cler. There are two entrances: one from the Grand
   Esplanade des Invalides, and the other from behind the gold dome on
   Avenue de Tourville.
Visitor Information: A helpful, free map/guide is available at the ticket
   office. Excellent English information is posted in most exhibits. Paired
   with the self-guided tour in this chapter, that should be sufficient info
   for most.
Tours: If you want even more background, a fine €5 multimedia guide
   covers the whole complex.
Length of This Tour: Allow 2-4 hours depending on your appetite for all
   things Napoleon and war.
Concerts: The museum hosts classical music concerts throughout the year.
   For schedules see the museum website.
Eating: The cafeteria is reasonable (outdoor tables available), and the
   museum gardens are picnic-perfect. Rue Cler eateries are a 10-minute
   walk away, as is the riverside promenade along the Seine, with many
   eating options.
Nearby: You’ll likely see the French playing boules on the esplanade (as
   you face Les Invalides from the riverside, look for the dirt area to the
   upper right; for the rules of boules, see here).
Starring: Napoleon’s Tomb, exhibits on World Wars I & II, memorabilia of
   Napoleon (including his stuffed horse).


OVERVIEW
The Army Museum and Napoleon’s Tomb are in the Invalides complex (or
should I say “Napoleon complex”?). Various exhibits are scattered around
the large complex. Consult your free Army Museum map for the whole list
and their locations. Your ticket covers them all—just flash your ticket or
Museum Pass at each entrance.
   Pick your favorite war. With limited time, visit only ▲▲▲ Napoleon’s
Tomb and the excellent ▲▲▲ World War I and World War II exhibits.
Next on my list would be the exhibit ▲▲ From Louis XIV to Napoleon I
(1643-1814), featuring swords and muskets, key battles of the Revolution,
and memorabilia of Napoleon. If you still have energy, browse the ▲
Charles de Gaulle Exhibit, which honors France’s WWII hero, or Arms
and Armor, a vast collection of medieval suits of armor, pikes, swords, and
cannons. Though there are other exhibits to see here, this chapter covers
only the top sights in order of importance.



                       The Tour Begins
• You can enter the Invalides complex from either the north or south side
(ticket offices are at both entrances). Start at Napoleon’s Tomb—underneath
the golden dome, with its entrance on the south side (farthest from the
Seine).


NAPOLEON’S TOMB
Enter the church, gaze up at the dome, then lean over the railing and bow to
the emperor lying inside the scrolled, red porphyry tomb (see photo). If the
lid were opened, you’d find an oak coffin inside, holding another ebony
coffin, housing two lead ones, then mahogany, then tinplate...until finally,
you’d find Napoleon himself, staring up, with his head closest to the door.
When his body was exhumed from the original grave and transported here
(1840), it was still perfectly preserved, even after 19 years in the ground.
    Born of humble Italian heritage on the French-owned isle of Corsica,
Napoleon Bonaparte (1769-1821) went to school at Paris’ Ecole Militaire,
quickly rising through the ranks amid the chaos of the Revolution. The
charismatic “Little Corporal” won fans by fighting for democracy at home
and abroad. In 1799, he assumed power and, within five short years,
conquered most of Europe. The great champion of the Revolution had
become a dictator, declaring himself emperor of a new Rome.
    Napoleon’s red tomb on its green base stands 15 feet high in the center
of a marble floor, circled by a mosaic crown of laurels and exalted by a
glorious dome above.
    Now, panning around the chapel, you’ll find tombs of Napoleon’s
family. Despots are quick to make loyal family members part of their inner
circle. After conquering Europe, he installed his big brother, Joseph, as king
of Spain (turn around to see Joseph’s black-and-white marble tomb in the
alcove to the left of the door); his little brother, Jerome, became king of the
German kingdom of Westphalia (tucked into the chapel to the right of the
door); and his baby boy, Napoleon II (downstairs), sat in diapers on the
throne of Rome.
   In other alcoves, you’ll find more dead war heroes, including Marshal
Ferdinand Foch, the commander in chief of the multinational Allied forces
in World War I, his tomb lit with otherworldly blue light. To the right of
Foch lies Maréchal Vauban, Louis XIV’s great military engineer, who
designed the fortifications of more than 100 French cities. Vauban’s
sarcophagus shows him reflecting on his work with his engineer’s tools,
flanked by figures of war and science. These heroes, plus many painted
saints, make this a kind of French Valhalla.
    Before moving on, consider the design of the church itself—find the
model of this complex under glass in front of the altar. It’s actually a double
church—one for the king and one for his soldiers—built long before
Napoleon under Louis XIV in the 17th century. You’re standing in the
“dome chapel,” decorated to the glory of Louis XIV and intended for
royalty before it became the tomb of Napoleon. The original altar was
destroyed in the Revolution. What you see today dates from the mid-1800s,
and was inspired by the altar and canopy at St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome.
• Step behind the altar (with the corkscrew columns), descend a flight of
stairs, and look through the windows at the second church—the Church of
St. Louis. This is where the veterans hospitalized here attended (mandatory)
daily Mass. (You can enter the Church of St. Louis from the main courtyard
—a quick and worthwhile detour.)
    Before descending to the crypt level where Napoleon is buried, pause on
the landing and face the doorway. It’s flanked by two bronze giants
representing civic and military strength. The writing above the door is
Napoleon’s “desire” (as the inscription reads) for his remains to be with the
French people. And, like a welcome mat on the floor before you, a big
inlaid N welcomes you into the tomb of perhaps the greatest military and
political leader in French history.
   Now go down the final flight of stairs and belly up to the banister
around Napoleon’s Tomb.

Crypt
Take a moment to absorb the majesty and symmetry of this tomb and the
reverence Napoleon still enjoys from the French people.
    Wander clockwise to find the names of Napoleon’s great battles on the
floor circling the base of the tomb. Rivoli marks the battle where the rookie
26-year-old general took a ragtag band of “citizens” and thrashed the
professional Austrian troops in Italy, returning to Paris a celebrity. In Egypt
(Pyramides), he fought Turks and tribesmen to a standstill. The exotic
expedition caught the public eye, and he returned home a legend.
    Napoleon’s huge victory over Austria and Russia at Austerlitz—on the
first anniversary of his coronation—made him Europe’s top dog. At the
head of the million-man Great Army (La Grande Armée), he made a three-
month blitz attack through Germany and Austria. As a military commander,
he was daring, relying on top-notch generals and a mobile force of
independent armies. His personal magnetism on the battlefield was said to
be worth 10,000 additional men.
    Pause to gaze at the grand statue of Napoleon the emperor in the alcove
at the head of the tomb—royal scepter and orb of earth in his hands. By
1804, all of Europe was at his feet. He held an elaborate ceremony in Notre-
Dame, where he proclaimed his wife, Josephine, empress, and himself—the
35-year-old son of humble immigrants—emperor. The laurel wreath, the
robes, and the Roman eagles proclaim him the equal of the Caesars. The
floor at the statue’s feet marks the grave of his son, Napoleon II (Roi de
Rome, 1811-1832).




    Circling the tomb on the crypt walls are relief panels showing
Napoleon’s constructive side. Dressed in toga and laurel leaves, he
dispenses justice, charity, and pork-barrel projects to an awed populace.
• In the first panel to the right of the statue...
    He establishes an Imperial University to educate naked boys
throughout “tout l’empire.” The roll of great scholars links modern France
with those of the past: Plutarch, Homer, Plato, and Aristotle.
    Three panels later, his various building projects (canals, roads, and so
on) are celebrated with a list and his quotation, “Everywhere he passed, he
left durable benefits” (“Partout où mon regne à passé...”).
    Hail Napoleon. Then, at his peak, came his most tragic errors.
• Turn around and look down to Moscowa (the Battle of Moscow—marked
beneath his tomb).
    Napoleon invaded Russia with 600,000 men and returned to Paris with
60,000 frostbitten survivors. Two years later, the Russians marched into
Paris, and Napoleon’s days were numbered. After a brief exile on the isle of
Elba, he skipped parole, sailed to France, bared his breast, and said, “Strike
me down or follow me!” For 100 days, they followed him, finally into
Belgium, where the British and the Prussians hammered the French at the
Battle of Waterloo (conspicuously absent on the floor’s décor—for more on
this battle, see “From Louis XIV to Napoleon I,” near the end of this
chapter).
    Exiled again by a war tribunal, he spent his last years in a crude shack
on the small South Atlantic island of St. Helena. When Napoleon died, he
was initially buried in a simple grave. The epitaph was never finished
because the French and British wrangled over what to call the hero/tyrant.
The stone simply read, “Here lies...”
• To get to the Courtyard of Honor and the various military collections, exit
Napoleon’s Tomb the same way you entered, make a U-turn right, and
march past the cafeteria and ticket hall. Continue to the end of the hallway.
Just before the courtyard, on the right, stairs lead up to the World War I and
World War II exhibits. Go upstairs, following blue banners reading Les
Deux Guerres Mondiales, 1871-1945. The museum is laid out so you first
see the coverage of World War I, though some may choose to pass through
this section quickly to reach the more substantial WWII section.



              Napoleon Bonaparte (1769-1821)
  Born to Italian parents on the French-ruled isle of Corsica, Napoleon
  attended French schools, although he spoke the language with an
  Italian accent to the end of his days. He graduated from Paris’ Ecole
  Militaire, where he trained in the latest high-tech artillery. His military
  career took an unexpected turn when the Revolution erupted (1789),
  and he chose to return to Corsica to fight royalist oppression.
      In 1793, as commander of artillery, Napoleon besieged Toulon,
  forcing the royalists to surrender and earning his first great victory. He
  later defended the Revolutionary government from royalist mobs in
  Paris by firing a “whiff of grapeshot” into the crowd (1795). Such
  daring military exploits and personal charisma earned him promotions
  and the nickname “the Little Corporal”—not for his height (he was an
  average 5’7”) but as a term of endearment from the rank and file.
  When he married the classy socialite Josephine Beauharnais,
  Napoleon became a true celebrity. In 1798, having conquered Italy and
  Egypt, Napoleon returned to Paris, where the weak government
  declared him First Consul—ostensibly as the champion of democracy,
  but in fact he was a virtual dictator over much of Europe. He was 29
  years old.
    During the next 15 years, Napoleon solidified his reign with
military victories over Europe’s kings—now allied against France.
Under his rule, France sealed the Louisiana Purchase with America,
and legal scholars drew up the Code of Napoleon, a system of laws
still used by many European governments today. In 1804, his power
peaked when he crowned himself emperor in a ceremony in Notre-
Dame blessed by the pope. The Revolutionary general was now,
paradoxically, part of Europe’s royalty. Needing an heir to the throne,
he divorced barren Josephine and married an Austrian duchess, Marie
Louise, who bore him the boy known to historians as the “King of
Rome.”




   In 1812, Napoleon decided to invade Russia, and the horrendous
losses from that failed venture drained his power. Many of Europe’s
  conquered nations saw their chance to pig-pile on France, toppling
  Napoleon and sending him to exile on the isle of Elba (1814).
  Napoleon escaped long enough to raise an army for a final hundred-
  day campaign before finally being defeated by British and Prussian
  forces at the Battle of Waterloo (1815). Guilty of war crimes, he was
  sentenced to exile on the remote South Atlantic island of St. Helena,
  where he talked to his dog, studied a little English, penned his
  memoirs, spoke his final word—“Josephine”—and died.



WORLD WAR I
World War I (1914-1918) introduced modern technology to the age-old
business of war. Tanks, chemical weapons, monstrous cannons, rapid
communication, and airplanes made their debut, collaborating to kill nearly
10 million people in just four years. In addition, the war ultimately seemed
senseless: It started with little provocation, raged on with few decisive
battles, and ended with nothing resolved, a situation that sowed the seeds of
World War II.
   A quick walk-through of this 20-room exhibit leads you chronologically
through World War I’s causes, battles, and outcome, giving you the essential
background for the next world war. There’s good English information, but
the displays are lackluster and low-tech: Move along quickly and don’t burn
out before getting to the World War II wing.

The War Begins
Room 1: The first room bears a thought-provoking name: “Honour to the
Unfortunate Bravery.” Paintings of dead and wounded soldiers from the
Franco-Prussian War make it clear that World War I actually “began” in
1871, when Germany thrashed France. Suddenly, a recently united
Germany was the new bully in Europe.
   Rooms 2-3, France Rebounds: Snapping back from its loss, France
began rearming itself, with spiffy new uniforms and weapons like the
American-invented Gatling gun (early machine gun).




   The French replaced the humiliation of defeat with a proud and extreme
nationalism. Fanatical patriots hounded a (Jewish) officer named Alfred
Dreyfus (display at the far left end) on trumped-up treason charges (1890s).
    Rooms 4-6, Colonial Expansion: Europe’s nations were in a race for
wealth and power, jostling to acquire lucrative colonies in Africa and Asia
(uniforms). In a climate of mutual distrust, nations allied with their
neighbors, vowing to protect each other if war ever erupted. In Room 6, a
map of Europe in 1914 shows the division: France, Britain, and Russia (the
Allies) teamed up against Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy (the Central
Powers). Europe was ready to explode, but the spark that would set it off
had nothing to do with Germany or France.
    Room 7, Assassination and War Begins: Bang. On June 28, 1914, an
Austrian archduke was shot to death (see video). One by one, Europe’s
nations were dragged into the regional dispute by their webs of alliances.
The Great War had begun.
    Room 8, The Battle of the Marne: German forces swarmed into
France, hoping for a quick knockout blow. Germany brought its big guns
(photo and miniature model of Big Bertha). The projection map shows
how the armies tried to outflank each other along a 200-mile battlefront. As
the Germans (purple-gray arrows) zeroed in on Paris, the French (blue
arrows) and British (“BEF”) scrambled to send 6,000 crucial
reinforcements, shuttled to the front lines in 670 Parisian taxis (one is
displayed nearby). The German tide was stemmed, and the two sides faced
off, expecting to duke it out and get this war over quickly. It didn’t work out
that way.
• The war continues upstairs.

World at War
Rooms 9-10, The War in the Trenches: By 1915, the two sides reached a
stalemate, and they settled in to a long war of attrition—French and Britons
on one side, Germans on the other. The battle line, known as the Western
Front, snaked 450 miles across Europe from the North Sea to the Alps. For
protection against flying bullets, the soldiers dug trenches (tranchées),
which soon became home—24 hours a day, 7 days a week—for millions of
men.
    Life in the trenches was awful—cold, rainy, muddy, disease-ridden—
and, most of all, boring. Every so often, generals waved their swords and
ordered their men “over the top” and into “no-man’s-land.” Armed with
rifles and bayonets, they advanced into a hail of machine gun fire. The
“victorious” side often won only a few hundred yards of meaningless
territory that was lost the next day after still more deaths. During the 10-
month Battle of Verdun, France had about 400,000 casualties.
    The war pitted 19th-century values of honor, bravery, and chivalry
against 20th-century weapons: grenades, machine guns, tanks, and poison
gas. To shoot over the tops of trenches while staying hidden, they even
invented crooked and periscope-style rifles.
   Rooms 11-13, “World” War/Colonial Empires in the War (labeled
1917 in floor): Besides the Western Front, the war extended elsewhere,
including the colonies, where many “natives” (see their uniforms) joined
the armies of their “mother” countries. On the Eastern Front, Russia and
Germany wore each other down. (Finally, the Russian people had had
enough; they overthrew their czar, brought the troops home, and fomented a
revolution that put communists in power.)
• Down a short hallway, enter Room 14.

War Ends
Room 14, The Allies: By 1917, the Allied forces were beginning to outstrip
the Central Powers, thanks to help from around the world. When Uncle Sam
said, “I Want You,” five million Americans answered the call to go “Over
There” (in the words of a popular song) and fight the Germans. The Yanks
were not an enormous military factor, but their very presence signaled that
the Allies seemed destined to prevail.
    Room 15, Armistice (labeled 1918 in floor): In spite of a desperate last
offensive by Generals Ludendorff and Hindenburg, the Germans were
doomed. Under the command of French marshal Ferdinand Foch, the Allies
undertook a series of offensives that would prove decisive. At the 11th hour
of the 11th day of the 11th month (November 11, 1918), the guns fell silent.
Allied Europeans celebrated the Armistice with victory parades (see the
newsreel footage of the Arc de Triomphe parade)...and then began
assessing the damage.
    Room 16, Costly Victory: After four years of battle, the war had left 9.5
million dead and 21 million wounded (see plaster casts of disfigured faces).
A generation was lost, and France never fully recovered its “superpower”
status.
   Rooms 17-19, From 1918 to 1938: The Treaty of Versailles (1919),
signed in the Hall of Mirrors, officially ended the war. A map shows how it
radically redrew Europe’s borders. Germany was punished severely,
leaving it crushed, humiliated, stripped of crucial land, and saddled with
demoralizing war debts. Marshal Foch prophetically said of the Treaty:
“This is not a peace. It is an armistice for 20 years.”
   France, one of the “victors,” was drained, trying to hang on to its
prosperity and its colonial empire. By the 1930s—swamped by the Great
Depression and a stagnant military (dummy on horseback)—France was
reeling, unprepared for the onslaught of a retooled Germany seeking
revenge.
   A photo of Adolf Hitler presages the awful events that came next.
• World War II is covered directly across the hall, in the rooms marked
1939-1942. Good WCs are nearby.


WORLD WAR II
World War II was the most destructive of earth’s struggles. In this exhibit,
the war unfolds in photos, displays, and newsreels, with special emphasis
on the French contribution. (You may not have realized that it was Charles
de Gaulle who won the war for us.) The museum takes you from Germany’s
quick domination (third floor), to the Allies turning the tide (second floor),
to the final surrender (first floor).
    Be ready—displays come in rapid succession and flow into each other
without obvious walls or dividers (look for room numbers in red on wall
posters and find your way with the display labels). Ideally, read this tour
before your visit as an overview of the vast, complex, and horrific global
spectacle known as World War II.

Third Floor: Axis Aggression, 1939-1941
The Phony War (La Drôle de Guerre) and the Defeat of 1940
(Le Defaite de 1940)
On September 1, 1939, Germany, under Adolf Hitler, invaded Poland,
starting World War II. But in a sense the war had really begun in 1918,
when the “war to end all wars” ground to a halt, leaving 9.5 million dead,
Germany defeated, and France devastated (if victorious). For the next two
decades, Hitler fed off German resentment over the Treaty of Versailles,
which humiliated and ruined Germany.
   After Hitler’s move into Poland, France and Britain mobilized. For the
next six months, the two sides faced off, with neither actually doing battle
—a tense time known to historians as the “Phony War” (Drôle de Guerre).
   Then, in spring of 1940 came the Blitzkrieg (“lightning war”), and
Germany’s better-trained and better-equipped soldiers and tanks (see turret)
swept west through Belgium. France was immediately overwhelmed, and
British troops barely escaped across the English Channel from Dunkirk.
Within a month, Nazis were goose-stepping down the Champs-Elysées.
• A few paces farther along you see a large photo of...




Charles de Gaulle (L’Appel du 18 Juin)
Just like that, virtually all of Europe was dominated by fascists. During
those darkest days, as France fell and Nazism spread across the Continent,
one Frenchman—an obscure military man named Charles de Gaulle—
refused to admit defeat. This 20th-century John of Arc had an unshakable
belief in his mission to save France. De Gaulle (1890-1970) was born into a
literate, upper-class family, raised in military academies, and became a
WWI hero and POW. But when World War II broke out, he was still only a
minor officer with limited political experience, who was virtually unknown
to the French public.




   After the invasion, de Gaulle escaped to London. From there he made
inspiring speeches over the radio, beginning with a famous address
broadcast on June 18, 1940. He slowly convinced a small audience of
French expatriates that victory was still possible.

France After the Armistice (La France Après l’Armistice)
After France’s surrender, Germany ruled northern France, including Paris—
see the photo of Hitler as a tourist at the Eiffel Tower. Hitler made a three-
hour blitz tour of the city, including a stop at Napoleon’s Tomb. Afterward
he said, “It was the dream of my life to be permitted to see Paris. I cannot
say how happy I am to have that dream fulfilled today.”
   The Nazis allowed the French to administer the south and the colonies
(North Africa). This puppet government, centered in the city of Vichy, was
right-wing and traditional, bowing to Hitler’s demands as he looted
France’s raw materials and manpower for the war machine. (In the movie
Casablanca, set in Vichy-controlled Morocco, French officials follow Nazi
orders while French citizens defiantly sing “The Marseillaise.”)




The Battle of Britain (La Solitude et la Bataille d’Angleterre)
Facing a “New Dark Age” in Europe, British prime minister Winston
Churchill pledged, “We will fight on the beaches...We will fight in the hills.
We will never surrender.”
   In June 1940, Germany mobilized to invade Britain across the English
Channel. From June to September, they paved the way, sending bombers—
up to 1,500 planes a day—to destroy military and industrial sites. When
Britain wouldn’t budge, Hitler concentrated on London and civilian targets.
This was “The Blitz” of the winter of 1940, which killed 30,000 and left
parts of London in ruins. But Britain hung on, armed with newfangled
radar, speedy Spitfires, and an iron will.
    They also had the Germans’ secret “Enigma” code. The Enigma
machine (in display case), with its set of revolving drums, allowed German
commanders to scramble orders in a complex code that could be broadcast
securely to their troops. The British (with crucial help from Poland)
captured a machine, broke the code, then monitored German airwaves. (An
Enigma machine co-starred with actor Benedict Cumberbatch, who played
code-breaking mathematician Alan Turing, in the movie The Imitation
Game.) For the rest of the war, Britain had advance knowledge of many
top-secret plans, but occasionally let Germany’s plans succeed—sacrificing
its own people—to avoid suspicion.




   By spring of 1941, Hitler had given up any hope of invading the Isle of
Britain. Churchill said of his people: “This was their finest hour.”
Germany Invades the Soviet Union (L’Allemagne Envahit
l’Union Soviétique)
Perhaps hoping to one-up Napoleon, Hitler sent his state-of-the-art tanks
speeding toward Moscow in June 1941 (betraying his former ally Joseph
Stalin). By winter, the advance had stalled at the gates of Moscow and was
bogged down by bad weather and Soviet stubbornness.
   The Third Reich had reached its peak. Soon, Hitler would have to fight a
two-front war. The French Renault tank (displayed) was downright puny
compared with the big, fast, high-caliber German Panzers. This war was
often a battle of factories, to see who could produce the latest technology
fastest and in the greatest numbers. And what nation might have those
factories...?




• In the corner is a glass case with a model of an aircraft carrier,
announcing that...

The United States Joins the War (Les Etats-Unis Dans la
Guerre)
On December 7, 1941, “a date which will live in infamy” (as US president
Franklin D. Roosevelt put it), Japanese planes made a sneak attack on the
US base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, and destroyed the pride of the Pacific
fleet in two hours.
    The US quickly entered the fray against Japan and her ally, Germany. In
two short years, America had gone from isolationist observer to supplier of
Britain’s arms to full-blown war ally against fascism. The US now faced a
two-front war—in Europe against Hitler, and in Asia against Japan’s
imperialist conquest of China, Southeast Asia, and the South Pacific.
    America’s first victory came when Japan tried a sneak attack on the US
base at Midway Island (June 3, 1942). This time—thanks to the Allies who
had cracked the Japanese code—America had the aircraft carrier USS
Enterprise (see model) and two of her buddies lying in wait. In five
minutes, three of Japan’s carriers (with valuable planes) were mortally
wounded, their major attack force was sunk, and Japan and the US were
dead even, settling in for a long war of attrition.
    Though slow to start, the US eventually had an army 16 million strong,
80,000 planes, the latest technology, $250 million a day, unlimited raw
materials, and a population of Rosie the Riveters fighting for freedom to a
boogie-woogie beat.
• Continue downstairs to the second floor.

Second Floor: The Tide Turns, 1942-1944
In 1942, the Continent was black with fascism, and Japan was secure on a
distant island. The Allies had to chip away on the fringes.

Battle of the Atlantic (La Bataille de l’Atlantique)
German U-boats (short for Unterseeboot, meaning submarine) and
battleships such as the Bismarck patrolled Europe’s perimeter, where they
laid spiky mines to try to keep America from aiding Britain. (Until long-
range transport planes were produced near war’s end, virtually all military
transport was by ship.) The Allies traveled in convoys with air cover, used
sonar and radar, and dropped depth charges, but for years they endured the
loss of up to 60 ships per month.
El-Alamein, Stalingrad, and Guadalcanal
Three crucial battles in the autumn of 1942 put the first chink in the fascist
armor. Off the northeast coast of Australia, 10,000 US Marines (see
kneeling soldier in glass case #14D) took an airstrip on Guadalcanal, while
30,000 Japanese held the rest of the tiny, isolated island. For the next six
months, the two armies were marooned together, duking it out in thick
jungles and malaria-infested swamps while their countries struggled to
reinforce or rescue them. By February 1943, America had won and gained a
crucial launch pad for bombing raids.
    A world away, German tanks under General Erwin Rommel rolled
across the vast deserts of North Africa. In October 1942, a well-equipped,
well-planned offensive by British general Bernard (“Monty”) Montgomery
attacked at El-Alamein, Egypt, with 300 tanks. (See British tank soldier
with headphones, #14F.) Monty drove “the Desert Fox” west into Tunisia
for the first real Allied victory against the Nazi Wehrmacht war machine.
    In 1942, the Allies began long-range bombing of German-held territory,
including saturation bombing of civilians. It was global war and total war.
    Then came Stalingrad. In August 1942, Germany attacked the Soviet
city, an industrial center and gateway to the Caucasus oil fields. By October,
the Germans had battled their way into the city center and were fighting
house-to-house, but their supplies were running low, the Soviets wouldn’t
give up, and winter was coming. The snow fell, their tanks had no fuel, and
relief efforts failed. Hitler ordered them to fight on through the bitter cold.
On the worst days, thousands of men died. (By comparison, the US lost a
total of 58,000 in Vietnam over 11 years.) Finally, on January 31, 1943, the
Germans surrendered, against Hitler’s orders. The six-month totals for the
Battle of Stalingrad? Eight hundred thousand German and other Axis
soldiers dead, 1.1 million Soviets dead. The Russian campaign put hard
miles on the German war machine.

Landing in North Africa (Le Débarquement Américain en
Afrique du Nord)
A photo shows Winston Churchill, US president Franklin D. Roosevelt, and
France’s Charles de Gaulle meeting to plan an indirect attack on Hitler by
invading Vichy-controlled Morocco and Algeria. On November 8, 1942,
100,000 Americans and British—under the joint command of an unknown,
low-key problem-solver named General Dwight (“Ike”) Eisenhower—
landed on three separate beaches (including Casablanca). More than
120,000 Vichy French soldiers, ordered by their superiors to defend the
fascist cause, confronted the Allies and...gave up. (Nearby, find displays of
some standard-issue weapons: Springfield rifle, Colt 45 pistol, Thompson
submachine gun, hand grenade.)
   The Allies moved east, but bad weather, inexperience, and the powerful
Afrika Korps under Rommel stopped them in Tunisia. But with flamboyant
General George S. (“Old Blood-and-Guts”) Patton punching from the west,
and Monty pushing from the south, they captured the port town of Tunis on
May 7, 1943. The Allies now had a base from which to retake Europe.

The French Resistance (L’Unification de la Résistance)
Inside occupied France, ordinary heroes fought the Nazis—the underground
Resistance. Jean Moulin (see photo), de Gaulle’s assistant, secretly
parachuted into France and organized these scattered heroes into a unified
effort.
   Various displays show the Resistance’s efforts. Bakers hid radios within
loaves of bread to secretly contact London. Barmaids passed along tips
from tipsy Nazis. Communists in black berets cut telephone lines. Farmers
hid downed airmen in haystacks. Housewives spread news from the front
with their gossip. Printers countered Nazi propaganda with pamphlets.
   In 1943, Moulin was arrested by the Gestapo (Nazi secret police) and
died. But Free France now had a (secret) government again, rallied around
de Gaulle, and was ready to take over when liberation came.
    Fans of Jean Moulin and the stirring Resistance story can explore it in
greater depth at the Museum of Liberation and Jean Moulin, which opened
in 2019 at Place Denfert-Rochereau (near the Catacombs, closed Mon,
www.museeliberation-leclerc-moulin.paris.fr).
• Meanwhile, on the Eastern Front...

The Red Army (L’Armée Rouge)
Monty, Patton, and Ike certainly were heroes, but the war was won on the
Eastern Front by Soviet grunts, who slowly bled Germany dry. Maps show
the shifting border of the Eastern Front.
• Bypass a couple of rooms, to...

The Italian Campaign (La Campagne d’Italie)
On July 10, 1943, the assault on Hitler’s European fortress began. More
than 150,000 Americans and British sailed from Tunis and landed on the
south shore of Sicily. (See maps and video clips of the campaigns.) Speedy
Patton and methodical Monty began a “horse race” to take the city of
Messina (the US won the friendly competition by a few hours). They met
little resistance from 300,000 Italian soldiers, and were actually cheered as
liberators. Mussolini was arrested by his own people, and Italy surrendered.
Hitler quickly poured 50,000 German troops into Italy, reinstalled
Mussolini, and ordered Italy to fight on.
     In early September, the Allies landed on the beaches of southern Italy.
Finally, after four long years of war, free men set foot on the European
continent. Lieutenant General Mark Clark led the slow, bloody push north
to liberate Rome.
     In January 1944, the Germans dug in between Rome and Naples at
Monte Cassino, a rocky hill topped by the monastery of St. Benedict (see
the large photo showing the obliterated abbey). Thousands died as the Allies
tried inching up the hillside. In frustration, the Allies air-bombed the
historic monastery to smithereens, killing many noncombatants...but no
Germans, who dug in deeper. After four months of vicious, sometimes
hand-to-hand combat by the Allies (Americans, Brits, Free French, Poles,
Italian partisans, Indians, etc.), a band of Poles stormed the monastery, and
the German back was broken.
   Meanwhile, 50,000 Allies had landed near Rome at Anzio and held the
narrow beachhead for months against massive German attacks. Finally the
Allied troops broke out and joined the assault on the capital. Without a
single bomb threatening its historic treasures, Rome fell on June 4, 1944.
• Room 23 (with benches) shows a film on...

D-Day (Jour-J)
Three million Allies and six million tons of matériel were massed in
England in preparation for the biggest fleet-led invasion in history—across
the Channel to France, then eastward to Berlin. The Germans, hunkered
down in northern France, knew an invasion was imminent, but the Allies
kept the details top secret. On the night of June 5, 150,000 soldiers boarded
ships and planes without knowing where they were headed until they were
under way. Each one carried a note from General Eisenhower: “The tide has
turned. The free men of the world are marching together to victory.”
    At 6:30 a.m. on June 6, 1944, Americans spilled out of troop transports
into the cold waters off a beach in Normandy, code-named Omaha (see the
black-and-white newsreel projection). The weather was bad, seas were
rough, and the prep bombing had failed. The soldiers, many seeing their
first action, were dazed and confused. Nazi machine guns pinned them
against the sea. Slowly, they crawled up the beach on their stomachs. A
thousand died. The survivors held on until the next wave of transports
arrived.
    All day long, Allied confusion did battle with German indecision; the
Nazis never really counterattacked, thinking D-Day was just a ruse, instead
of the main invasion. By day’s end, the Allies had taken several beaches
along the Normandy coast and begun building artificial harbors, providing a
tiny port-of-entry for the reconquest of Europe. The stage was set for a
quick and easy end to the war. Right.
• Go downstairs to the...

First Floor: The War Ends, 1944-1945
Battle of Normandy and Landing in Provence (Le
Débarquement de Provence)
Through June, the Allies (mostly Americans) secured Normandy by taking
bigger ports (Cherbourg and Caen) and amassing troops and supplies for the
assault on Germany. In July they broke out and sped eastward across
France, with Patton’s tanks covering up to 40 miles a day. They had “Jerry”
on the run.
   On France’s Mediterranean coast, American troops under General
Alexander Patch landed near Cannes (see the big photo of the sky filled
with parachutes), took Marseille, and headed north to meet up with
General Patton. A tiny theater shows happy liberation scenes as France is
freed city by city.




Les Maquis
French Resistance guerrilla fighters helped reconquer France from behind
the lines. (Don’t miss the folding motorcycle in its parachute case.) The
liberation of Paris was started by a Resistance attack on a German garrison.

Liberation of Paris (La Libération de Paris)
As the Allies marched on Paris, Hitler ordered his officers to torch the city
—but they sanely disobeyed and prepared to surrender. A video shows the
exhilaration of August 26, 1944, as General Charles de Gaulle walked
ramrod-straight down the Champs-Elysées, followed by Free French troops
and US GIs passing out chocolate and Camels. Two million Parisians went
crazy.

Toward Berlin (Vers Berlin)
The quick advance from the west through France, Belgium, and
Luxembourg bogged down at the German border in autumn of 1944. Patton
outstripped his supply lines, an airborne and ground invasion of Holland
(the Battle of Arnhem) was disastrous, and bad weather grounded planes
and slowed tanks.




   On December 16, the Allies met a deadly surprise. An enormous, well-
equipped, energetic German army appeared from nowhere, punched a
“bulge” deep into Allied territory through Belgium and Luxembourg, and
demanded surrender. General Anthony McAuliffe sent a one-word response
—“Nuts!”—and the momentum shifted. The Battle of the Bulge was
Germany’s last great offensive.
   The Germans retreated across the Rhine River, blowing up bridges
behind them. But one bridge, at Remagen, was captured by the Americans
and stood just long enough for GIs to cross and establish themselves on the
east shore of the Rhine. Soon US tanks were speeding down the autobahns
and Patton could wire the good news back to Ike: “General, I have just
pissed in the Rhine.”
    Soviet soldiers did the dirty work of taking fortified Berlin by launching
a final offensive in January 1945, and surrounding the city in April. German
citizens fled west to surrender to the more-benevolent Americans and Brits.
Hitler, defiant to the end, hunkered in his underground bunker. (See photo
of ruined Berlin.)
    On April 28, 1945, Mussolini and his girlfriend were killed and hung by
their heels in Milan. Two days later, Adolf Hitler and his new bride, Eva
Braun, avoided similar humiliation by committing suicide (pistol in mouth
and poison), and having their bodies burned beyond recognition. Germany
formally surrendered on May 8, 1945.
• To the left, in the adjoining room, don’t miss the exhibits on...

Concentration Camps (Les Camps de Concentration)
Lest anyone mourn Hitler or doubt this war’s purpose, gaze at photos from
Germany’s concentration camps. Some camps held political enemies and
prisoners of war, including two million French. Others were expressly built
to exterminate people considered “genetically inferior” to the “Aryan
master race”—particularly Jews, Gypsies, homosexuals, and the mentally
ill.

War of the Pacific (Les Batailles du Pacific)
Often treated as an afterthought, the final campaign against Japan was a
massive American effort, costing many lives but saving millions of others
from Japanese domination.
    Japan was an island bunker surrounded by a vast ring of fortified Pacific
islands. America’s strategy was to take one island at a time, “island-
hopping” until close enough for B-29 Superfortress bombers to attack Japan
itself. The battlefield spread across thousands of miles. In a new form of
warfare, ships carrying planes led the attack and prepared tiny islands (such
as Iwo Jima) for troops to land on and build airfields. While General
Douglas MacArthur island-hopped south to retake the Philippines (“I have
returned!”), others pushed north toward Japan.
   On March 9, Tokyo was firebombed, and 90,000 were killed. Japan was
losing, but a land invasion would cost hundreds of thousands of lives. The
Japanese had a reputation for choosing death over the shame of surrender—
they even sent bomb-laden “kamikaze” planes on suicide missions.
   America unleashed its secret weapon, an atomic bomb (originally
suggested by German-turned-American Albert Einstein). On August 6, a B-
29 dropped one (named “Little Boy,” see the replica dangling overhead) on
the city of Hiroshima and instantly vaporized 100,000 people and four
square miles. Three days later, a second bomb fell on Nagasaki. The next
day, Emperor Hirohito unofficially surrendered. The long war was over, and
US sailors returned home to kiss their girlfriends in public places.




The Closing Chapter (Actes de Conclusion)
The death toll for World War II, tallied from September 1939 to August
1945, totaled 80 million soldiers and civilians. The Soviet Union lost 26
million, China 13 million, France 580,000, and the US 340,000. The Nazi
criminals who started the war and perpetrated war crimes were tried and
sentenced in an international court—the first of its kind—held in Nürnberg,
Germany.
   World War II changed the world, with the US emerging as the dominant
political, military, and economic superpower. Europe was split in two. The
western half recovered, with American aid. The eastern half remained under
Soviet occupation. For 45 years, the US and the Soviet Union would
compete—without ever actually doing battle—in a “Cold War” of
espionage, propaganda, and weapons production that stretched from Korea
to Cuba, from Vietnam to the moon.
• Exit through the shop and turn left. The next exhibit is located on the east
side of the large Courtyard of Honor (where Napoleon honored his troops,
Dreyfus had his sword broken, and de Gaulle once kissed Churchill).
Follow “From Louis XIV to Napoleon III” signs. Start upstairs on the
second floor.


FROM LOUIS XIV TO NAPOLEON I, 1643-1814
This display traces the evolution of uniforms and weapons through France’s
glory days, with the emphasis on Napoleon Bonaparte. As you circle the
second floor, the exhibit unfolds chronologically in four parts: the Ancien
Régime (Louis XIV, XV, and XVI), the Revolution, the First Empire
(Napoleon), and the post-Waterloo world. Many (but not all) exhibits have
some English information.
   This museum is best for browsing, but I’ve highlighted a handful of the
(many) exhibits to get you started. Room numbers are posted on doorjambs.

Hall 1: Ancien Régime (Louis XIV, XV, and XVI)
Louis XIV unified the army as he unified the country, creating the first
modern nation-state with a military force. You’ll see many glass cases of 1
weapons. Gunpowder was quickly turning swords, pikes, and lances to
pistols, muskets, and bayonets. Uniforms became more uniform, and
everyone got a standard-issue flintlock.
   At the end of the hall, a display case has some amazingly big and 2
odd-shaped rifles. Nearby, there’s a video on weapons, and a projection
screen showing a reenactment of the 3 Battle of Fontenoy (in present-day
Belgium) in 1745. Put on headphones and watch how the French
established their superiority on the Continent.
• Turn the corner and enter...
Hall 2: Révolution
Room 13 features the 4 American War of Independence. You’ll see the
sword (épée) of the French aristocrat Marquis de La Fayette, who—full of
revolutionary fervor—sailed to America, where he took a bullet in the leg
and fought alongside George Washington.
    After France underwent its own Revolution, the king’s Royal Army
became the people’s National Guard, protecting their fledgling democracy
from Europe’s monarchies while spreading revolutionary ideas by conquest.
    Midway down Hall 2, find the large 5 model of the Battle of Lodi in
1796 (push the English-language button). The French and Austrians faced
off on opposite sides of a northern Italian river, each trying to capture a
crucial bridge. The model shows the dramatic moment when the French
cavalry charged across the bridge, overpowering the exhausted Austrians.
They were led by a young, relatively obscure officer who had distinguished
himself on the battlefield and quickly risen through the ranks—Napoleon
Bonaparte. Stories spread that it was the brash General Bonaparte himself
who personally sighted the French cannons on the enemy—normally the
job of a lesser officer. It turned the tide of battle and earned him a reputation
and a nickname, “The Little Corporal.”
   Rooms 19-21 chronicle the era of 6 Napoleon as emperor. While
pledging allegiance to Revolutionary ideals of democracy, Napoleon staged
a coup and soon ruled France as a virtual dictator. The museum displays
General Bonaparte’s hat, sword, and medals. In 1804, Napoleon donned
royal robes and was crowned Emperor. The famous portrait by J. A. D.
Ingres shows him at the peak of his power, stretching his right arm to
supernatural lengths. The ceremonial collar and medal he wears in the
painting are displayed nearby, as are an eagle standard and Napoleon’s
elaborate saddle.
   Continue to the end of Hall 2 to find 7 Napoleon’s beloved Arabian
horse. Le Vizir weathered many a campaign with Napoleon, grew old with
him in exile, and now stands stuffed and proud.
Hall 3: The Reign of Napoleon
Ambitious Napoleon plunged France into draining wars against all of
Europe. In Room 29 (midway down the hall), you’ll find 8 Napoleon’s
tent and bivouac equipment: a bed with mosquito netting, a director’s chair,
his overcoat, and a table where you can imagine his generals hunched over
as they made battle plans.
    Napoleon’s plans to dominate Europe ended with disastrous losses when
he attempted to invade Russia. The rest of Europe ganged up on France, and
in 1814 Napoleon was forced to abdicate. At the end of the hall, find Room
35 with a 9 portrait of a crestfallen Napoleon, now replaced by King
Louis XVIII (whose bust stands opposite). Napoleon spent a year in exile
on the isle of Elba. In March of 1815, he escaped, returned to France,
rallied the army, and prepared for one last hurrah.
• Turning the corner into Hall 4, you run right into what Napoleon did—
Waterloo.

Hall 4: Waterloo and the First Restoration
Study the projection screen that maps the course of the history-changing 10
Battle of Waterloo, fought on the outskirts of Brussels, June 15-19, 1815.
    On June 18, 72,000 French (the blue squares) faced off against the allied
armies of 68,000 British-Dutch under Wellington (red and yellow) and
45,000 Prussians under Blücher (purple). Napoleon’s only hope was to keep
the two armies apart and defeat them individually.
    First, Napoleon’s Marshal Ney advances on the British-Dutch,
commanded by the Prince of Orange. Then the French attack the Prussians
on the right. They rout the Prussians, driving them north. Napoleon’s
strategy is working. Now he prepares to finish Wellington off.
    On the morning of June 18, Wellington hunkers down atop a ridge at
Waterloo. Napoleon advances, and they face off. Nothing happens.
Napoleon decides to wait two hours to attack, to let the field dry—some say
it was his fatal mistake. Finally, Napoleon attacks from the left flank. Next
he punches hard on the right. Wellington pushes them back. Meanwhile, the
Prussians are advancing from the right, so Napoleon sends General Mouton
to check it out. Napoleon realizes he must act quickly or have to fight both
armies at once. He sends General Ney into the thick of Wellington’s forces.
Fierce fighting ensues. Ney is forced to retreat. The Prussians advance from
the right. It’s a two-front battle. Caught in a pincer, Napoleon has no choice
but to send in his elite troops, the Imperial Guard, who have never been
defeated. The British surprise the Guard in a cornfield, and Wellington
swoops down from the ridge, routing the French. By nightfall, the British
and Prussian armies have come together, 12,000 men have died, and
Napoleon’s reign of glory is over.
    Napoleon was sent into exile on St. Helena. Once the most powerful
man in the world, Napoleon spent his final years as a lonely outcast
suffering from ulcers, dressed in his nightcap and slippers, and playing
chess, not war.
    The French monarchy was restored, and King Louis XVIII donned the
11 royal robes.

• Continuing on and crossing a hall, you should run right into a portrait of
12 Napoleon III, the emperor of France in the 1850s and the nephew of the

great Napoleon Bonaparte...but that’s a whole other story, and this area
might be reorganized by the time of your visit. Our tour here is done.


THE REST OF THE ARMY MUSEUM
• Your ticket is good for all the exhibits and museums in the complex
(consult your free museum map). If you still have an appetite for French
military history, take the stairs down directly to the impressive...

Charles de Gaulle Exhibit
This engaging memorial one floor below ground level brings France’s
history of war into the modern age. The exhibit leads you through the life of
the greatest figure in 20th-century French history. A 25-minute
documentary runs twice per hour. You can use the free audioguide, or just
circle clockwise and let the big photos and video images tell de Gaulle’s life
story:
   It starts in 1890 with childhood photos and posters capturing the 19th-
century French world that shaped him. During World War I, de Gaulle
fought bravely at Verdun. In the 1920s, as a “soldier-writer,” he rose
through the ranks ghostwriting for the war hero Marshal Petain. As fascism
rose in the 1930s, de Gaulle encouraged France to modernize its armies.
   When World War II broke out in 1939 and France capitulated, de Gaulle
refused to collaborate with the Nazis and went into exile. He became the
head of “La France Libre”—the small unoccupied territories of French
people around the world. He was instrumental in France’s liberation in 1944
and led the parade down the Champs-Elysées.
   After helping to defeat Hitler, de Gaulle turned to politics. He led the
nation for a decade (1958-69) as its president. But in 1968, student protests
and worker strikes eventually toppled him. Today, he’s honored as
something much more than just an airport.
• Back on the west side of the Courtyard of Honor is the exhibit called...

Arms and Armor
Here you’ll discover every size, shape, and style of body armor and swords.
The collection’s highlight (to the right down the hall after you enter) is the
suit of armor of France’s great Renaissance king, François I, decorated with
fleur-de-lis. He sits astride his horse, fitted out in matching armor.
Connoisseurs of medieval armor, cannons, swords, pikes, crossbows, and
early guns will love this collection of weapons from the 13th to 17th
centuries; others can browse a few rooms and move on.




More Sights
If you still haven’t had enough of dummies in uniforms and endless glass
cases of muskets, there’s more. The Museum of the Order of Liberation
honors heroes of the WWII Resistance. The Museum of Plans-Reliefs (on
the top floor of the east wing) exhibits the 18th-century models of France’s
cities (1:1600 scale) that strategists used to thwart enemy attacks. Survey
Antibes and ponder which hillside you’d use to launch an attack. Finally,
you can end your visit in the pristine Church of St. Louis—the perfect
place to remember all the fallen soldiers.
