Sights: Major Museums Neighborhood

MAJOR MUSEUMS NEIGHBORHOOD
Paris’ grandest park, the Tuileries Garden, was once the private property of
kings and queens. Today it links the Louvre, Orangerie, and Orsay
museums. And across from the Louvre are the tranquil, historic courtyards
of the Palais Royal.
▲▲▲Louvre (Musée du Louvre)
This is Europe’s oldest, biggest, greatest, and second-most-crowded
museum (after the Vatican). Housed in a U-shaped, 16th-century palace
(accentuated by a 20th-century glass pyramid), the Louvre is Paris’ top
museum and one of its key landmarks. It’s home to Mona Lisa, Venus de
Milo, and hall after hall of Greek and Roman masterpieces, medieval
jewels, Michelangelo statues, and paintings by the greatest artists from the
Renaissance to the Romantics. When it’s crowded—and that’s most of the
year—woe to those who show up without a timed-entry ticket (buy online
in advance).
    Touring the Louvre can be overwhelming, so be selective. Focus on the
Denon wing, with Greek sculptures, Italian paintings (by Raphael and
Leonardo), and—of course—French paintings (Neoclassical and
Romantic), and the adjoining Sully wing, with Egyptian artifacts and more
French paintings. For extra credit, tackle the Richelieu wing, displaying
works from ancient Mesopotamia, as well as French, Dutch, and Northern
art.
    Cost and Hours: €17 for timed-entry ticket—book online in advance,
includes special exhibits, covered by Museum Pass (but pass holders must
still reserve time slot in advance); €15 tickets sometimes available at the
door but it’s unlikely—and you’ll wait in a long line; open Wed-Mon 9:00-
18:00, possibly until 21:45 Wed and Fri—check online, closed Tue, last
entry 45 minutes before closing; crowds worst in the morning and all day
Sun, Mon, and Wed; multimedia guide-€5, guided tours available, several
cafés, +33 1 40 20 53 17, recorded info +33 1 40 20 51 51, www.louvre.fr.
   Getting There: Use the Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre Métro stop.
(The old Louvre Métro stop, called Louvre-Rivoli, is farther from the
entrance.) Bus #69 also runs past the Louvre.
      See the Louvre Tour chapter or download my free audio tour.

Palais Royal Courtyards
Across from the Louvre are the lovely courtyards of the stately Palais
Royal. Although the palace is closed to the public, the courtyards are open.
   Cost and Hours: Free and always open. The Palais Royal is directly
north of the Louvre on Rue de Rivoli (Mo: Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre).
   Visiting the Courtyards: Enter through a whimsical (locals say tacky)
courtyard filled with stubby, striped columns and playful fountains (with
fun, reflective metal balls). Next, you’ll pass into another, perfectly Parisian
garden. This is where in-the-know Parisians come to take a quiet break,
walk their poodles and kids, or enjoy a rendezvous—amid flowers and
surrounded by a serene arcade and a handful of historic restaurants. Bring a
picnic and create your own quiet break, or have a drink at one of the
outdoor cafés at the courtyard’s northern end. This is Paris.
    Though tranquil today, this was once a hotbed of political activism. The
palace was built in the 17th century by Louis XIII and eventually became
the headquarters of the powerful Dukes of Orléans. Because the Dukes’ digs
were off-limits to the police, some shocking free-thinking took root here.
This was the meeting place for the debating clubs—the precursors to
modern political parties. During the Revolution, palace resident Philippe,
duc d’Orléans, (nicknamed Philippe Egalité for his progressive ideas)
advocated a constitutional monarchy, and voted in favor of beheading Louis
XVI—his own cousin. Philippe hoped his liberal attitudes would spare him
from the Revolutionaries, but he, too, was guillotined. His son, Louis-
Philippe, became France’s first constitutional monarch (r. 1830-1848). The
palace’s courtyards were backdrops for a riotous social and political scene,
filled with lively café culture, revolutionaries, rabble-rousers, scoundrels,
and...Madame Tussaud’s first wax shop (she used the severed heads of
guillotine victims to model her sculptures).
    Nearby: Exiting the courtyard at the side facing away from the Seine
brings you to the Galeries Colbert and Vivienne, attractive examples of
shopping arcades from the early 1800s (see here).
▲▲▲Orsay Museum (Musée d’Orsay)
The Orsay boasts Europe’s greatest collection of Impressionist works. It
might be less important than the Louvre—but it’s more purely enjoyable.
   The Orsay, housed in an atmospheric old train station, picks up where
the Louvre leaves off: the second half of the 19th century. This is art from
the tumultuous time that began when revolutions swept across Europe in
1848 and ended when World War I broke out in 1914. Begin with the
conservative art of the mid-1800s—careful, idealized Neoclassicism (with a
few rebels mixed in). Then tour the late 1800s, when the likes of Manet,
Monet, Degas, and Renoir jolted the art world with their colorful, lively
invention, Impressionism. (Somewhere in there, Whistler’s Mother sits
quietly.) The Orsay also displays the works of their artistic descendants, the
Post-Impressionists: Cézanne, Van Gogh, Gauguin, Seurat, and Toulouse-
Lautrec. On the mezzanine level, waltz through Rodin sculptures and Art
Nouveau exhibits, and finish in the Grand Ballroom, which shows the
chandeliered elegance of this former train station.




   Cost and Hours: €14, free on first Sun of month, covered by Museum
Pass, combo-tickets with Orangerie Museum (€18) or Rodin Museum (€24)
are sold only at those museums—not the Orsay, keep Orsay ticket for
discount at Opéra Garnier. Museum open Tue-Sun 9:30-18:00, Thu until
21:45, closed Mon, last entry one hour before closing (45 minutes before on
Thu), Impressionist galleries start shutting 45 minutes before closing;
museum especially crowded on Sun and Tue; audioguide-€6, guided tours-
€6; cafés and restaurant, +33 1 40 49 48 14, www.musee-orsay.fr.
   Getting There: The museum, at 1 Rue de la Légion d’Honneur, sits
above the RER/Train-C Musée d’Orsay stop; the nearest Métro stop is
Solférino, three blocks southeast of the Orsay. Buses #69 and #87 stop near
the Orsay. From the Louvre, it’s a lovely 15-minute walk through the
Tuileries Garden and across the pedestrian bridge.
      See the Orsay Museum Tour chapter (which includes more tips on
avoiding lines) or download my free audio tour.

▲▲Orangerie Museum (Musée de l’Orangerie)
Located in the Tuileries Garden and drenched by natural light from
skylights, the Orangerie (oh-rahn-zhuh-ree) is the closest you’ll come to
stepping into an Impressionist painting. Start with the museum’s claim to
fame: Monet’s Water Lilies. Then head downstairs to enjoy the manageable
collection of select works by Utrillo, Cézanne, Renoir, Matisse, and
Picasso.
   Cost and Hours: €12.50 for timed-entry ticket—reserve online in
advance, free for those under age 18, free on first Sun of the month, €18
combo-ticket with Orsay Museum, ask about combo-ticket with Monet’s
garden and house at Giverny, covered by Museum Pass; Wed-Mon 9:00-
18:00, closed Tue; audioguide-€5, English guided tours available-€6,
located in Tuileries Garden near Place de la Concorde (Mo: Concorde), 15-
minute stroll from the Orsay, +33 1 44 77 80 07, www.musee-orangerie.fr.
      See the Orangerie Museum Tour chapter.

Forum des Halles
Today’s modern shopping mall and esplanade covers what was, since the
Middle Ages, the center of all food distribution in Paris. For eight centuries,
Les Halles (lay all, the halls) functioned as a gargantuan open market where
fish, meats, and vegetables were sold and distributed. By the late 1800s the
market was covered with muscular steel arches and looked something like
Paris’ older train stations. The area buzzed 24/7—meats were butchered and
fish were cleaned until late at night, farmers and fishermen arrived with
their goods early in the mornings, and deals were made throughout the day.
In 1971 the market was torn down: Increased traffic, smells, and higher land
values had forced its relocation to near Orly airport (in the town of Rungis).




    Today’s incarnation of the huge market—Forum des Halles—is a
multilevel shopping center. It’s famous for its canopy with louvers to
maximize the shade and is designed to collect rainwater, which powers a
fountain that cascades from its peak down to a babbling man-made brook.
The mall is the embodiment of 21st-century urban design: It quietly rests
over a massive underground transportation hub and faces a pleasant city
park (with a fun kids’ zone) and esplanade. The park is overlooked by the
spindly Gothic St. Eustache Church (described next) and the stately old
Bourse de Commerce building, which now houses a contemporary art
collection (www.pinaultcollection.com).
    Nearby: Rue Montorgueil and Rue Montmartre are delightful café-lined
streets a macaron toss from the shopping mall (described in the Shopping in
Paris chapter).

St. Eustache Church
This impressive Gothic church is a worthy alternative to Notre-Dame
during the famous cathedral’s closure. Built 300 years after Notre-Dame
(and similar in size), St. Eustache is a testament to the enduring appeal of
the Gothic style. From the exterior, St. Eustache’s forest of flying buttresses
makes Notre-Dame’s seem tame by comparison. Inside you’ll notice
Renaissance details, but its Gothic style resonates. St. Eustache served the
community of vendors of the once-magnificent outdoor market of Les
Halles. After the market relocated in 1971, this “church of the market
people” fell silent. Today, in the rear of the church, you’ll find a delightful
sculpture honoring the market tradition of this neighborhood: The
Departure of Fruit and Vegetables from the Heart of Paris, by Raymond
Mason.
   Cost and Hours: Free, Sun-Fri 9:30-19:00, Sat from 10:00, 146 Rue
Rambuteau, Mo: Les Halles, +33 1 42 36 31 05, www.saint-eustache.org.

Louvre Wine Museum (Les Caves du Louvre)
This free, scratch-and-sniff wine museum has engaging exhibits describing
everything from terroir (the qualities that come from soil, climate, etc.) to
grape varieties to corks to bottle labels (using a free “Wines in Paris” app
that can serve you well long after your visit). Your self-guided tour ends
with an optional wine tasting (€19/3 wines). They also offer €32 guided
tours in English with wine tasting and a €75 hands-on workshop in wine
blending that includes a bottle of your very own blend.
