Rue Cler Walk

RUE CLER WALK
The Art of Parisian Living
Map: Rue Cler Walk
Orientation
The Walk Begins
   1 Café Roussillon
     2 Petit Bateau
     3 Au Bon Jardinier (“The Good Gardener”) Fruits and

    Vegetables
     4 Le Petit Cler

     5 Wine Bacchus

     6 Fromagerie

     7 Poissonnerie

     8 No More Horse Meat

     9 A la Mère de Famille Confectionery

    10 Oldest Building and Charcuterie-Traiteur Jeusselin

    11 Café du Marché and More

    12 L’Epicerie Fine

    13 Artisan Boulangerie

    14 Mephisto Shoe Store

    15 Cler Fleurs and Butcher Shop

    16 City Info Post

    17 Tabac La Cave à Cigares

    18 Pharmacy


A stroll down this street introduces you to a thriving, traditional Parisian
neighborhood and offers insights into the local culture. And although Rue
Cler is a wealthy district, it retains an everyday charm still found in most
neighborhoods throughout the city. This charming dimension of Paris is
slowly changing, however. With increasing affluence, mobility, and
tourism, businesses that offer workaday practicalities are slowly morphing
into upscale shops and cafés. But the Parisian love and appreciation of
community persists, and it can be sampled even on touristy and affluent
Rue Cler.
    Shopping for groceries is the backbone of daily life here. Parisians shop
nearly every day for three good reasons: Refrigerators are small (tiny
kitchens), produce must be fresh, and it’s an important social event.
Shopping is a chance to hear about the butcher’s vacation plans, see photos
of the florist’s new grandchild, relax over un café, and kiss the cheeks of
friends (for proper kissing etiquette, see “Le French Kiss” sidebar, later).
    Rue Cler—traffic-free since 1984—offers plenty of space for narrow
stores and their patrons to spill out onto the street. It’s an ideal environment
for this ritual to survive and for you to explore. The street is lined with the
essential shops—wine, cheese, chocolate, bread—as well as a bank and a
post office. People from all walks of life live side by side: Before moving to
the Elysée Palace (France’s White House), French president Emmanuel
Macron lived on the seventh floor at 15 Rue Cler, right above Slim, the
night-shift receptionist at one of my favorite Rue Cler hotels. And the shops
of this community are run by people who’ve found their niche: boys who
grew up on quiche and girls who know a good wine.
   For those learning the fine art of living Parisian-style, Rue Cler provides
an excellent classroom. And if you want to assemble the ultimate French
picnic, there’s no better place. The Rue Cler Walk is the only tour in this
guidebook you should start while hungry. Remember that your ability to
enthusiastically embrace the local etiquette of greeting people in French as
you enter each shop (see below) will raise the “happy quotient” of your Rue
Cler experience way up.



                            Orientation
Length of This Walk: Allow an hour to browse and café-hop along this
   short walk of two or three blocks.
When to Go: Visit Rue Cler when its markets are open and lively (Tue-Sat
   8:30-13:00 & 15:00-19:30, Sun 8:30-12:00, dead Sun afternoon and
   Mon).
Getting There: Start your walk at the northern end of the pedestrian
   section of Rue Cler, at Rue de Grenelle (right by a bus #69 stop and a
   short walk from Mo: Ecole Militaire).
Tours: Download my Rue Cler Walk audio tour.
Shop Etiquette: Remember that these shops are busy serving regular
   customers; be careful not to get in the way. Be polite—say “Bonjour,
   Madame/Monsieur” as you enter and “Bonne journée (bohn zhoor-
   nay), Madame/Monsieur” when you leave. Buy something, but before
   making a purchase, watch the locals to see if self-service is allowed.
   Many shopkeepers prefer to serve you and don’t want you to touch the
   goods. If you aren’t sure of the protocol, ask, “Je peux?” (Can I?; zhuh
   puh). If you know what you want, point to your choice and say, “S’il
   vous plaît” (Please; see voo play). For extra credit, add, “Je voudrais”
   (I would like; zhuh voo-dray). And don’t forget “Merci beaucoup”
   (Thank you very much; mehr-see boh-koo).



                       The Walk Begins
 1   Café Roussillon
Standing outside this traditional neighborhood bar/café, survey the
neighborhood. In all four directions you’ll see the same Baron Haussmann-
designed buildings with their uniform height, balconies, and iconic slanted
mansard roofs. With ground floors devoted to retail and upper floors
housing people, there’s a vitality here in the middle of a huge metropolis
that you don’t find in many American cities. Feel the community: people
walking dogs, pushing carriages and dragging shopping carts, and tourists
with their roller bags heading in and out. Electric scooters, quick-rent bikes,
and motorbikes take up space previously dedicated to parked cars. Electric
wires—buried underground—are nowhere to be seen. Paris is a city of
neighborhoods. And this one’s equipped with my favorite market street—a
traffic-free mall serving this community—Rue Cler.
    The Café Roussillion, with its traditional bar, is a neighborhood fixture.
Cafés like this display a sign, required by French law, making it clear that
drinks served at the bar are cheaper than drinks served at the tables. The
blackboard lists wines sold by the glass, along with other drinks.
    Cafés also post a decal on their door (for example, Edenred restaurant
ticket) reminding local workers they accept lunch coupons. In France, an
employee lunch-subsidy program is an expected perk. Thanks to strong tax
incentives designed to keep the café culture vital, employers issue coupons
or credits for each day an employee works in a month, good for a half-price
lunchtime plat du jour (daily special). Sack lunches are rare, since a good
lunch is sacred...and subsidized.
• If you’re shopping for designer baby clothes, you’ll find them across the
street at...
 2   Petit Bateau
The French spend at least as much on their babies as they do on their dogs
—dolling them up with designer jammies. This store is one in a popular
chain. Little children around here are really sophisticated. (They even speak
French.) And they just aren’t comfortable unless they’re making a fashion
statement (such as underwear with sailor stripes).
    In the last generation, an aging and shrinking population was a serious
problem for Europe’s wealthier nations. But France now has one of
Europe’s biggest baby populations—the French average two children per
family, compared to 1.6 for the rest of Europe. Babies are trendy today, and
the government rewards parents with big tax incentives for their first two
children—and then doubles the incentives after that. Since childcare is
subsidized and public school starts at age three, most new mothers get back
into the workforce quickly.
   Making babies is good business—and revered. Notice how locals give
pregnant women the royal treatment: They get priority seating on subways
and buses, and they go straight to the front of any line—no waiting on those
swollen feet. And the French love to ogle babies. The community celebrates
every new addition.
• Cross Rue de Grenelle to find...
 3Au Bon Jardinier (“The Good Gardener”) Fruits and
Vegetables
Each morning, fresh produce is trucked in from farm fields to Paris’ huge
Rungis market—Europe’s largest, near Orly Airport—and then dispatched
to merchants with FedEx-like speed and precision. Good luck finding a
shopping bag—locals bring their own two-wheeled carts or reusable bags.
The earth-friendly French also resist excessive packaging.
   Notice what’s local and what’s not during your visit. Look at the price of
those melons. What’s the country of origin? (It must be posted by law.) If
they’re out of season, they come from Guadeloupe. Many people buy only
local products (sticking with produce labeled “Fr” for France). Parisians—
who know they eat best by being tuned in to the seasons—shop with their
noses. Try it. Smell the cheap foreign strawberries. One sniff of the torpedo-
shaped French ones (gariguettes), and you know which is better. Locals call
those from Belgium “plastic strawberries”—red on the outside, white on the
inside. Find the herbs in the back. Is today’s delivery in?
   The Franprix across the street is a small outpost of a nationwide
supermarket chain. Opposite Grand Hôtel Lévêque is a traiteur asiatique.
Fast Asian food-to-go is popular in Paris. These shops—about as common
as bakeries—have had an impact on traditional Parisian eating habits.
• Between the Franprix and Grand Hôtel Lévêque is...
 4   Le Petit Cler
This small café, a fine choice for a drink or bite with a view, used to be a
tabac (tobacco shop). It’s a good example of how this one working-class
market street is becoming increasingly upscale. Not so long ago, only one
place on the entire street offered outdoor tables. Then others joined in, each
displacing a more humble shop that addressed neighborhood needs. Now
some locals regret that these shops are being lost to trendy café crowds.
• Just past Grand Hôtel Lévêque is...
 5   Wine Bacchus
Shoppers often visit the neighborhood wine shop last, after they’ve
assembled their meal and are ready to pick the appropriate wine. Wines are
classified by region. Most “Parisians” (born elsewhere) have an affinity for
the wines of their home region. You can travel throughout France by taking
a spin tour of wines on the shelves. You’ll see a locker for the most
expensive wines, one small section for foreign wines, and a shelf for craft
beers. Many are Belgian beers, but French labels are becoming more
common as the French embrace craft brewing. Notice the prices: Most
wines are €20 or less, and several sell for under €6. You can get a good
bottle for €12. Wines of the month are stacked in the center and are usually
great deals. The helpful clerk is a counselor who works with your menu and
budget to help you select just the right wine. They can pop a bottle of white
wine into “Le Chiller” and have it cooled for you in three minutes—and
also equip you with cups for a picnic.




• Next door, smell the...
 6   Fromagerie
A long, narrow, canopied cheese table brings the fromagerie into the street.
Wedges, cylinders, balls, and miniature hockey pucks are all powdered
white, gray, and burnt marshmallow—it’s a festival of mold. The street cart
and front window feature both cow (vache) and goat (chèvre) cheeses.
Locals know the shape indicates the region of origin (for example, a
pyramid shape indicates a cheese from the Loire). And this is important.
Regions create the terroir (physical and magical union of sun, soil, and
generations of farmer love) that gives the production—whether wine or
cheese—its personality. Oh là là means you’re impressed. If you like
cheese, show greater excitement with more làs. Oh là là là là. A Parisian
friend once held the stinkiest glob close to her nose, took an orgasmic
breath, and exhaled, “Yes, it smells like zee feet of angels.” Go
ahead...inhale.
   Step inside, say “bonjour,” and browse through more than 200 types of
French cheese. A fromagerie is lab-coat serious but friendly. Also known as
a crémerie or a “BOF” (for beurre, oeuf, and fromage), this is where people
shop for butter, eggs, and cheese. (In fact, notice the circa-1950 photo
posted to the right as you step in, showing this very shop when it was
named simply “butter and eggs.”) Just like wines, quality cheeses need to
be aged in the cool, humid environment of a cave (cellar). Under the careful
watch of an affineur (the “finisher”), some cheeses will rest a few weeks,
others for months. Like produce, cheeses are seasonal, as the milk produced
by cows or goats changes flavor according to the animal’s varied diet. Ask
what’s in season.




    In the back room, the shop keeps les meules—big, 170-pound wheels of
cheese, made from 250 gallons of milk. The “hard” cheeses are cut from
these. Don’t eat the skin of these big ones...they’re rolled on the floor. But
the skin on most smaller cheeses—the Brie, the Camembert—is part of the
taste. “It completes the package,” says my local friend.
   If buying soft cheese, tell the shop when you’re planning to eat it—
they’ll squeeze the cheese to make sure it’ll reach la maturité parfaite on
the day you want to consume it. One of your authors’ favorites is Epoisses,
from Burgundy.
   If you order a set menu at dinner tonight, you can take the cheese course
just before or instead of dessert. On a good cheese plate you have a hard
cheese (perhaps a Comté, similar to a white cheddar), a softer cheese
(maybe Brie or Camembert), a bleu cheese, and a goat cheese—ideally
from different regions. Because it’s strongest, the goat cheese is usually
eaten last.
• Across the street, find the fish shop.
 7   Poissonnerie
Fresh fish is brought into Paris daily from ports on the English Channel,
110 miles away. In fact, fish here is likely fresher than in many towns closer
to the sea, because Paris is a commercial hub (from here, it’s shipped to
outlying towns). Anything wiggling? This poissonnerie, like all such shops,
was upgraded to meet Europe-wide hygiene standards. Because fishermen
don’t fish on Sunday and freshness is not optional, this shop is closed on
Monday.
• Next door, under the awning (get close to see), is a particularly tempting
Rue Cler storefront.
 8   No More Horse Meat
The mosaics and glass set over the doorway advertise horse meat:
Boucherie Chevaline. While you’ll no longer find horse meat here, the
classy old storefront survives. Created in the 1930s and signed by the artist,
it’s a work of art fit for a museum—but it belongs right here, and that’s
where it will stay.
• A few steps farther, across the street, is...
 9   A la Mère de Famille Confectionery
This shop has been in the neighborhood for 30 years. The owner sells
modern treats but has always kept the traditional candies, too. “The old
ladies, they want the same sweets that made them so happy 80 years ago,”
she says. You can buy chocolate by the piece (about €1 each). You’re
welcome to assemble a small assortment.
   Until a few years ago, the chocolate was dipped and decorated right on
the premises. As was the tradition in Rue Cler shops, the merchants resided
and produced in the back and sold in the front.
• Next door is the neighborhood’s...

10   Oldest Building and Charcuterie-Traiteur Jeusselin
Rue Cler’s oldest building is at #37—the one with the two garret windows
on the roof. It’s from the early 1800s, when this street was part of a village
near Paris and lined with structures like this. Over the years, Paris engulfed
these surrounding villages—and now the street is a mishmash of
architectural styles.
    Occupying the ground floor of this house is Charcuterie-Traiteur
Jeusselin. Traiteurs (people who “treat” food) sell mouthwatering deli food
to go. Because Parisian kitchens are so small, these gourmet delis are
handy, even for those who cook. Home chefs can concentrate on creating
the main course and then buy beautifully prepared side dishes to complete a
fine dinner.
    Charcuteries by definition are pork butchers, specializing in sausage,
pâté, and ham. The charcuterie business is fiercely competitive in France,
with countless cooking contests allowing owners to test their products and
show off their skills. Jeusselin proudly displays its hard-earned diplomas on
its back walls (right side) and hard-won awards on the right side of the
storefront. Even with such accolades, many charcuteries have had to add
traiteur services to survive. They’re now selling prepared dishes, pastries,
and wines to-go.
    The photogenic Italian charcuterie-traiteur Davoli sits right across Rue
Cler. Each day these two places go tête à tête, cooking up plats du jour.
    Both charcuteries put out their best stuff just before lunch and dinner. If
you want a roasted chicken off the spit, pick one up—cooked and hot—at
11:00 or at 17:00, when Parisians buy provisions for that day’s meals. Note
the system: Order, take your ticket to the cashier to pay, and return with the
receipt to pick up your food.
• The ice cream shop next door to Jeusselin, Glacier Artisan Martine
Lambert, serves what many locals consider Paris’ best ice cream. A few
paces from here you’ll find...

11   Café du Marché and More
Café du Marché, on the corner, is the place to sit and enjoy the action (see
listing in Eating in Paris, on here). It’s Rue Cler’s living room, where locals
gather before heading home, many staying for a relaxed and affordable
dinner. The owner has priced his menu so that residents can afford to dine
out on a regular basis, and it works—many patrons eat here five days a
week. For a reasonable meal, grab a chair and check the chalk menu listing
the plat du jour. Notice how the no-indoor-smoking laws have made
outdoor seating a huge hit.
    Across Rue Cler, the sterile Aldi grocery store sells at discount prices.
Because storage space is so limited in Parisian apartments, bulk purchases
(à la Costco) are unlikely to become a big deal here. The latest shopping
trend is to stock up on nonperishables online, pick up produce three times a
week, and buy fresh bread daily. Compare this storefront with the elegance
of the other shops on this street. Its moderne exterior suggests some
corruption around the building permit. Normally, any proposed building
modification on Rue Cler must undergo a rigorous design review before the
owner obtains the required permit.
    City Hall is enthusiastic about making the town bike-friendly. Notice the
loaner bikes parked in the Vélib’ rack. There are many of these self-service
stands around town (for more on using this system, see www.velib-
metropole.fr). The system is intended to let people take short one-way rides
by bike.
• From Café du Marché, hook right and side-trip a couple of doors down
Rue du Champ de Mars to visit...

12   L’Epicerie Fine
A fine-foods boutique like this stands out because of its gentle owners,
Pascal and Nathalie. Their mission in life is to explain to travelers, in fluent
English, what the French fuss over food is all about. They’ll tempt you with
fine gourmet treats, Berthillon ice cream, and generous tastes of caramel,
balsamic vinegar, and French and Italian olive oils. Their salted caramels
from Normandy and small jars of mustards and jams make good souvenirs.




                 Le French Kiss (Faire la Bise)
  You can’t miss the cheek pecking in Paris. It’s contagious—and (even
  after the pandemic) it’s how Parisians greet each other. Here’s the
  skinny.
      You won’t see any American-style hugging in Paris; that’s far too
  aggressive for the French. What you will see between acquaintances is
  a public display of proffered cheeks and puckered lips when saying
  hello and goodbye. Observe. The lips don’t actually touch the cheek—
  only the cheeks touch, and a gentle kiss noise is made (except when
  parents kiss children). You usually start by going left (so the right
cheeks almost touch), then alternate to the right. The number of times
varies with the region or circumstances—two, three, or four kisses.
Different regions kiss a different number of times. Parisians faire la
bise in social settings but rarely in the workplace. When being
introduced for the first time (at a dinner party, for example), women
kiss women, men kiss women, but men shake hands with other men. If
you haven’t seen someone in a long while, Parisians often double the
standard two kisses into four.




   How many kisses are appropriate for an American? If it happens to
you, my recommendation is to go for two with confidence, and then—
hover and wait.
   Across the street is a real estate agency advertising condos and
apartments for rent or sale. The touch screen in the window gives the
details: the arrondissement (neighborhood, indicated by the number after
“Paris” in the address), whether it’s an apartment for rent (location) or a
condo for sale (vente), how many rooms (pieces—includes living and
family rooms), square meters (25 square meters is about the size of a
spacious hotel room), and the monthly rent or sales price.
• Return to Rue Cler. The neighborhood bakery on the corner is often
marked by a line of people waiting to pick up their daily baguette.

13   Artisan Boulangerie
Since the French Revolution, the government has regulated the cost of a
basic baguette (meaning “wand” or “stick” of bread). By law, it must weigh
250 grams and consist of only four ingredients: flour, yeast, salt, and water.
Parisians specify their preferences when they place a boulangerie order—
some like their baguette well done, and others prefer it more doughy. More
than one trip a day to the bakery is normale in Paris, as a good baguette can
become stale in a matter of hours. To keep it fresh, wrap it in a cloth, never
a plastic bag.
   Locals debate the merits of Paris’ many boulangeries, often remaining
loyal to their local bread-baker. Boulangeries must make their bread on the
premises (otherwise, they can’t be called a boulangerie). Most hotels won’t
serve breakfast until the corner bakery opens, to avoid having to set out
yesterday’s bread and croissants for their guests. Each spring, the city hosts
a competition for the Best Baguette of Paris. The top prize? A cash award of
€4,000 and the honor of providing the French president with baguettes for
the coming year. This annual contest is the equivalent of Michelin’s star
system for bakeries.
   It’s said that a baker cannot be good at both bread and pastry—at
cooking school, they generally major in one or the other. A Boulangerie
diploma covers bread and viennoiserie, which includes all the breakfast
items (croissants, pain au chocolat, and so on), and these bakers usually do
tartes and anything with choux pastry (éclairs, for example). If you get a
Pâtisserie diploma, your forte is pastries like macarons and fancy creamy
cakes and chocolate creations. You can usually tell whether a boulanger or
pâtissier runs a place by what a shop has more of—and what’s selling best.
   At Artisan Boulangerie, the baker has bucked the trend, demonstrating
equal skill at the two specialties. But Rue Cler regulars worry that his new
stand selling food to-go will distract him from what he does best—making
top-quality bread and delicious pastries. And the new top-quality Ladurée
pastry shop next door may draw some of his clients away.
• A bit farther along is...

14   Mephisto Shoe Store
Shoe stores are almost as popular as bakeries in this city of footwear-loving
fashionistas. (French-made Mephistos are cheaper here than in the US.) You
may see the locals checking out your “foreign” shoes. In a city where many
people don’t have cars, good shoes matter. The average Parisian’s daily life
is active: walking to the Métro, to lunch, to the shops after work, and then
home (probably up several flights of stairs). No need for the gym with this
routine. (Hence, gyms here are rare, expensive, and not well maintained.)
• Across the street is...
15   Cler Fleurs and Butcher Shop
Almost all Parisians who reside in the city center live in apartments or
condos. Even the biggest, most luxury-laden city home shares walls with
neighbors and has no yard. A lucky few may have access to a courtyard, but
almost no one has a private garden. Parisians spend small fortunes bringing
nature into their homes with plants and fresh flower arrangements. Notice
the flower boxes on balconies—you work with what you have. When
visiting friends in Paris, it’s de rigueur to give a gift of flowers, and it’s
good form to have them delivered before you show up. Avoid
chrysanthemums, as they are reserved for funerals.
    Pop into the butcher shop a few doors down for a graphic peek at the
meat Parisians are eating. Check out the chalkboard listing nine cuts of beef
(boeuf), three kinds of veal (veau), four cuts of pork (porc), and three cuts
of lamb (agneau). This meat cutter replaced a longtime butcher who
recently retired (and is putting a fright into locals). Traditional butchery is
struggling to survive in France, as the younger generation no longer
considers it a “desirable” career option, but it continues on Rue Cler.
• Walk on to the end of Rue Cler, where it hits a bigger street flooded with
cars and buses.
16   City Info Post
An electronic signpost (10 feet up) directs residents to websites for local
information—transportation changes, surveys, employment opportunities,
community events, and so on. Notice the big glass recycling bin nearby and
the see-through garbage sacks. In the 1990s, Paris suffered a rash of trash-
can bombings. Bad guys hid rigged camp-stove canisters in metal garbage
cans, which shredded into deadly “shrapnel” when they exploded. City
authorities solved this by replacing metal cans with translucent bags.
• Across the busy Avenue de la Motte-Picquet is a tabac.
17   Tabac La Cave à Cigares
Just as the US has liquor stores licensed to sell booze, the only place for
people over 18 to buy tobacco legally in France is at a tabac (tah-bah)
counter. Tobacco counters like this one are a much-appreciated fixture of
each neighborhood, offering lots of services (and an insight into the local
culture). Even nonsmokers enjoy perusing the wares at a tabac. Notice how
European laws require a bold warning sign on cigarettes, with graphic,
often grotesque photos—about half the size of the package—proclaiming,
bluntly, fumer tue (smoking kills).
    Tabacs serve their neighborhoods as a kind of government cash desk. All
sell stamps and some sell public-transit tickets. Like back home, the LOTO
is a big deal—and a lucrative way for the government to tax poor and less-
educated people.
    American smokers may not be able to resist the temptation to pick up a
petit Habana cigar—your chance to buy a fine Cuban stogie.
• Appropriately, next door you’ll find a...

18   Pharmacy
In France, as in much of Europe, pharmacists are the first point of contact
for people who are ill. They make the first diagnosis and have the authority
to prescribe certain drugs (and more recently, Covid tests and vaccines). If
it’s out of their league, they’ll recommend a doctor. Pharmacies are also the
only place to get many basic medical items, such as aspirin and simple
reading glasses.
    Inside, you’ll notice locals handing over a green ID the size of a credit
card, with an embedded chip and a photo. This is the essential Carte Vitale,
the French health insurance card. The national health-care system, Sécurité
Sociale, pays about 75 percent of pharmacy, doctor, and hospital bills.
Private employer-related insurance, a Mutuelle, covers a varying amount of
the rest. Filling a prescription is often completely covered. The last time the
World Health Organization ranked health-care systems by country, France
came out on top. The French are deservedly proud of their nationalized
health care. But budget shortfalls are forcing the government to cut back on
parts of France’s social safety net. If there’s a strike during your trip, it
likely has to do with the erosion of such benefits.
    You may notice “sexy” ads in pharmacies, as well as more public
displays of affection among Parisian couples than you’re accustomed to.
The French are less inhibited about sex than Americans. In France, sex is
approached from a practical perspective. Back in the 1990s, when France’s
president, François Mitterrand, was the focus of a sex scandal (similar to
the one that embroiled Bill Clinton), his infamous response to the prying
press was simply, “Et alors?” (So what?). The French generally agreed.
They like to say, “If he’s good behind his desk, that’s what matters.”
• Step back onto the sidewalk and consider this.
