Day Trip: Chartres

CHARTRES
  PLANNING YOUR TIME
Orientation to Chartres
Sights in Chartres
Map: Chartres
Map: Chartres Cathedral
 Sleeping in Chartres
 Eating in Chartres
Chartres, about 50 miles southwest of Paris, gives travelers a pleasant break
in a lively, midsize town with a thriving, pedestrian-friendly old center. But
the big reason to come to Chartres (shar-truh) is to see its famous cathedral
—arguably Europe’s best example of pure Gothic. And with the interior of
Paris’ Notre-Dame Cathedral off-limits, the cathedral at Chartres is your
best chance to experience a glorious Gothic church as a day trip from Paris.
    Chartres’ old church burned to the ground on June 10, 1194. Some of the
children who watched its destruction were actually around to help rebuild
the cathedral and attend its dedication Mass in 1260. That’s astonishing,
considering that other Gothic cathedrals, such as Paris’ Notre-Dame, took
literally centuries to build. Having been built so quickly, the cathedral has a
unity of architecture, statuary, and stained glass that captures the spirit of
the Age of Faith like no other church.
    While overshadowed by its cathedral, the town of Chartres also merits
exploration. Discover the picnic-perfect park behind the cathedral, check
out the colorful pedestrian zone, and wander the quiet alleys and peaceful
lanes down to and along the small river.


PLANNING YOUR TIME
Chartres is an easy day trip from Paris (even if you leave Paris in the
afternoon and return later in the evening). But with its statues glowing in
the setting sun—and with hotels and restaurants much less expensive than
those in the capital—Chartres also makes a worthwhile overnight stop. If
you’ll be here at night, don’t miss the dazzling light show—Chartres en
Lumières—when dozens of Chartres’ most historic buildings are colorfully
illuminated, adding to the town’s after-hours appeal (early April-mid-Oct;
details at TI). Chartres’ historic center is quiet Sunday and Monday, when
most shops are closed.
    Chartres is a one-hour ride from Paris’ Gare Montparnasse (14/day,
about €16 one-way; see the Paris Connections chapter for Gare
Montparnasse details). Jot down return times to Paris before you exit the
Chartres train station (last train generally departs Chartres around 21:30;
verify for your day of travel).
   Upon arrival in Chartres, head for the cathedral. Allow an hour to savor
the church on your own as you follow my self-guided tour. Try to make the
cathedral tour at noon, led by Anne-Marie Woods (details later). Take
another hour or two to wander the appealing old city, following my Chartres
Walk. On Saturday and Wednesday mornings, a small outdoor market sets
up a few short blocks from the cathedral on Place Billard.



                 Orientation to Chartres
Tourist Information: The TI is in the historic Maison du Saumon building
(Mon-Sat 10:00-18:00, Sun until 17:00, closes earlier Nov-March, 8 Rue de
la Poissonnerie, +33 2 37 18 26 26, www.chartres-tourisme.com). It offers
specifics on cathedral tours and also rents audioguides for the old town
(€5.50, €8.50/double set, about 2 hours). The narration offers little more
information than my self-guided Chartres Walk but is relaxing and easy to
follow. Skip the Chartres Pass sold here.
    The TI has a small map that shows the floodlit Chartres en Lumières
sites, and information on the petit train you can take to see them all (check
the website or ask at the TI for details).
    Arrival in Chartres: Exiting Chartres’ train station, you’ll see the
spires of the cathedral dominating the town. It’s a 10-minute walk up
Avenue Jehan de Beauce to the cathedral. The free minibus, called the
Filibus, runs to near the cathedral (line: Relais des Portes, 3/hour, Mon-Sat
8:30-19:00), or you can take a taxi for about €7.
    If arriving by car, you’ll have fine views of the cathedral and city as you
approach from the A-11 autoroute. Pay underground parking is on Place des
Epars and Place Châtelet, both a short walk from the cathedral. Free
parking is available in the lower medieval town (Parking Trois Détours), a
15-minute uphill walk to the cathedral following my Chartres Walk.
    Helpful Hints: A launderette is a few blocks from the cathedral (by the
TI) at 16a Place de la Poissonnerie (daily 7:00-21:00). If you need to call a
taxi, try +33 2 37 36 00 00.
                 Sights in Chartres
▲▲▲CHARTRES CATHEDRAL
Map: Chartres
    Self-Guided Tour
  1 Main Entrance (West Facade)


  Map: Chartres Cathedral
  2 Nave

  3 Labyrinth

  4 Rose Windows

  5 Blue Virgin Window

  6 Choir Screen: Life of Mary

  7 Chapel of Our Lady on the Pillar

  8 Mary’s Veil

  9 Noah Window and Tower Climb

  10 South Exterior: Flying Buttresses

  11 South Porch

  12 North Porch

CHARTRES WALK

CHARTRES CATHEDRAL
The church, worth ▲▲▲, is (at least) the fourth one on this spot dedicated
to Mary, the mother of Jesus, who has been venerated here for some 1,700
years. There’s even speculation that the pagan Romans dedicated a temple
here to a mother-goddess. In earliest times, Mary was honored next to a
natural spring of healing waters (not visible today).




    In 876, the church acquired the torn veil (or birthing gown) supposedly
worn by Mary when she gave birth to Jesus. The 2,000-year-old veil (now
on display) became the focus of worship at the church. By the 11th century,
the cult of saints was strong. And Mary, considered the “Queen of All
Saints,” was hugely popular. God was enigmatic and scary, but Mary was
maternal and accessible, providing a handy go-between for Christians and
their Creator. Chartres, a small town of 10,000 with a prized relic, found
itself in the big time on the pilgrim circuit.
    When the fire of 1194 incinerated the old church, the veil was feared
lost. Lo and behold, several days later, townspeople found it miraculously
unharmed in the crypt (beneath today’s choir). Whether the veil’s survival
was a miracle or a marketing ploy, the people of Chartres were so stoked,
they worked like madmen to erect this grand cathedral in which to display
it. Thinkers and scholars gathered here, making the small town with its big-
city church a leading center of learning in the Middle Ages (until the focus
shifted to Paris’ university).
    By the way, the church is officially called the Cathédrale Notre-Dame de
Chartres. Many travelers think that “Notre-Dame” is in Paris. That’s true.
But more than a hundred churches dedicated to Mary—“Notre-Dames”—
are scattered around France, and Chartres Cathedral is one of them.
    Cost and Hours: Free, daily 8:30-19:30, July-Aug until 22:00 on Tue,
Fri, and Sun. Mass usually Mon-Sat at 11:45 (in crypt), daily at 18:15, Sun
also at 9:00 (Gregorian) and 11:00. Confirm times by phone or online, +33
2 37 21 59 08, www.cathedrale-chartres.org (click “Cathedral,” then
“Celebrations,” then “Masses”).
    Tours: A now-beloved English scholar who moved here about 60 years
ago when he was 24, Malcolm Miller has dedicated his life to studying this
cathedral and sharing its wonder through his guided lecture tours. While he
has retired now, his very capable American understudy, Anne-Marie
Woods, leads 1.25-hour tours, worthwhile even if you’ve taken my self-
guided tour. No reservation is needed; just show up with cash (€12, €5 for
students, includes headphones that allow her to speak softly, Easter-mid-Oct
Tue-Sat at 12:00; no tours last half of Aug or on religious holidays, +33 2
37 21 75 02, annemariechartres@gmail.com). Tours begin just inside the
church at the Visites de la Cathédrale sign. Consult this sign for changes or
cancellations..
   Malcolm still offers private tours (millerchartres@aol.com). Miller’s
guidebook provides a detailed look at Chartres’ windows, sculpture, and
history (sold at cathedral).
   You can rent a videoguide to the right as you enter the cathedral, a good
way to get a closer look at the window details (€7, 70 minutes). Binoculars
are a big help for studying the cathedral art (rent at souvenir shops around
the cathedral).
   Tower Climb: €6 to climb the 200 steps to the rooftop with a French-
only guided tour; daily May-Aug at 11:00, 14:30, and 16:00, Sept-April at
11:00 and 15:00; call ahead at +33 2 37 21 22 07 as this may change due to
renovations.
   Crypt: Beneath the cathedral are extensive remnants of earlier churches,
a modern copy of the old wooden Mary-and-baby statue, an amazing 2,000-
year-old well, and frescoes from the 12th and 13th centuries.
   The only way to see the crypt is on a tour. Anne-Marie Woods’ tour (see
above) includes the crypt and helps bring it to life, but I’d avoid the more
frequent 30-minute tours in French with English handout (€4, 5/day late
June-mid-Sept, fewer Sun and off-season, book at cathedral gift shop, +33 2
37 21 75 02).
   Restoration: A multiyear restoration is underway, though you should
see few signs of it when you visit.

   Self-Guided Tour
Historian Malcolm Miller calls Chartres a picture book of the entire
Christian story, told through its statues, stained glass, and architecture. In
this “Book of Chartres,” the text is the sculpture and windows, and its
binding is the architecture. The complete narrative can be read—from
Creation to Christ’s birth (north side of church), from Christ and his
followers up to the present (south entrance), and then to the end of time,
when Christ returns as judge (west entrance). The remarkable cohesiveness
of the text and the unity of the architecture are due to the fact that nearly the
entire church was rebuilt in just 30 years (a blink of an eye for cathedral
building). The cathedral contains the best and most intact library of
medieval religious iconography in existence. Most of the windows date
from the early 13th century.
    The Christian universe is a complex web of heaven and earth, angels and
demons, and prophets and martyrs. Much of the medieval symbolism is
obscure today. While it’s easy to be overwhelmed by the thousands of
things to see, make a point to simply appreciate the perfect harmony of this
Gothic masterpiece.
• Start outside, taking in the...
 1   Main Entrance (West Facade)
Chartres’ soaring (if mismatched) steeples announce to pilgrims that
they’ve arrived. For centuries, pilgrims have come here to see holy relics, to
honor “Our Lady,” and to feed their souls.
   The facade is about the only survivor of the intense, lead-melting fire
that incinerated the rest of the church in 1194. The church we see today was
rebuilt behind this c. 1150 facade in a single generation (1194-1260).
   Compare the towers. The right (south) tower, with a Romanesque stone
steeple, survived the fire. The left (north) tower lost its wooden steeple in
the fire. In the 1500s, it was topped with the flamboyant Gothic steeple we
see today.
    The emaciated column-like statues flanking the three west doors are
pillars of the faith. These kings of Judah, prophets, and Old Testament big
shots foretold the coming of Christ. With solemn gestures and faces, they
patiently endure the wait.
    What they predicted came to pass. History’s pivotal event is shown
above the right door, where Mary (seated) produces Baby Jesus from her
loins. This Mary-and-baby sculpture is a 12th-century stone version of an
even older wooden statue that burned in 1793. Centuries of pilgrims have
visited Chartres to see Mary’s statue, gaze at her veil, and ponder the
mystery of how God in heaven became man on earth, as He passed through
immaculate Mary like sunlight through stained glass.
    Over the central door is Christ in majesty, surrounded by animals
symbolizing Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Over the left door, Christ
ascends into heaven after his death and resurrection.
• Enter the church (from a side entrance if the main one is closed) and wait
for your pupils to enlarge.
 2   Nave
The place is huge—the nave is 427 feet long, 20 feet wide, and 120 feet
high. Notice the height of the entrance doors compared to the tourists...the
doors are 24 feet tall!
    The long, tall central nave is lined with 12 pillars, which support
pointed, crisscrossed arches that lace together the heavy stone vaulting. The
pillars themselves are supported by flying buttresses on the outside of the
church (which we’ll see later). This skeleton structure was the miracle of
Gothic design, making it possible to build tall cathedrals with ribbed walls
and lots of stained-glass windows (see the big saints in the upper stories of
the nave). Chartres has 28,000 square feet of stained glass. The nave—the
widest Gothic nave in France—is flanked by raised side aisles. This design
was for crowd flow, so pilgrims could circle the church without disturbing
worshippers.
    Try to picture the church in the Middle Ages—painted in greens,
browns, and golds (like colorful St. Aignan Church in the old town,
described later in my self-guided walk). It was packed with pilgrims, and
was a rough cross between a hostel, a soup kitchen, and a flea market. The
floor of the nave slopes in to the center, for easy drainage when hosing
down the dirty pilgrims who camped here. Looking around the church,
you’ll see stones at the base of the columns smoothed by centuries of tired
pilgrim butts. With all the hubbub in the general nave, the choir (screened-
off central zone around the high altar) provided a holy place with a more
sacred atmosphere.
    Taking it all in from the nave, notice that, as was typical in medieval
churches, the windows on the darker north side feature Old Testament
themes—awaiting the light of Christ’s arrival. And the windows on the
brighter south side are New Testament. Regardless of which direction they
face, the highest windows—way up in the clerestory—are dark from
decades of candle soot. As the ongoing cleaning job proceeds, more of the
interior will be bright and sparkling like the apse (area behind the front
altar).
• On the floor, midway up the nave, find the...
 3   Labyrinth
The broad, round labyrinth inlaid in black marble on the floor is a spiritual
journey. Labyrinths like this were common in medieval churches. Pilgrims
enter from the west rim, by foot or on their knees, and wind around,
meditating, on a metaphorical journey to Jerusalem. About 900 feet later,
they hope to meet God in the middle. (The chairs are removed on Fridays
between 10:00 and 17:00 from Lent to November 1.) To let your fingers do
the walking, you’ll find a small model of the maze just outside the gift
shop, where the tours begin.
• Walk up the nave to where the transept crosses. As you face the altar and
gleaming choir, north is to the left.
 4   Rose Windows
The three big, round “rose” (circular) windows over the north, south, and
west entrances receive sunlight at different times of day. All three are
predominantly blue and red, but each has different “petals,” and each tells a
different part of the Christian story in a kaleidoscope of fragmented images.
    Stained glass was created to teach Bible stories to the illiterate medieval
masses...who apparently owned state-of-the-art binoculars. The windows
were used in many ways—to tell stories, to allow parents to teach children
simple lessons, to help theologians explain complex lessons, to enable
worshippers to focus on images as they meditated or prayed...and, of
course, to light a dark church in a colorful and decorative way.
    The brilliantly restored north rose window charts history from the
distant past up to the birth of Jesus. On the outer rim, a ring of semicircles,
ancient prophets foretell Christ’s coming. Then (circling inward) there’s a
ring of red squares with kings who are Jesus’ direct ancestors. Still closer,
circles with white doves and winged angels zero in on the central event of
history—Mary, the heart of the flower, with her newborn baby, Jesus.
    This window was donated by Blanche of Castile, mother of the future
King Louis IX (who would build Paris’ stained-glass masterpiece of a
church, Sainte-Chapelle). Blanche’s heraldry frames the lower edge of the
window: yellow fleur-de-lis on a blue background (for France) and gold
castles on a red background (for her home kingdom of Castile).
    The south rose window, with a similar overall design, tells how the Old
Testament prophecies were fulfilled. Christ sits in the center (dressed in
blue, with a red background), setting in motion radiating rings of angels,
beasts, and instrument-playing apocalyptic elders who labor to bring history
to its close. The five lancet windows below show Mary flanked by four Old
Testament prophets (Jeremiah, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel) lifting New
Testament writers (Luke, Matthew, John, and Mark) on their shoulders. (In
the first window on the left, see white-robed Luke riding piggyback on
dark-robed Jeremiah.) These demonstrated how the ancients prepared the
way for Christ—and how the New Testament evangelists had a broader
perspective from their lofty perches.
    In the center of the west rose window, a dark Christ rings in history’s
final Day of Judgment. Around him, winged angels blow their trumpets and
the dead rise, face judgment, and are sent to hell or raised to eternal bliss.
The frilly edge of this glorious “rose” is flecked with tiny clover-shaped
dewdrops.
• Now walk around the altar to the right (south) side and find the window
with a big, blue Mary (second one from the right).


          The Chartres Generation—the 1200s
  From king to bishop and knight to pawn, French society was devoted
  to the Christian faith. It inspired knights to undertake the formidable
  Crusades, artists to re-create the divine in statues and stained glass,
and architects to build skyscraping cathedrals filled with the mystic
light of heaven. They aimed for a Golden Age, blending faith and
reason. But misguided faith often outstripped reason, resulting in very
un-Christian intolerance and violence.
c. 1194: The old cathedral burns down.
1200: The University of Paris is founded, using human reason to
analyze Christian faith. Borrowing from the pagan Greek philosopher
Aristotle, scholars described the Christian universe as a series of
concentric rings spinning around the earth in geometrical perfection.
1202: The pope calls on all true Christians to rescue the Holy Land
from Muslim “infidels” in the Fourth Crusade (1202-1204). This
crusade ends disastrously in the sacking of Christian Constantinople.
1206: Chartres’ cornerstone is laid. The style is opus francigenum
(“French-style work”)—what we now call Gothic. Chartres is just one
of several great cathedrals under construction in Europe.
1207: Francis of Assisi, a rebellious Italian youth, undergoes a
conversion to a life of Christian poverty and love. His open spirit
inspires many followers, including France’s King Louis IX (a
generation later).
1209: France’s King Philip Augustus, based in Paris, invades southern
France and massacres fellow Christians (members of the Cathar sect)
as heretics.
1212: Thousands of boys and girls idealistically join the Children’s
Crusade to save the Holy Land. Most die in transit or are sold into
slavery.
1220: The external structure of Chartres Cathedral is nearly finished.
Work begins on the statues and stained glass.
1226: Eleven-year-old Louis IX is crowned as rex et sacerdos, “king
and priest,” beginning a 45-year Golden Age combining church and
state. His mother, Blanche of Castile (granddaughter of Eleanor of
Aquitaine), serves as his regent during his minority and is his lifelong
mentor.
1230: Most of Chartres’ stained glass is completed.
     1244: At age 30, Louis IX falls sick and, while in a coma, sees a
     vision that changes his life. His personal integrity helps unify the
     nation. He reforms the judicial system along Christian lines, helping
     the poor.
     1245: The last Albigensian heretics are burned at Montségur, in a
     crusade ordered by Louis IX and his mother, Blanche.
     1248: Louis IX personally leads the Seventh Crusade by walking
     barefoot from Paris to the port of departure. During the fighting, he is
     captured and ransomed. He later returns home a changed man.
     Humbled, he adopts the poverty of the Franciscan brotherhood. His
     devotion earns him the title of St. Louis.
     1260: Chartres Cathedral is dedicated. The church is the physical
     embodiment of the Age of Faith, with architecture as mathematically
     perfect as God’s Creation, sculpture serving as sermons in stone, and
     stained glass lit by the light of God.


 5    Blue Virgin Window
Mary, dressed in blue on a rich red background, cradles Jesus, while the
dove of the Holy Spirit descends on her. This very old window (mid-12th
century) was the central window behind the altar of the church that burned
in 1194. It survived and was reinserted into this frame in the new church
around 1230. Mary’s glowing dress is an example of the famed “Chartres
blue,” a sumptuous color made by mixing cobalt oxide into the glass
(before cheaper materials were introduced). The Blue Virgin was one of the
most popular stops for pilgrims—especially pregnant ones—of the cult of
the Virgin-about-to-give-birth. Devotees prayed, carried stones to repair the
church, and donated to the church coffers; Mary rewarded them with peace
of mind, easy births, and occasional miracles.
   Below Mary (bottom panel), see Christ being tempted by a red-faced,
horned, smirking devil.
   The Zodiac Window (two windows to the left) shows the 12 signs of
the zodiac (in the right half of the window; read from the bottom up—
Pisces, Aries, Gemini in the central cloverleaf, Taurus, Cockroach, Leo,
Virgo, etc.). On the left side are the corresponding months (February
warming himself by a fire, April gathering flowers, and so on).
• Now turn around and look behind you.
 6   Choir Screen: Life of Mary
The choir (enclosed area around the altar where church officials sat) is the
heart (coeur) of the church. A stone screen rings it with 41 statue groups
illustrating Mary’s life. Although the Bible says little about the mother of
Jesus, legend and lore fleshed out her life. Take some time to learn about
the Lady this church is dedicated to.



                    Surviving the Centuries
  Chartres contains the world’s largest collection of medieval stained
  glass, with more than 150 early-13th-century windows, about 80
  percent with the original glass. Through the centuries, much of the rest
  of France’s stained glass was destroyed by various ideologues:
  Protestant puritans who disapproved of papist imagery (they would
  never think of it as art), revolutionaries who turned churches into
  “temples of reason” (or stables), Baroque artists who preferred clear
  windows and lots of light, and the bombs of World War II.
      Chartres was spared many (but not all) of these ravages. During
  World War II, in anticipation of Nazi destruction, the citizens removed
  all the windows (burying them in cellars in southwest France) and
  piled sandbags to protect the statues. Today, Chartres survives as
  Europe’s best-preserved medieval cathedral.


   Scene #1 (south side) shows Mary’s dad hearing the news that Mary is
on the way. In #4, Mary is born, and maidens bathe the new baby. In #6,
Mary marries Joseph (sculpted with the features of King François I). In
scene #7, an angel announces to Mary that she’ll be the mother of the
Messiah, and (#10) she gives birth to Jesus in a manger. In #12, the Three
Kings—looking like the three musketeers—arrive. In #14, Herod orders all
babies slaughtered, but Mary’s son survives to begin his mission.
   Next come episodes from the life of Jesus. On the other side of the choir
screen, in #27, Jesus is crucified and, in #28, lies lifeless in his mother’s
arms. Scene #34 depicts the Ascension, as Jesus takes off, Cape Canaveral-
style, while his awestruck followers look up at the bottoms of his rocketing
feet. In #39, Mary has died and is raised by angels into heaven, where (#40)
she’s crowned Queen of Heaven by the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
   The plain windows surrounding the choir date from the 1770s, when the
dark mystery of medieval stained glass was replaced by the open light of
the French Enlightenment. The plain windows and the choir are some of the
only “new” features. Most of the 13th-century church has remained intact,
despite style changes, revolutionary vandals, and war bombs.
• Do an about-face and find the chapel with Mary on a pillar.
 7   Chapel of Our Lady on the Pillar
A 16th-century statue of Mary and baby—draped in cloth, crowned and
sceptered—sits on a 13th-century column in a wonderful carved-wood
alcove. This is today’s pilgrimage center, built to keep visitors from
clogging up the altar area. Modern pilgrims (including lots of new moms
pushing strollers) honor the Virgin by leaving flowers, lighting candles, and
kissing the column.
• Double back a bit around the ambulatory, heading toward the back of the
church. In the next chapel you encounter (Chapel of the Sacred Heart of
Mary), you’ll find a gold frame holding a fragment of Mary’s venerated
veil. These days it’s kept—for its safety and preservation—out of the light
and behind bulletproof glass.




 8   Mary’s Veil
This veil (or tunic) was supposedly worn by Mary when she gave birth to
Jesus. It became the main object of adoration for the cult of the Virgin. The
great King of the Franks, Charlemagne (742-814), received the veil as a
present from Byzantine Empress Irene. Charlemagne’s grandson gave the
veil to Chartres in 876. In 911, with the city surrounded by Vikings, the
bishop hoisted the veil like a battle flag and waved it at the invaders. It
scared the bejeezus out of them, and the town was saved.




    In the frenzy surrounding the fire of 1194, the veil mysteriously
disappeared, only to reappear three days later (recalling the Resurrection).
This was interpreted by church officials and the townsfolk as a sign from
Mary that she wanted a new church, and thus the building began. Recent
tests confirm that the material itself, and the weaving technique used to
make the cloth, date to the first century AD, lending support to claims of the
relic’s authenticity.
• Return to the west end and find the last window on the right (near the
tower entrance).
 9   Noah Window and Tower Climb
Read Chartres’ windows in the medieval style: from bottom to top. In the
bottom diamond, God tells Noah he’ll destroy the earth. Next, Noah hefts
an ax to build an ark, while his son hauls wood (diamond #2). Two by two,
he loads horses (cloverleaf, above left), purple elephants (cloverleaf, right),
and other animals. The psychedelic ark sets sail (diamond #3). Waves cover
the earth and drown the wicked (two cloverleafs). The ark survives
(diamond #4), and Noah releases a dove. Finally, up near the top (diamond
#7), a rainbow (symbolizing God’s promise never to bring another flood)
arches overhead, God drapes himself over it, and Noah and his family give
thanks.




   Chartres was a trading center, and its merchant brotherhoods donated
money to make 42 of the windows. For 800 years, these panes have
publicly thanked their sponsors. In the bottom left is a man making a wheel.
More workers are to the right. The panels announce that “these windows are
brought to you by...” the wheel-, ax-, and barrelmaking guilds.
• To climb the north tower, you’ll need to join a tour (see “Tower Climb,”
earlier). Exit the church through the main entrance or the door in the south
transept to view its south side.

10   South Exterior: Flying Buttresses
Six flying buttresses (the arches that stick out from the upper walls) push
against six pillars lining the nave inside, helping to hold up the heavy stone
ceiling and sloped, lead-over-wood roof. The ceiling and roof push down
onto the pillars, of course, but also outward (north and south) because of
that miracle of Gothic architecture: the pointed arch. The flying buttresses
push back, channeling the stress outward to the six vertical buttresses, then
down to the ground. The result is a tall cathedral held up by slender pillars
buttressed from the outside, allowing the walls to be opened up for stained
glass.




  The church is built from large blocks of limestone. Peasants trod in
hamster-wheel contraptions to raise these blocks into place—a testament to
their great faith.


                              GOD = LIGHT
  You can try to examine the details, but a better way to experience the
  mystery of Chartres is just to sit and stare at these enormous panels as
  they float in the dark of empty space like holograms or space stations
  or the Queen of Heaven’s crown jewels. Ponder the medieval concept
  that God is light.
      To the Chartres generation, the church was a metaphor for how
  God brings his creation to life, like the way light animates stained
  glass. They were heavy into mysticism, feeling a oneness with all
  creation in a moment of enlightenment. The Gospel of John (as well as
  a writer known to historians as the Pseudo-Dionysus) was their
  favorite. Here are select verses from John 1:1-12 (loosely translated):
          In the beginning was The Word.
          Jesus was the light of the human race.
           The light shines in the darkness and the darkness cannot
             resist it.
           It was the real light coming into the world, the light that
              enlightens everyone.
           He was in the world, but the world did not recognize
             Him.
           But to those who did, He gave the power to become the
             children of God.


 11   South Porch
The three doorways of the south entrance show the world from Christ’s
time to the present, as Christianity triumphs over persecution.
   Center Door, Christ and Apostles: Standing between the double doors,
Jesus holds a book and raises his arm in blessing. He’s a simple, itinerant,
bareheaded, barefoot rabbi, but underneath his feet, he tramples symbols of
evil: the dragon and lion. Christ’s face is among the most noble of all
Gothic sculpture.




    Christ is surrounded by his apostles, who spread the good news to a
hostile world. Peter (to the left as you face Jesus), with curly hair and
beard, holds the keys to the kingdom of heaven. Paul (to the right of Jesus)
fingers the sword of his martyrdom and contemplates the inevitable loss of
his head. In fact, all of these apostles were killed or persecuted, and their
faces are humble, with sad eyes. But their message prevailed, and under
their feet they crush the squirming rulers who once persecuted them.
    The final triumph comes above the door in the Last Judgment. Christ
sits in judgment, raising his hands, while Mary and John beg him to take it
easy on poor humankind. Beneath Christ the souls are judged—the
righteous on our left, and the wicked on our right, who are thrown into the
fiery jaws of hell. Farther to the right (above the statues of Paul and the
apostles), horny demons subject wicked women to an eternity of sexual
harassment.
    Left Door, Martyrs: Eight martyrs flank the left door. St. Lawrence
(second from left) cradles the grill (it looks like a book) on which he was
barbecued alive. His last brave words to the Romans were: “You can turn
me over—I’m done on this side.” St. George (far right on right flank)
wears the knightly uniform of the 1200s, when Chartres was built and King
Louis IX was crusading. Depicted beneath the martyrs are gruesome
methods of torture, such as George stretched on the wheel. Many of these
techniques were actually used in the 1200s by Christians against heretics,
Muslims, Jews, and Christian Cathars.
• Reach the north side by circling around the back end of the church. As you
walk, enjoy the peaceful park, fine views over the town, and the church’s
architecture. Ponder the exoskeletal nature of Gothic design and the ability
of medieval faith to mobilize the masses.

12   North Porch
In the “Book of Chartres,” the north porch is chapter one, from the Creation
up to the coming of Christ.
    Look between the double doors to see Baby Mary (headless), in the
arms of her mother, Anne, marking the end of the Old Testament world and
the start of the New.
    History begins in the tiny details in the concentric arches over the
doorway. God creates Adam (at the peak of the outermost arch, just to the
left of the keystone) by cradling his head in his lap like a child.
    Next, look at the statues that flank the doors. Melchizedek (farthest to
the left of Mary and Anne), with the cap of a king and the cup of
Communion, is the biblical model of the rex et sacerdos (king-priest), the
title bestowed on King Louis IX.
    Abraham (next to Melchizedek) holds his son by the throat and raises a
knife to slit him for sacrifice. Just then, he hears something and turns his
head up to see God’s angel, who stops the bloodshed. The drama of this
frozen moment anticipates Renaissance naturalism by 200 years.
    John the Baptist (fourth to the right from Mary/Anne), the last Old
Testament prophet, who prepared the way for Jesus, holds a lamb, the
symbol of Christ. John is skinny from his diet of locusts and honey. His
body and beard twist and flicker like a flame.
    All these prophets, with their beards turning down the corners of their
mouths, have the sad, wise look of having been around since the beginning
of time and having seen it all—from Creation to Christ to Apocalypse. Over
the door is the culmination of all this history: Christ on his throne, joined
by Mary, the Queen of Heaven. These sculptures are some of the last work
done on the church, completing the church’s stone-and-glass sermon.




   Imagine all this painted and covered with gold leaf in preparation for the
dedication ceremonies in 1260, when the Chartres generation could finally
stand back and watch as their great-grandchildren, carrying candles, entered
the cathedral.
CHARTRES WALK
Chartres’ old town bustles with activity (except Sun and Mon) and merits
exploration. You can rent an audioguide from the TI, or better, just wander
(follow the route shown on the “Chartres” map).




   In medieval times, Chartres was actually two towns—the pilgrims’ town
around the cathedral, and the industrial town along the river, which was
powered by watermills. This self-guided walk takes you on a 45-minute
loop around the cathedral, through the old pilgrims’ town, down along the
once-industrial riverbank, and back up to the cathedral.
• Begin at the square in front of the church.
   Cathedral Close: Around the cathedral was a town within the town.
Essentially a precinct run by the church, it was called the “close” of Notre-
Dame (cloître Notre-Dame). Looking at the square in front of the church,
imagine a walled-in cathedral town with nine gates. It was busy, with a
hospital, a school (Chartres was a leading center of education in the 12th
century), a bishop’s palace, markets, fairs, and lots of shops—many of them
tucked up against the church between its huge buttresses. Chartres was on
the medieval map because of the cathedral and its relic. The town was all
about the church. For example, in the medieval mind, the foundation of
truth was the number three—the Trinity. Nine (three times three) was also a
good number. Chartres consisted of three entities—the town, the close, and
the church. And each was sure to have nine gates or doors.
    About 20 paces in front of the cathedral’s main door, a modern plaque in
the pavement points pilgrims to Santiago de Compostela in northwest
Spain, home of the tomb of St. James (notice the pilgrim with his walking
stick and the stylized scallop shell symbolizing the various routes from all
over Europe converging on Santiago). For a thousand years, the faithful
have trekked from Paris to Chartres and on to Santiago, a thousand miles
away. And for centuries, pilgrims have stoked the economy of Chartres.
• Circle the cathedral clockwise, passing a fine 24-hour clock as you round
the corner, and then find the striking carvings of the north porch (described
earlier). Head under a stately 18th-century wrought-iron gate to the...
    Bishop’s Palace and Grounds: The bishop essentially ruled from here
until the French Revolution secularized the country. This fine building has
housed King Henry IV (here for his coronation), Napoleon, and—since
1939—the city’s Museum of Fine Arts (Musée des Beaux Arts). An ivy-
covered arcade, running from near the church to the palace, is all that
remains of a covered passageway designed to make the bishop’s commute
more pleasant. Stand close to the banister as you survey the lower levels of
the bishop’s terraced gardens and enjoy a view of the lower town. From
here, you can see why this point has been a strategic choice since ancient
times. Beyond the gardens nestles the lower town, which was centered not
on the church but on the river, which powered the local industry.
• From the bishop’s garden, continue circling around the cathedral until you
reach its south porch (described earlier). Turn left onto...
   Rue des Changes: This “street of the money changers” runs south from
the cathedral. The layout, street names, and building facades of this historic
district all date back to a time when businesses catered to the needs of
pilgrims rather than tourists. At Rue de la Poissonnerie (where fish were
sold), side-trip half a block left, to a fine old half-timbered building called
Maison du Saumon (House of Salmon). It dates from about 1500, and as
you might guess from the wood carvings, it faced the former fish market.
Today it’s Chartres’ TI. Find the carving of the entangled sow (one floor up,
right side) designed to remind medieval people to focus on what they are
meant to do on this earth.
   Back on Rue des Changes, a few more paces brings you to the sky-blue
open-air produce market on Place Billard (open Sat and Wed until 13:00).
Chartres’ castle stood here until 1802, when it was demolished with
revolutionary gusto to make way for the market.
• From here, Rue des Changes turns into Rue des Grenets. For a detour into
a bigger-than-you-thought pedestrian zone of shops, colorful lanes, and
café-dappled squares, turn right up Rue de la Pie to Place Marceau (the
hub of this network) and Rue Noël Ballay (the main shopping drag). Return
to Rue des Grenets and continue walking away from the cathedral.




    Rue des Grenets: Farther down the street is the Church of St. Aignan.
Squat, crumbling, and lopsided, this is the oldest of Chartres’ parish
churches. Remember: Locals didn’t worship in the great cathedral (that was
for visitors—like us); they worshipped in the town’s simple parish
churches. This one is built upon the tomb of a fourth-century bishop of
Chartres (his statue stands in front of the choir). Its interior, dating from
about 1625, shows how colorful a stone church could be. The vibrant
colors, lavish decoration, and vaulted wood ceiling are astonishing given
the plain exterior. The wood ceiling reminds us that even stone churches
can catch fire, a poignant lesson relearned in 2019 at Notre-Dame Cathedral
in Paris.
    Continue down Rue des Grenets to a tall, skinny half-timbered house.
As the population grew, so did the fire hazard, and the town required half-
timbered buildings to be plastered over for safety. Today, the town
government—interested in pumping up the touristic charm—pays folks to
peel away the plaster and re-expose those timbers. You can see that this
building is one of the oldest—the tilting lintel and the asymmetrical
windows are dead giveaways.
    Turn left at the house and drop down the tertre, a series of stair-step
terraces that link the upper and lower towns. The well-worn stone benches
along the way evoke a day when washerwomen, laden with freshly washed
laundry, rested as they climbed the hill after a trip to the river.
• At the bottom, turn right on Rue St. Pierre, then find the Church of St.
Pierre (great photo-op of flying buttresses and a delicate yet decrepit
interior). Follow Pont St. Hilaire a block below the church, and—bam!—
Eure at the river.
    The Eure River: This is another photogenic spot, with old buildings,
humpback bridges, and cathedral steeples in the distance. As in nearly any
industrial town back then, waterwheels provided power. The river was once
lined with busy mills and warehouses. The worst polluters were kept
downstream (dyers, tanners, slaughterhouses). The names of the riverside
lanes evoke those times: Rue du Massacre, Rue de la Tannerie, and Rue de
la Foulerie (named for a process of cleaning wool).
    When the industry moved out to make room for Chartres’ growing
population, laundry places replaced the old mills. These were two-story
structures—the wash cycle downstairs at the river, then the dry cycle
upstairs, where vents allowed the wind to blow through. You can still see
some of the mechanisms designed to accommodate periodic changes in the
river level. The last riverside laundry closed in the 1960s.
• Turn left on Rue de la Foulerie and follow the river back toward the
cathedral. The bridge at Rue du Bourg was once the town’s main bridge.
Cross it and climb uphill—you’ll see Queen Bertha’s Staircase (Escalier de
la Reine Berthe), a one-of-a-kind half-timbered spiral staircase. Soon after,
turn left up the stairs, and in a few blocks arrive back at the cathedral.
From here, consider stopping by the...
    International Stained Glass Center (Centre International du Vitrail):
This low-key center on the north side of the cathedral is worth a visit to
learn about the techniques behind the mystery of this fragile but enduring
art (€7, daily 14:00-17:45, 5 Rue du Cardinal Pie, 50 yards from cathedral,
+33 2 37 21 65 72, www.centre-vitrail.org).
    Here you’ll gaze into the eyes of original stained-glass windows from
the 12th to the 17th century. The windows you see were gathered from
several parish churches around Chartres that were destroyed during the
French Revolution. You’ll also see several windows from the nearby
churches of St. Aignan and St. Pierre (both described earlier). Finish your
visit in the 12th-century vaulted wine cellar to enjoy contemporary
windows made using modern techniques.
    Panels describe the displays, many of which are original windows. Ask
at the entrance about the 25-minute video in English describing the process
of blown glass and the 10-minute French-only video explaining how it is
turned into stained glass (easy to follow for non-French speakers). The
center also offers five-day classes; call ahead or email for topics and dates.



                    Sleeping in Chartres
$$ Hôtel Campanile Chartres Cathédrale,*** a block up from the train
station, is central and comfortable. Don’t let the facade fool you—the 58
rooms are modern and sharp. Several rooms connect—good for families—
and many have partial cathedral views (buffet breakfast extra; elevator, air-
con, handy and safe pay parking, 6 Avenue Jehan de Beauce, +33 2 37 21
78 00, www.campanile-chartres-centre-gare-cathedrale.fr,
chartres.centre@campanile.fr).
    $ Hôtel le Bœuf Couronné*** is more like a vintage two-star hotel,
with 17 colorful, good-value rooms and a handy location halfway between
the station and cathedral (buffet breakfast extra, elevator, no air-con, good
restaurant with views of the cathedral, reserve ahead for pay parking, 15
Place Châtelet, +33 2 37 18 06 06, www.leboeufcouronne.com,
resa@leboeufcouronne.fr).
   $ Hôtellerie Saint Yves, which hangs on the hillside just behind the
cathedral, delivers well-priced simplicity with 50 spic-and-span rooms in a
renovated monastery with meditative garden areas. Single rooms have no
view; ask for a double room with views of the lower town (small
bathrooms, good breakfast extra, 3 Rue des Acacias, +33 2 37 88 37 40,
www.maison-st-yves.com, reception@saintyves.net).


                      Eating in Chartres
Dining out in Chartres is a good deal—particularly if you’ve come from
Paris. Troll the places basking in cathedral views, and if it’s warm, find a
terrace table (several possibilities). Then finish your evening cathedral-side,
sipping a hot or cold drink at Le Serpente.
    $$ Café Bleu offers a great view terrace and an appealing interior. It
serves classic French fare at acceptable prices (closed Tue, 1 Cloître Notre-
Dame, +33 2 37 36 59 60).
    $$ Le Café Serpente saddles up next door to the cathedral, with terrific
view tables and an adorable collector’s interior. The cuisine is basic bistro
fare and fairly priced. Simple dishes and to-go food are available all day
from the room at the back (daily, 2 Cloître Notre-Dame, +33 2 37 21 68
81).
    $ La Picoterie efficiently serves up inexpensive fare such as omelets,
crêpes, and salads in its cozy dining room (daily, 36 Rue des Changes, +33
2 37 36 14 54).
    $$ Le Pichet 3 is run by endearing Marie-Sylvie and Xavier. This local-
products shop and snug bistro make a fun stop. Sit on the quiet terrace or
peruse the artsy inside. Laura—the daughter—serves a tasty assiette
végétarienne and a good selection of plats. Try the local specialty, la poule
au pot, and the rabbit with plums (Thu-Sun lunch and dinner, Mon lunch
only, closed Tue-Wed, 19 Rue du Cheval Blanc, +33 2 37 21 08 35).
    $$ Restaurant l’Amphitryon at the recommended Hôtel le Bœuf
Couronné is the place to go in Chartres for a traditional French dinner,
served with class (daily from 19:00, see “Sleeping in Chartres,” earlier).
