Sights: Champs-Élysées and Nearby

CHAMPS-ELYSEES AND NEARBY
▲▲▲Champs-Elysées
This famous boulevard is Paris’ backbone, with its greatest concentration of
traffic (although it’s delightfully traffic-free on the first Sun of the month).
From the Arc de Triomphe down Avenue des Champs-Elysées, all of France
seems to converge on Place de la Concorde, the city’s largest square. And
though the Champs-Elysées has become as international as it is Parisian, a
walk down the two-mile boulevard is still a must.




   To reach the top of the Champs-Elysées, take the Métro to the Arc de
Triomphe (Mo: Charles de Gaulle-Etoile), then saunter down the grand
boulevard (Métro stops every few blocks, including George V and Franklin
D. Roosevelt).
     See the Champs-Elysées Walk chapter.
▲▲Arc de Triomphe
Napoleon had the magnificent Arc de Triomphe commissioned to
commemorate his victory at the 1805 battle of Austerlitz. The foot of the
arch is a stage on which the last two centuries of Parisian history have
played out—from the funeral of Napoleon to the goose-stepping arrival of
the Nazis to the triumphant return of Charles de Gaulle after the Allied
liberation. Examine the carvings on the pillars, featuring a mighty Napoleon
and excitable Lady Liberty. Pay your respects at the Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier. Then climb the 284 steps to the observation deck up top, with
sweeping skyline panoramas and a mesmerizing view down onto the traffic
that swirls around the arch.




    Cost and Hours: Free to view exterior; steps to rooftop-€13, timed-
entry tickets available online, free for those under age 18, free on first Sun
of the month Nov-March, covered by Museum Pass—pass holders do not
need to reserve a time slot; daily 10:00-23:00, Oct-March until 22:30, last
entry 45 minutes before closing; Place Charles de Gaulle, use underpass to
reach arch, Mo: Charles de Gaulle-Etoile, +33 1 55 37 73 77, www.paris-
arc-de-triomphe.fr.
      See the Champs-Elysées Walk chapter.

▲Petit Palais (and Musée des Beaux-Arts)
This free museum displays a broad collection of paintings and sculpture
from the 1600s to the 1900s on its ground floor, and an easy-to-appreciate
collection of art from Greek antiquities to Art Nouveau in its basement.
While the collection can be shuffled about for special exhibits, the part I
describe is usually unaffected. Though it houses mostly second-tier art,
there are a few diamonds in the rough (including works by Rembrandt,
Courbet, Cézanne, Sisley, Pissarro, Degas, and Monet). The building is
impressive, and was constructed along with the Grand Palais and Pont
Alexandre III for the 1900 Paris Exhibition (World’s Fair). The museum’s
classy café merits the detour alone—and if it’s raining and your Museum
Pass has expired, or you just need a clean WC, the Petit Palais is a
worthwhile stop.
    Cost and Hours: Free, Tue-Sun 10:00-18:00, Fri until 21:00 for special
exhibits (fee), closed Mon; across from Grand Palais on Avenue Winston
Churchill, a looooong block west of Place de la Concorde, Mo: Champs-
Elysées Clemenceau; lovely café, +33 1 53 43 40 00,
www.petitpalais.paris.fr.
    Visiting the Museum: Enter the museum and head up the main hall to
the left, passing an intriguing collection of 19th-century statues
commissioned by the city, all with English descriptions. These are all
plaster casts, as their bronze brothers were melted down during World War
II.
    Turn right into the second hall and find the large painting gallery that
features Romantics and Realists from the late 19th century. Midway down
the main hall on the left, Courbet’s soft-porn The Sleepers (Le Sommeil,
1866) captures two women nestled in post-climactic bliss. A few paintings
down, his large, dark Firefighters (Pompiers courant à un incendie) is a
Realist’s take on an everyday scene—firefighters rushing to put out a blaze.
On the opposite wall, notice another scene from everyday life in Paris—the
massive produce market that once thrived at Les Halles (now a modern
mall).
    Turning the corner, you’ll see artwork by Gustave Doré (1832-1883),
best known as the 19th century’s greatest book illustrator. In his enormous
La Vallée de Larmes (1883), Christ and the cross are the only salvation
from this “valley of tears.” (The doorway behind the painting leads directly
to the museum café.)
    Walk left into the bright room, then make a right to find Claude Monet’s
Sunset on the Seine at Lavacourt (Soleil couchant sur la Seine a Lavacourt,
1880). Painted the winter after his wife died, it looks across the river from
Monet’s home to two lonely boats in the distance, with the hazy town on the
far bank. The sun’s reflection is a vertical smudge down the water. Nearby
you should find works by Alfred Sisley, Edgar Dégas, Camille Pissarro,
Eugène Boudin, and the American painter Mary Cassatt. Boudin’s gray,
luminous seascape recalls his Normandy upbringing (Honfleur), and
reminds us that he was an early mentor of Claude Monet. He urged Monet
to accompany him in Normandy, telling him, “I want you to see the light.”
Claude listened.
    On the back side of Monet’s Sunset, Paul Cézanne’s Portrait d’Ambroise
Vollard depicts his agent (art dealer), whose job it was to make his paintings
go viral—though Cézanne was unknown for most of his life. While Vollard
looks somewhat dejected (this painting took 115 sessions to complete), he
provided exposure for Cézanne’s work and gave him essential moral
support. Notice how Cézanne used blocks of paint rather than brush strokes
to create chunkier, geometrical shapes in his works. Continuing into the
yellow room, you’re greeted by a few smaller paintings by Paul Cézanne
and a Cézanne-looking early work by Paul Gauguin (Vieil Homme au
Bâton), painted during his time with Vincent van Gogh in Arles.
    Before heading downstairs, double back to the side rooms adjoining the
large painting gallery you just visited to find exquisite furniture in the Louis
XIV, XV, and XVI styles.
    The museum’s overlooked basement features a surprising collection of
art, with Greek antiquities, a gorgeous room of medieval iconography,
rooms filled with art by Dutch masters, and beautiful displays of Art
Nouveau furniture. English explanations in every room help bring these
works to life.

Grand Palais
This grand exhibition hall, built for the 1900 World’s Fair, is used for
temporary exhibits (closed for renovation until 2024; temporary exhibits are
set up at the south end of the Champ de Mars park). The building’s
Industrial Age, erector-set, iron-and-glass exterior is striking (Avenue
Winston Churchill, Mo: Champs-Elysées Clemenceau or Franklin D.
Roosevelt, tel. +33 01 44 13 17 17, www.grandpalais.fr).
▲Paris Ferris Wheel (Roue de Paris)
In summer, the Paris Ferris Wheel offers a sensational 200-foot-high view
of the city from the northern side of the Tuileries Garden. The towering
wheel is the centerpiece of a funfair complete with kid-pleasing rides and
games.
    Cost and Hours: €12 ticket covers two slow revolutions, two
passengers per gondola, open long hours daily late June-late Aug.

View from Hôtel Hyatt Regency
For a remarkable Parisian panorama, head to Hôtel Hyatt Regency Paris
Etoile and its Windo Skybar on the 34th floor. Ride the free elevators to
floor 33 and walk up one flight to the bar. You’ll enter a sky-high world of
comfy chairs, glass walls, expensive drinks, and jaw-dropping views that
are best before dark and not worthwhile in poor weather (bar open daily
17:00-late, +33 1 40 68 51 31, www.windoparis.com).
   Getting There: It’s at Porte Maillot (3 Place du Général Koenig). Take
the Métro to the pedestrian-unfriendly Porte Maillot stop. Follow signs to
Palais des Congrès and enter the underground mall, turn right at the small
sign for Hôtel Hyatt Regency, and walk straight until you arrive at the hotel
(don’t take escalator up from mall—if you get lost there are maps
everywhere in the mall). If you’re coming from the Rue Cler area, take
RER/Train-C from Invalides or Pont de l’Alma to Porte Maillot (direction:
Pontoise). If you’re pooped or strapped for time, the skies are clear, and the
sun’s about to set, spring for a taxi or Uber.

La Défense and La Grande Arche
Though Paris keeps its historic center classic and skyscraper-free, this
district, nicknamed “le petit Manhattan,” offers an impressive excursion
into a side of Paris few tourists see: that of a modern-day economic
superpower. La Défense was first conceived more than 60 years ago as a
US-style forest of skyscrapers that would accommodate the business needs
of the modern world. Today La Défense is a thriving commercial and
shopping center, home to 150,000 employees and 55,000 residents. It’s also
the single largest concentration of skyscrapers in all of Europe.
    For a worthwhile visit, take the Métro to the La Défense Grande Arche
stop, carefully follow Sortie Grande Arche signs (there are many), and
climb to the base of La Grande Arche for distant city views. Then stroll
about three-quarters of a mile gradually downhill among the glass buildings
to the Esplanade de la Défense Métro station, and return home from there.
Mall stores are open every day.
    Visiting La Défense: The centerpiece of this ambitious complex is the
mammoth La Grande Arche de la Fraternité. Inaugurated in 1989 on the
200th anniversary of the French Revolution, it was, like the Revolution,
dedicated to human rights and brotherhood. The place is big—Notre-Dame
Cathedral could fit under its arch. The four-sided structure sits on enormous
underground pillars and is covered with a veneer of beautiful white Carrara
marble. The arch is a 38-story office building for 30,000 people on more
than 200 acres. The left side houses government ministries, the right side
corporate offices, and the top is dedicated to human rights. The “cloud”—a
huge canvas canopy under the arch—is an attempt to cut down on the wind-
tunnel effect this gigantic building creates. You can take a pricey elevator to
the panoramic rooftop for a view over the skyscrapers and Parisian
suburbs, but I wouldn’t as you’re too far from the city center for worthwhile
views (€15, daily 10:00-18:30).
    Wander behind the arch, past freestanding glass sheets that help to
deflect wind, to see an unusual mix of glassy skyscrapers and a cemetery
(in the orchard). Study the Le Corbusier-style planning, where motor traffic
(the freeway and trains that tunnel underneath) is separated from pedestrian
traffic (the skybridges).
    Back on the mall side, notice the Arc de Triomphe in the distance, bull’s-
eye down the Esplanade. La Grande Arche aligns perfectly with the Arc de
Triomphe, the Obelisk on Place de la Concorde, and the Arc de Triomphe
du Carrousel in front of the Louvre.
    Drop down the arch’s steps and glide onto the vast Esplanade (a.k.a. “le
Parvis”). Survey the skyscraping scene. La Défense is much more than its
eye-catching arch—it’s an international power broker. Check out the
skyscrapers clockwise: Engie (almost behind you to the left) deals in
electricity, Areva is a global energy company that is big into nuclear power,
and EDF is France’s national electric company. Back to the left, that tall
brass thing in front of the small trees is one of French artist César
Baldaccini’s famous thumb statues (40 feet high).
    Continue down the Esplanade back toward the city center to about
where the skyscrapers end (and to the next Métro stop). Take in the
monumental structures around you: Les 4 Temps is a giant shopping mall of
250 stores, and like malls at home, it’s a teenage wasteland when school is
out and eerily quiet at night. Go ahead, have a peek and compare with your
shopping mall.
    Opposite Les 4 Temps, the half-dome Center of New Industries and
Technologies (better known as CNIT) was built in 1958 and looks like it.
It’s now a congress center and remains a feat of architecture: It’s the largest
concrete vault anywhere that rests on only three points. Enter the vault to
see a semicircle of dazzling offices and shops that recede as they rise, like
the seating in an opera house.


             Best Views over the City of Light
  Your trip to Paris is played out in the streets, but the brilliance of the
  City of Light is best appreciated by rising above it all. Invest time to
  marvel at all the man-made beauty, seen best in the early morning or
  around sunset. Many of the viewpoints listed here are free or covered
  by the Museum Pass; otherwise, expect to pay €8-20.
  Eiffel Tower: It’s hard to find a grander view of Paris than from the
  tower’s second level (for most, it’s better than from the top level). Go
  around sunset and stay after dark to see the tower illuminated; or go in
  the early morning to avoid the midday haze and crowds (not covered
  by Museum Pass, see the Eiffel Tower Tour chapter).
Paris Ferris Wheel: The Roue de Paris offers a 200-foot-high view of
Paris (not covered by Museum Pass, summer only, two slow and
scenic loops, see here).
Arc de Triomphe: This is the perfect place to see the glamorous
Champs-Elysées (if you can manage the 284 steps). It’s great during
the day, but even greater at night, when the boulevard positively
glitters (covered by Museum Pass, see here).
Steps of Sacré-Cœur: Join the party on Paris’ only hilltop. Walk
uphill, or take the funicular or bus, then hunker down on Sacré-Cœur’s
steps to enjoy the sunset and territorial views over Paris. Stay in
Montmartre for dinner, then see the view again after dark (free, see
here).
Galeries Lafayette or Printemps: Take the escalator to the top floor
of either department store (they sit side by side) for a stunning
overlook of the old Opéra district (free, see here).
Montparnasse Tower: The top of this solitary skyscraper has some of
the best views in Paris, though they’re too high to be worthwhile after
dark. Zip up 56 floors on the elevator, then walk to the rooftop (not
covered by Museum Pass, see here).




Pompidou Center: Take the escalator up and admire the beautiful
cityscape along with the exciting modern art (the sixth floor is the top,
but the fifth-floor outdoor terrace is more enjoyable). There may be
better views over Paris, but this is the best one from a museum
(covered by Museum Pass, see the Pompidou Center Tour chapter).
Place du Trocadéro: This square, a 20-minute walk from the Eiffel
Tower, is the place to see the tower. Come for a look at Monsieur
Eiffel’s festive creation day or night (when the tower is lit up), before
or after your tower visit.
Arab World Institute: This building near Ile St. Louis has 180-degree
views over the river from its roof terrace (free for views, see here).
Windo Skybar at Hôtel Hyatt Regency Paris Etoile: This otherwise
unappealing hotel is noteworthy for its razzle-dazzle 34th-floor bar,
where you can sip wine and enjoy a stunning Parisian panorama (free
elevator but pricey drinks, see here).
    In France, getting a building permit often comes with a requirement to
dedicate two percent of the construction cost to art. Hence, the Esplanade is
a virtual open-air modern art gallery, sporting pieces by Joan Miró (blue,
red, and yellow), Alexander Calder (red), Anthony Caro (long, brown,
folded-steel sculpture that resembles the meltdown of a bridge support), and
Yaacov Agam (the fountain with colorful stripes and rhythmically dancing
spouts), among others. Just behind Yaacov’s fountain, find La Défense de
Paris, the statue that gave the area its name; it recalls the 1870 Franco-
Prussian war—a rare bit of old Paris out here in the ’burbs.
    As you descend the Esplanade, notice how the small gardens with
benches and areas for boules are designed to integrate tradition into this
celebration of modern commerce. Note also how the buildings tend to
decrease in height and increase in age as you approach Paris’ center. Your
walk ends at the amusing fountain of Bassin Takis, where you’ll find the
Esplanade de la Défense Métro station that zips you out of all this
modernity and directly back into town. Near this station, look in the middle
of the esplanade for the giant green bench—a fun photo op. Before
descending into the Métro, take one last look (perhaps from a perch on that
big green bench) back to La Grande Arche to appreciate how far you’ve
come.


OPERA NEIGHBORHOOD
The glittering Garnier opera house anchors this neighborhood of broad
boulevards and grand architecture. This area is also nirvana for high-end
shoppers, with the opulent Galeries Lafayette and Printemps stores, the
delicate Fragonard Perfume Museum, and the sumptuous shops that line
Place Vendôme and Place de la Madeleine (see the Shopping in Paris
chapter for a shopping walk of this area). Key Métro stops include Opéra,
Madeleine, and Havre-Caumartin (RER/Train-A: Auber).

▲▲Opéra Garnier (Opéra National de Paris—Palais Garnier)
A gleaming grand theater of the belle époque, the Palais Garnier was built
for Napoleon III and finished in 1875. From Avenue de l’Opéra, once lined
with Paris’ most fashionable haunts, the facade suggests “all power to the
wealthy.” In the 1980s, that elitism prompted the call for a new opera house
built for the people, and the larger Opéra Bastille was situated symbolically
on Place de la Bastille, where the French Revolution started in 1789. The
smaller Opéra Garnier is now home to ballet, some opera, and other
performances.




   To see the interior, you have several choices: Take a guided tour (your
best look), tour the public areas on your own (using the audioguide and/or
my self-guided tour, later), or attend a performance. Note that the
auditorium is sometimes off-limits due to performances and rehearsals.
Highlights of the interior include the Grand Staircase, the various
chandeliered reception halls, the 2,000-seat auditorium, and a few exhibits
on the building and opera.
   Cost and Hours: €14, €4 off if you show your Orsay Museum ticket
(within 8 days of Orsay visit), not covered by Museum Pass; generally daily
10:00-16:15, mid-July-Aug until 17:15, closes for rehearsals and
performances—most reliably open 10:00-13:00; 8 Rue Scribe, Mo: Opéra,
RER/Train-A: Auber, www.operadeparis.fr/en/visits/palais-garnier.
   Tours: The €6.50 multimedia guide gives a good self-guided tour.
Guided tour in English usually runs daily at 14:00, check website to reserve
a spot, arrive 30 minutes early for security screening (€18.50, after-hours
tours-€22, tours include entry, +33 1 42 46 72 40 or +33 1 42 46 92 10).
    Ballet and Concert Tickets: To find out about upcoming performances,
ask for a schedule at the information booth, consult L’Officiel des
Spectacles magazine (see here), or see the Paris Opera website
(www.operadeparis.fr). There are usually no performances mid-July-Sept.
It’s easiest to reserve online but cheaper to buy on performance day. To buy
tickets by phone, call +33 1 71 25 24 23 (office closed Sun). You can also
go directly to the ticket office (open Mon-Sat 11:30–18:30 and an hour
before the show, closed Sun).
      Self-Guided Tour: First, take in the best 1 view of the facade from
the traffic island of the Opéra Métro. The building is huge. Its massive
foundations straddle an underground lake (inspiring the mysterious world of
The Phantom of the Opera). It’s the masterpiece of architect Charles
Garnier, who oversaw every element, from laying the foundations to what
color the wallpaper should be. His cohesive design was so admired that the
building came to be known as the Palais Garnier. (To better understand
what you’re seeing, read the “Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann” sidebar.)
    Garnier’s classically inspired facade is a celebration of opera—the art
form that combines all the arts. Atop the green dome, a shimmering Apollo,
the god of music, holds aloft his shining bronze lyre, as if to declare, “This
is a temple of the highest arts.” (You’ll see lyres and Apollos all over the
building, outside and in.) Running across the middle of the facade are
(smallish) bronze busts of famous composers. The medallions with “E” and
“N” honor the Emperor Napoleon III. On the lower right (second statue
from the right) is a copy of the well-known Dance by Carpeaux (whose
original is in the Orsay).


   Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann (1809-1891)
  The elegantly uniform streets that make Paris so Parisian are the work
  of Baron Haussmann, who oversaw the modernization of the city in
  the mid-19th century. He cleared out the cramped, higgledy-piggledy,
  unhygienic medieval cityscape and replaced it with broad, straight
  boulevards lined with stately buildings and linked by modern train
  stations.
      The quintessential view of Haussmann’s work is from the
  pedestrian island immediately in front of the Opéra Garnier. You’re
  surrounded by Paris circa 1870, when it was the capital of the world.
  Gaze down the surrounding boulevards to find the column of Place
  Vendôme in one direction, and the Louvre in another. Haussmann’s
  uniform, cohesive buildings are all five stories tall, with angled, black
  slate roofs and formal facades. The balconies on the second and fifth
  floors match those of their neighbors, creating strong lines of
  perspective as the buildings stretch down the boulevard.
      But there was more than aesthetics to the plan. In pre-Haussmann
  Paris, angry rioters would take to the narrow streets, setting up
  barricades to hold back government forces (as made famous in Victor
  Hugo’s Les Misérables). With Haussmann’s new design, government
  troops could circulate easily and fire cannons down the long, straight
  boulevards. A whiff of “grapeshot”—chains, nails, and other buckshot-
  type shrapnel—could clear out any revolutionaries in a hurry.
      The 19th century was a great time to be wealthy, thanks to the
  city’s fancy covered market halls, civilized sidewalks, and even
  elevators. With the coming of elevators, the wealthy took the higher
  floors and enjoyed the view.


   The 2 tourist entrance is around the left side of the building, between
the two curved ramps. In fact, this was once the rich patrons’ entrance, as
they could drive their carriages right up the ramps and slip in, away from
the riff-raff. Before the entrance stands a bust of Garnier and a bronze
plaque showing the building’s footprint. Find the horseshoe-shaped seating
area (in the center), the rectangular stage (to the left), and the rectangular
Grand Staircase (to the right). Notice how little space was given to the
seating area itself—the public spaces were paramount.
    Enter, buy your ticket, and make your way (up a small curving staircase)
to the foot of the 3 Grand Staircase. Gaze up into this vast hall, where the
whole building is united by the set of stairs that branches into a Y midway
up. Take in the columns, statues, railings, lanterns, chandeliers, and the
different colors of marble, as your eye goes up to a ceiling fresco featuring
Apollo. Check out the Grand Staircase from all angles: from the bottom
looking up, from the landing as you ascend, and looking back from above.
This staircase was the Opera House’s real “stage,” for the evening’s real
show: the grand spectacle of elite Parisians—out to see and be seen—
strutting their elegant stuff. Mentally populate the space with fin de siècle
ladies in flowing satin gowns and white-gloved gentlemen in top hats and
tuxes.




    Ascend to the top of the stairs, where you’ll find the numbered doors of
the 4 box seats. These were where the rich people watched the opera.
Before entering, note the busts between the boxes, honoring great librettists,
set designers, dancers, and composers, like Hector Berlioz (near box #37).
The famous box #5 (around the left) honors the (fictional) Phantom of the
Opera, who always sat here. The novel and musical are based on two
historical facts: the building’s underground cistern, and a real incident in
which the chandelier fell and killed someone.
    Now enter an open box and take in the view of the 5 amphitheater.
The red-velvet performance hall seats 2,000. Admire Marc Chagall’s
colorful ceiling (1964) playfully dancing around the seven-ton chandelier. If
Chagall’s modern depiction of famous operas feels out of place, we’ll soon
see the original painting it replaced. The stage curtain is made of canvas,
painted to look like...a curtain, seemingly made of velvet, complete with
fake folds and tassels. Note the box seats next to the stage—the most
expensive in the house, with an obstructed view of the stage—but just right
if you’re here only to be seen.
    Next, we’ll tour the opulent, chandeliered reception rooms, where
operagoers gathered for drinks and socializing during intermission. Start in
the far corner with the domed 6 Rotonde du Glacier, where they indulged
in ice cream treats under a ceiling painting of Bacchus and his revelers.
Among the room’s busts, find Antonio Salieri (Mozart’s rival) and several
“divas”—noted singers and dancers, back when dance was one of opera’s
best-loved elements. (In fact, most performances here today are by the
Opéra Garnier’s dance company.)
    Head down the long, chandelier-strewn Galerie du Glacier, and turn
right (just before the end) into the tiny 7 Salon du Soleil. This Room of
the Sun dazzles the eye with a black-and-gold sunray ceiling and walls
fitted with infinity mirrors.
    Continue straight to the Grand Staircase and turn left, entering the large
and over-the-top opulent 8 Grand Foyer. This long, high-ceilinged Hall-
of-Mirrors-esque space was the main gathering place at intermission. Its
golden decor (mostly gold paint, not gilding) features statues, columns, and
chandeliers, all set off by colorful ceiling paintings. Find 20 lyres in a
minute. The statues at either end, by the fireplaces, are 24-carat gold, and
visibly shinier than the gold-painted statues. Garnier proudly put his own
bust here (halfway down the foyer on the left), eternally admiring his fine
work. (Garnier’s next major project was the famous Monte Carlo casino and
opera house.) Step outside onto the balcony (or look out the windows), and
you realize this room sits in the middle story of the facade, overlooking
Place de l’Opéra.
    Exit the Grand Foyer at the far end, pass through the tiny Salon de la
Lune (Soleil’s nocturnal counterpart), and turn left into the 9 museum.
Browse the long hallway of exhibits, starting with a cutaway model of the
stage (with two subterranean levels below and elaborate pulleys above),
followed by paintings of famous singers, dancers, composers, and set
designers. Farther down on the right is a round gold-framed work depicting
the original ceiling painting that graced the auditorium before Chagall came
along. Muses spin and cavort among the fluffy clouds of heaven. The
museum leads into the library, with dioramas of set designs for famous
operas, including Faust, by Paris’ hometown boy Charles Gounod.
    Head downstairs (where there are often other exhibits) and enjoy one
more view from the foot of the Grand Staircase. Exit through the
appropriately elegant gift shop on the opposite side from where you
entered.
    Nearby: The illustrious Café de la Paix faces the Opera’s front and has
been a meeting spot for the local glitterati for generations. If you can afford
the coffee, this spot offers a delightful break.
Fragonard Perfume Museum
Near Opéra Garnier, this perfume shop (often congested with tour groups)
masquerades as a museum. Housed in a beautiful 19th-century mansion, it’s
the best-smelling museum in Paris—and you’ll learn a little about how
perfume is made, too (well-described in English).
   Cost and Hours: Free, daily 9:00-17:00, 3 Square Louis Jouvet, Mo:
Opéra, RER/Train-A: Auber, +33 1 47 42 04 56, http://musee-parfum-
paris.fragonard.com/en/.

High-End Shopping
The upscale Opéra neighborhood hosts some of Paris’ best shopping. Even
window shoppers can appreciate this as a ▲ “sight.” Just behind the Opéra,
the Galeries Lafayette department store is a magnificent cathedral to
consumerism, under a stunning stained-glass dome. The area between Place
de la Madeleine, dominated by the Madeleine Church (looking like a
Roman temple), and the octagonal Place Vendôme, is filled with pricey
shops and boutiques, giving travelers a whiff of the exclusive side of Paris
(for more on Galeries Lafayette or for a boutique-to-boutique stroll through
this area, see the Shopping in Paris chapter).

▲▲Jacquemart-André Museum (Musée Jacquemart-André)
This enjoyable (if somewhat faded) museum-mansion, with an elegant café,
showcases the lavish home of a wealthy, art-loving, 19th-century Parisian
couple. After visiting the Opéra Garnier and wandering Paris’ grand
boulevards, get inside for an intimate look at the lifestyles of the Parisian
rich and fabulous. Edouard André and his wife Nélie Jacquemart spent their
lives and fortunes designing, building, and then decorating this sumptuous
mansion. What makes the visit worthwhile is the helpful audioguide tour
(included with admission, plan on spending an hour with the audioguide).
The place is strewn with paintings by Rembrandt, Botticelli, Uccello,
Mantegna, Bellini, Boucher, and Fragonard. Though there are no must-see
masterpieces, the art gathered here would still be enough to make any
gallery famous.
    Cost and Hours: €12, €3-5 more for special exhibits (which are
common), includes audioguide, not covered by Museum Pass; daily 10:00-
18:00, Mon until 20:30 during special exhibits; avoid lines on weekends
and during the first week of special exhibits by purchasing skip-the-line
tickets online in advance (€2 fee), 158 Boulevard Haussmann, Mo: St-
Philippe-du-Roule, bus #80 connects conveniently with Ecole Militaire;
+33 1 45 62 11 59, www.musee-jacquemart-andre.com.
    Visiting the Museum: While you follow the audioguide, keep an eye
out for these highlights.
    The Antechamber introduces you to the museum’s winning formula:
opulent decor (chandeliers, red velvet walls, gilded trim) + semi-famous
paintings (two Boucher nudes and two Canaletto scenes of Venice) + the
lifestyle of Edouard and Nélie (who received visitors here) = an immersive
aesthetic experience. Next, you enter the Versailles-like Grand Salon, the
central focus for their parties, with a guest list of up to 1,000.
    After passing through several rooms of Edouard’s collection of beautiful
things—furniture, tapestries, exotic curios, and Tiepolo paintings on the
ceiling—you’ll reach the Library, displaying portraits by Rembrandt, Hals,
and Van Dyck, and Rembrandt’s Supper at Emmaus.
    Backtracking, you reach the spacious Music Room, used for candlelit
parties and concerts. (The band was perched on the balconies above, so the
music seemed to waft down from heaven.) Find the bronze bust of Edouard,
age 57, done by his wife, Nélie. They’d met when he hired her to do his
portrait. The Winter Room is fitted with skylights and exotic plants, to
brighten a sunny day. It leads into the Smoking Room—the belle époque
man cave.
    Upstairs, you enter the world of Italian art. You pass a mural by Tiepolo
and enter the Studio, which Edouard made for his artist wife to work in.
Among the many (minor) sculptures displayed now, locate Luca della
Robbia’s ceramic Madonna and Donatello’s small bronze torchbearer. The
Florentine and Venetian Painting Rooms have Botticelli’s Virgin and
Child, a Giovanni Bellini Madonna, Mantegna’s Ecce Homo, and works by
Uccello, Guardi, and Carpaccio.
    Downstairs are the couple’s Private Apartments. They kept separate
bedrooms (one for “Madame,” one for “Monsieur”) but met in the room in
between for breakfast. There you’ll see the portrait that Nélie painted of
Edouard when they first met—the spark that brought about their marriage,
their mutual passion for art, and eventually the Jacquemart-André Museum.
