Montmartre Walk

MONTMARTRE WALK
From Sacré-Cœur to the Moulin Rouge
Orientation
The Walk Begins
   1 Place des Abbesses

   2 Sacré-Cœur Basilica and View
    Map: Montmartre Walk
    3 Sacré-Cœur Interior


    Map: Sacré-Cœur
    4 Church of St. Pierre-de-Montmartre

    5 Cabaret de Patachou

    6 Place du Tertre: Bohemian Montmartre

    7 Rue Norvins

    8 Dalí Museum (Dalí Paris)

    9 Montmartre Ground Zero

    10 Montmartre Museum and Satie’s House

    11 La Maison Rose Restaurant

    12 Clos Montmartre Vineyard

    13 Au Lapin Agile Cabaret

    14 Moulin de la Galette

    15 Le Bateau-Lavoir (Picasso’s Studio)

    16 Vincent van Gogh’s House

    17 Café des Deux Moulins

    18 Moulin Rouge

    19 Pig Alley


Stroll along the hilltop of Butte Montmartre amid traces of the many people
who’ve lived here over the years—monks stomping grapes (1200s), farmers
grinding grain in windmills (1600s), dust-coated gypsum miners (1700s),
Parisian liberals (1800s), Modernist painters (1900s), and all the struggling
artists, poets, dreamers, and drunkards who came here for cheap rent,
untaxed booze, rustic landscapes, and cabaret nightlife. In the jazzy 1920s,
the neighborhood became the haunt of American GIs and expat African
Americans (who experienced less discrimination here than in the US at that
time). Today it’s a youthful neighborhood in transition—slightly seedy, très
trendy, and ever-more touristy.
    Many tourists make the almost obligatory trek to the top of Paris’ Butte
Montmartre, eat an overpriced crêpe, marvel at the view—and miss out on
the neighborhood’s charm and history. Both are uncovered in this stroll.
We’ll ascend to the gleaming Sacré-Cœur Basilica, wander through the
hilltop village, browse affordable art, ogle the Moulin Rouge nightclub, and
catch echoes of those who once partied to a bohemian rhapsody during the
belle époque.




                           Orientation
Length of This Walk: Allow at least two hours for this two-mile
   uphill/downhill walk.
When to Go: To minimize crowds at Sacré-Cœur, come on a weekday or
   by 9:30 on a weekend. Sunny weekends are the busiest—especially
   Sunday, when Montmartre becomes a pedestrian-only zone and most
   shops stay open. If crowds don’t get you down, come for the sunset and
   stay for dinner. This walk is best under clear skies, when views are
   sensational.
Getting There: This walk begins at Place des Abbesses (Mo: Abbesses).
   Other nearby stops include Anvers and Pigalle. (Expect some seediness
   around Anvers and Pigalle, and avoid the sketchy Métro station Barbès
   Rochechouart completely.)
      From Place des Abbesses we’ll walk a few level blocks and then take
   the funicular (one-minute ride, Métro passes valid) to the base of Sacré-
   Cœur. A taxi from the Seine or the Bastille to Sacré-Cœur costs about
   €20 (€25 at night).
Scam Alert: At Sacré-Cœur and in the areas around the Pigalle and Anvers
   Métro stations, beware of pickpockets, smartphone snatchings, the shell
   game, and the “found ring” and “friendship bracelet” scams (for more
   on scams, see here).
Tourist Information: A small TI may be open near the base of the
   funicular at 7 Rue Drevet (Tue-Sat 10:00-13:00 & 14:00-17:00, closed
   Sun-Mon).
Sacré-Cœur: Church—free, daily 6:30-22:30; dome—€7, not covered by
   Museum Pass, daily 10:00-18:00, June-Sept until 20:00, Jan-Feb until
   17:00; modest dress required.
Church of St. Pierre-de-Montmartre: Free, Tue-Fri 9:00-12:00 & 15:00-
   18:00, Sat 9:00-19:00, Sun until 18:00, closed Mon.
Dalí Museum (Dalí Paris): €13, not covered by Museum Pass, daily 10:00-
   18:30, may stay open later July-Aug, audioguide-€3, 11 Rue Poulbot,
   +33 1 42 64 40 10, www.daliparis.com.
Montmartre Museum: €14, includes good 45-minute audioguide, not
   covered by Museum Pass, Wed-Mon 10:00-18:00, closed Tue, last entry
   45 minutes before closing, 12 Rue Cortot.
Services: Pay WCs may be open outside of Sacré-Cœur, down the stairs to
   the left as you leave the church (daily 10:00-18:15). Others are in the
   Square Suzanne Buisson park (north of #14 on this tour); the
   Montmartre Museum (best); at the souvenir shop at the top of the
   funicular; and any cafés you patronize.
Eating: The starting point, Place des Abbesses, has some great spots for
   morning coffee and croissants. You’ll find peaceful, picnic-ready
   benches all along this walk as well as a patch of grass in the park on the
   back side of the basilica. Good sandwiches are available from the
   award-winning bakeries along Rue des Abbesses, which also features
   several picnic-friendly cheese, wine, and fruit stalls and a fine selection
   of cafés. See here for more restaurant and café recommendations.
Neighborhood Shopping Street: Appealing Rue des Martyrs runs for six
   blocks below Place Pigalle and feels a world apart from Montmartre.
   Featuring eye-popping bakeries, trendy cafés, and delicious food shops,
   it ends at a handy Métro station (see the Rue des Martyrs boutique stroll
   in the Shopping in Paris chapter).
Starring: Cityscape views, Sacré-Cœur, postcard scenes brought to life, a
   charming market street, and boring buildings where interesting people
   once lived.



                       The Walk Begins
• From the Abbesses Métro stop, take the elevator up and surface through
one of the original Art Nouveau “Métropolitain” entrances.
 1   Place des Abbesses
Our tour starts in the heart of today’s Montmartre. While the neighborhood
center has shifted from the top of the hill to here, the bohemian vibe lives
on. Place des Abbesses and its surrounding streets are lively with cafés,
bars, and rustic charm. Young Parisian hipsters (called bobos, or bourgeois
bohemians) flock to Montmartre—as their forebears did—for cheaper rents,
less urban noise, a lively arts community, and plenty of nightlife.




    Named for an abbey that it once abutted, this perfectly Parisian square
revolves around its carousel with just enough benches to meet demand. It’s
bordered by a small park, strollable lanes, and an unusual brick church (St-
Jean de Montmartre, completed in 1904). This was the first building in Paris
to use reinforced concrete and steel in this manner, which allowed for much
faster and cheaper construction (worth a quick look inside). Romantics
should wander into the small park to find the Mur des je t’aime (the “I Love
You Wall”), a tiled area along the park’s wall with “I love you” written
artfully in about a hundred different languages.
    The main drag, Rue des Abbesses, is lined with shops, bakeries,
pâtisseries, and restaurants (great for breakfast and lunch). You could
explore the street now, but our walk will also return to this street later.
• Leave Place des Abbesses, heading east on Rue Yvonne le Tac (passing
right by La Poste). You’ll pass a few cafés. At the end of the block, Le
Progrès has great café ambience. Veer slightly left onto Rue Tardieu and
walk a block to the park below Sacré-Cœur. To get up the hill, you can
either climb those 200 steps or take the funicular. At the top, find a good
viewing spot on the steps of the church.
 2   Sacré-Cœur Basilica and View
From Paris’ highest natural point (430 feet), the City of Light fans out at
your feet. Pan from left to right. The long triangular roof on your left is the
Gare du Nord train station. The blue-and-red Pompidou Center is straight
ahead, and the skyscrapers in the distance define the southern limit of Paris.
Next is the domed Panthéon, atop Paris’ other (and far smaller) butte. Then,
standing solo to the right, comes the modern Montparnasse Tower, and
finally (if you’re in position to see this far to the right), the golden dome of
Les Invalides. The grassy park below was once dotted with openings to
gypsum mines, the source of the white “plaster of Paris” that plastered
Paris’ buildings for centuries.
    Now turn and face the church. The Sacré-Cœur (Sacred Heart) Basilica’s
exterior, with its onion domes and bleached-bone pallor, looks ancient, but
it was finished only a century ago by Parisians humiliated by German
invaders. Roman Catholics built it as a kind of penance for how the
surrounding neighborhood sowed rebelliousness and division. Many French
people were disgusted that in 1871 their government actually shot its own
citizens, the Communards, who held out here on Montmartre after the
French leadership surrendered to the Prussians (the Communards’
monument is in Père Lachaise Cemetery—read about their story on here).
    The five-domed, Roman-Byzantine-looking basilica took 44 years to
build (1875-1919). It stands on a foundation of 83 pillars sunk 130 feet
deep, necessary because the ground beneath was honeycombed with
gypsum mines. The exterior is laced with gypsum, which whitens with age.
• Join the security line to get inside.
 3   Sacré-Cœur Interior
Crowd flow permitting, pause (sit in a pew) near the entrance and take in
the nave.
    A View of the Nave: In the impressive mosaic high above the altar, a
60-foot-tall Christ exposes his sacred heart, burning with love and
compassion for humanity. Joining him are a dove representing the Holy
Spirit and God the Father high above. Christ is flanked by biblical figures
on the left (including St. Peter, kneeling) and French figures on the right (a
kneeling Joan of Arc in her trademark armor). If you get closer, you’ll see
other French figures: clergymen (who offer a model of this church to the
Lord), government leaders (in business suits), and French saints, including
St. Bernard (above, with his famous dog), and Louis IX, the king known as
Saint Louis (with the crown of thorns). Remember, the church was built by
a French populace recently humbled by a devastating war. At the base of the
mosaic is the National Vow of the French people begging God’s
forgiveness: “Sacritissimo Cordi Jesu Gallia poenitens et devota...”—
which means, “To the Sacred Heart of Jesus, we are penitent and devoted.”
Right now, in this church, at least one person is praying for Christ to be
understanding of the world’s sins—part of a tradition that’s been carried out
here, day and night, 24/7, since Sacré-Cœur’s completion a century ago.
• Start shuffling clockwise around the church. Near the entrance, find the
white...
     B Statue of St. Thérèse: Follow Thérèse’s gaze to a pillar with a
plaque (“L’an 1944...”). The plaque’s map shows where, on April 21, 1944,
13 bombs fell on Montmartre in an Allied air raid during World War II—all
in a line, all near the church—killing no one. This fueled local devotion to
the Sacred Heart and to this church.
• Continue up the side aisle to the apse, and find a...
     C Scale Model of the Church: It shows the church from the long side
(you’d enter at left). This early-version model doesn’t accurately reflect the
finished product, but it’s close. You see its central dome surrounded by
smaller domes and the tower. The “Byzantine” style is clear in the onion
domes and in the heavy horseshoe arches atop slender columns. The church
is built of large rectangular blocks (just look around you), with no attempt
to plaster over the cracks/lines in between.
• Continue along, looking to the right at...
     D Colorful Mosaics of the 14 Stations of the Cross (about 10 feet high
with Roman numerals): At #7, pause to rub St. Peter’s bronze foot and
look up to the heavens. After #14, you’ll meet a solid silver statue of Christ
with his sacred heart.
• Continue your circuit around the church.
    E Stained-Glass Windows: Because the church’s original stained-
glass windows were broken by the concussive force of WWII bombs, all of
the glass you see is post-1945.
• As you approach the entrance you’ll walk straight toward three stained-
glass windows dedicated in 1947 to...
    F Joan of Arc (Jeanne d’Arc, 1412-1431): See the teenage girl as she
hears the voice of the Archangel Michael (right panel, at bottom) and later
(above on the same panel) as she takes up the Archangel’s sword. Next, she
kneels to take communion (central panel, bottom), then kneels before the
bishop to tell him she’s been sent by God to rally France’s soldiers and save
Orléans from English invaders (central panel, top). However, Burgundian
forces allied with England arrest her, and she’s burned at the stake as a
heretic (left panel), dying with her eyes fixed on a crucifix and chanting,
“Jesus, Jesus, Jesus...”
• Exit the church. A public WC is to your left (when open), down 50 steps.
To your right is the entrance to the church’s...
    G Dome and Crypt: For an unobstructed panoramic view of Paris,
climb 260 feet (292 steps) up the tight, claustrophobic, spiral stairs to the
top of the dome—especially worthwhile if you have kids with excess
energy. The crypt is just a big, empty basement.
• Leaving the church, turn right and walk west along the ridge, following
tree-lined Rue Azaïs. Turn right at the first street (Rue St. Eleuthère) and
walk uphill a block to the Church of St. Pierre-de-Montmartre (at top on
right). The small square in front of the church has a bus stop for little
electric bus #40 that winds through the neighborhood to and from Place des
Abbesses.
    You’re in the heart of Montmartre, by Place du Tertre. A sign for the
Cabaret de la Bohème reminds visitors that in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, this was the world capital of bohemian life. But before we plunge
into that tourist mosh pit, let’s see where this whole Montmartre thing first
got its start—in a church.
 4   Church of St. Pierre-de-Montmartre
This church was the center of Montmartre’s initial claim to fame, a
sprawling abbey of Benedictine monks and nuns. The church is one of
Paris’ oldest (1147). Look down the nave at the Gothic arches and its
modern (post-WWII) stained glass. The church was founded by King Louis
VI and his wife, Adelaide. Montmartre’s growing population in the late
1800s overwhelmed this small church, leading to the construction of the
church of St-Jean de Montmartre (where this walk started).
   Flanking the entrance (behind you) are two dark Corinthian columns that
date to ancient times. These may have stood in a temple of Mercury or Mars
in Roman times. The name “Montmartre” comes from the Roman “Mount
of Mars,” though later generations—thinking of their beheaded patron St.
Denis—preferred a less pagan version, “Mount of Martyrs.”
   And speaking of martyrs, walk up the right-side aisle to find
Montmartre’s most famous martyr: a white statue of St. Denis, holding his
head in his hands. This early Christian bishop was sentenced to death by the
Romans for spreading Christianity. As they marched him up to the top of
Montmartre to be executed, the Roman soldiers got tired and just beheaded
him near here. But Denis popped right up, picked up his head, and carried
on another three miles north before he finally died.
   To the right of Denis, the statue of “Notre Dame de Montmartre” marks
a modern miracle—how the Virgin spared the neighborhood from the
WWII bombs of April 21, 1944.
   Before leaving, rub St. Peter’s toe (again), look up, and ask for
déliverance from the tourist mobs outside.
• Now step back outside. Before entering the crowded Place du Tertre, get a
quick taste of the area by making a short detour to the right down Rue du
Mont-Cenis. These days it’s lined with cafés and shops. But back in the day,
#13 Rue du Mont-Cenis was the...
 5   Cabaret de Patachou
This building (20 yards down a long entryway, now a pleasant art gallery—
with serious art rather than touristy posters—run by friendly Julien and
Sophie Roussard) is where singer Edith Piaf (1915-1963) once trilled “La
Vie en Rose” to an intimate crowd of 80 diners. (Notice the historic photos
just before the door.) Piaf—a destitute teenager who sang for pocket change
in the streets of pre-WWII Paris—was discovered by a nightclub owner and
became a star. Her singing inspired the people of Nazi-occupied Paris. In
the heady days after the war, she sang about the joyous, rosy life in the city.
For more on this warbling-voiced singer, see here.
• Head back uphill to the always-lively square, and stand on its cusp for the
best perspective of...
 6   Place du Tertre: Bohemian Montmartre
Lined with cafés, shaded by acacia trees, and filled with artists, hucksters,
and tourists, the scene mixes charm and kitsch in ever-changing
proportions. Place du Tertre has been the town square of the small village of
Montmartre since medieval times. (Tertre means “stepped lanes” in
French.)
   In 1800, a wall separated Paris from this hilltop village. To enter Paris
you had to pass tollbooths that taxed anything for sale. Montmartre was a
mining community where the wine flowed cheap (tax-free) and easy. Life
here was a working-class festival of cafés, bistros, and dance halls. Painters
came here for the ruddy charm, the light, and the low rents. In 1860,
Montmartre was annexed into the growing city of Paris. The “bohemian”
ambience survived, and it attracted sophisticated Parisians ready to get
down and dirty in the belle époque of cancan. The La Mère Catherine
restaurant is often called the first bistro—this is where Russian soldiers first
coined the word by saying, “I’m thirsty, bring my drink bistro!” (meaning
“right away”).
   The square’s artists, who at times outnumber the tourists, are the great-
great-grandkids of the Renoirs, Van Goghs, and Picassos who once roamed
here—poor, carefree, seeking inspiration, and occasionally cursing a world
too selfish to bankroll their dreams.
• Plunge headlong into the square—filled with tourists paying €50 for a 20-
minute portrait (more for color)—meet an artist, sip an espresso, then
continue west along the main drag, called...



             The Birth of the Counterculture
  Montmartre of the late 19th century was a creative hive of
  nonconformist painters, writers, musicians, thinkers, and hard-to-
  classify eccentrics. They challenged society’s norms, practically
  inventing the notion of a “counterculture,” and paved the way to
  modernism.
     The first wave of artists was the Impressionists, who came to paint
  the windmills (moulins), rustic cottages, and vine-covered stone walls.
     In 1871, Montmartre was a hotbed of revolution and resistance,
     quixotically defying the French government after it capitulated to
     Germany in the Franco-Prussian War. When the Moulin Rouge
     nightclub opened in 1889 with its racy cancan girls, sleepy
     Montmartre became the go-to place for edgy nightlife. It attracted
     artists of every stripe, who boldly championed new theories they were
     convinced would remake the world. There were Symbolists,
     Naturalists, Incoherents, Decadents, and “Les Nabis”—Hebrew for
     “prophets.”
         The gathering place for all these people was the cabaret. Here, the
     mix of food, drink (such as powerful absinthe), music, shadow plays,
     dancing, vaudeville, and circus acts created a heady atmosphere where
     great ideas were launched. Van Gogh came here to drink, and
     Toulouse-Lautrec sketched the dancers and prostitutes.
         The bohemian spirit lasted into the next generation. Picasso arrived
     here in 1900, where he pioneered Cubism in his hillside studio and
     attended cabaret shows at Au Lapin Agile. The painter Utrillo captured
     Montmartre’s otherworldly beauty, and the composer Erik Satie wrote
     his eccentric, stripped-down piano pieces.
         In the 1920s Jazz Age, the cabaret scene shifted downhill a bit, but
     the party raged on, with the torch carried by jazz-loving African
     American expats. With World War II, Montmartre fell into disrepair,
     but the glories of bohemian Montmartre live on in the minds of
     romantics.
         Montmartre helped birth the modern world. No wonder.
     Nonconformists could escape the shackles of their conventional
     Parisian upbringing, find freedom on Montmartre’s 430-foot summit,
     and literally look down on the bourgeois world.


 7    Rue Norvins
Montmartre’s oldest and main street is still the primary commercial artery,
serving the current trade—tourism.
• If you’re a devotee of Dalí, a detour left on Rue Poulbot will lead you to
the...
 8   Dalí Museum (Dalí Paris)
This beautifully lit black gallery offers a walk through more than 300
statues, etchings, and drawings by the master of Surrealism. The Spaniard
found fame in Paris in the 1920s and ’30s. He lived in Montmartre for a
while, hung with the Surrealist crowd in Montparnasse, and shocked the
world with his dreamscape paintings and experimental films.
• Return to Rue Norvins and continue west a dozen steps to the picturesque
intersection with Rue des Saules. You’ve arrived at...
 9   Montmartre Ground Zero
We’re leaving most tourists behind and entering the residential part of
Montmartre. Pause to survey the colorful jumble of classic storefronts,
cafés, and charm. Walk to the golden souvenir shop on the left (#12)—
formerly a venerable old boulangerie that dated from 1900. This spot was a
favorite place for the artist Maurice Utrillo to paint (see sidebar, later).
From here, look back up Rue Norvins to the dome of Sacré-Cœur rising
above the rooftops—a classic scene Utrillo famously captured. Cross to the
front of La Bonne Franquette restaurant and look right up Rue Saint-
Rustique for another Utrillo scene.
• Let’s lose the tourists completely. Follow Rue des Saules downhill (north)
onto the back side of Montmartre. Enjoy the “Van Gogh in Paris” info
panels along the way. A block downhill, turn right on Rue Cortot to reach
the...

10   Montmartre Museum and Satie’s House
In what is now the Montmartre Museum (at #12), Pierre-Auguste Renoir
once lived while painting his best-known work, Bal du Moulin de la
Galette. Every day he’d lug the four-foot-by-six-foot canvas from here to
the other side of the butte to paint in the open air the famous windmill
ballroom, which we’ll see later.
    A few years later, Utrillo lived and painted here with his mom, Suzanne
Valadon. In 1893, she carried on a torrid six-month relationship with the
lonely, eccentric man who lived two doors up at #6—composer Erik Satie,
who wrote Trois Gymnopédies and was eking out a living playing piano in
Montmartre nightclubs.
    The Montmartre Museum offers the best look at the artistic Golden Age
of this neighborhood (1870-1910)—and has the best public WCs on the hill.
The museum’s collection of paintings, posters, old photos, music, and
memorabilia is split between two creaky 17th-century manor houses
separated by a sweet little garden. An eight-minute film narrated by an
actress playing Utrillo’s mother, Suzanne Valadon, provides the perfect
introduction to the world of the bohemian artists—Renoir, Picasso, Edith
Piaf, Toulouse-Lautrec, and more—who lived on Montmartre before and
after the construction of Sacré-Cœur.
    Next, pass through the garden to find the first house’s entry (before
entering, continue to the end of the short stone path for great views over
Montmartre’s vineyard).
    Inside, you’ll learn about the butte’s 2,000-year history and see photos
of the gypsum quarries and flour-grinding windmills of the Industrial Age.
Montmartre’s cabaret years come to life here—there’s the original Lapin
Agile sign, the famous Chat Noir poster, and Toulouse-Lautrec’s dashing
portrait of red-scarved Aristide Bruant, the earthy singer, comedian, and
club owner. You’ll see more Toulouse-Lautrec posters and displays about
the biggest and most famous cabaret of all: the cancan-kickers of the
Moulin Rouge.
    The second house holds temporary exhibits relevant to Montmartre
(usually well worth a look), as well as the museum’s highlight (hiding on
the top floor): the tiny apartment and painting studio of Maurice Utrillo.
    Before leaving, take a moment to reflect on this remarkable era by
enjoying a coffee or lunch at the sun-dappled garden café. Rarely has so
much artistic talent and creative energy been concentrated in one place at
the same time.
• Return to Rue des Saules and walk downhill to...

11   La Maison Rose Restaurant
The restaurant, made famous by an Utrillo painting, was once frequented by
Utrillo, Pablo Picasso, and Gertrude Stein. Today it serves reasonably good
cuisine to nostalgic tourists.
• Just downhill from the restaurant is Paris’ last remaining vineyard.
 12   Clos Montmartre Vineyard
What originally drew artists to Montmartre was country charm like this.
Ever since the 12th century, the monks and nuns of the large abbey have
produced wine from here. With vineyards, wheat fields, windmills, animals,
and a village tempo of life, it was the perfect escape from grimy Paris. In
1576, puritanical laws taxed wine in Paris, bringing budget-minded drinkers
outside the Paris city gates to Montmartre. Today’s vineyard is off-limits to
tourists except during the annual grape-harvest fest (first Sat in Oct,
www.fetedesvendangesdemontmartre.com) when a thousand costumed
locals bring back the boisterous old days. The vineyard’s annual production
of 300 liters is auctioned off at the fest to support local charities. Bottles sell
for over €50 and are considered mediocre at best.
• Continue downhill to the intersection with Rue St. Vincent, or save your
energy by skipping the descent and reading about the next stop from where
you are.

13   Au Lapin Agile Cabaret
The poster above the door gives the place its name. A rabbit (lapin) makes
an agile leap out of the pot while balancing the bottle of wine that he can
now drink—rather than be cooked in. This was the village’s hot spot. Artists
and writers including Picasso, Renoir, Utrillo, Paul Verlaine, Aristide
Bruant, and Amedeo Modigliani would gather for “performances” of
serious poetry, dirty limericks, sing-alongs, parodies of the famous, or
readings of anarchist manifestos. Once, to play a practical joke on the
avant-garde art community, patrons tied a paintbrush to the tail of the
owner’s donkey and entered the resulting “abstract painting” in a show at
the Salon. Called Sunset over the Adriatic, it won critical acclaim and sold
for a nice price.
   The old Parisian personality of this cabaret survives, where several
nights a week a series of performers takes a small, French-speaking
audience on a wistful musical journey back to the good old days (for
details, see here).



                   Maurice Utrillo (1883-1955)
  Born to a free-spirited single mom and raised by his grandmother,
  Utrillo had his first alcohol detox treatment at age 18. Encouraged by
  his mother and doctors, he started painting as occupational therapy.
  That (plus guidance from his mother and, later, from his wife) allowed
  him to live productively into his 70s and become wealthy and famous
  despite occasional relapses into drinking and mental problems.
      Utrillo grew up on Montmartre’s streets. He fought, broke street
  lamps, and haunted the cafés and bars, paying for drinks with
  masterpieces. A very free spirit, he’s said to have exposed himself to
  strangers on the street, yelling, “I paint with this!”
      His simple scenes of streets, squares, and cafés in a vaguely
  Impressionist style became popular with commoners and scholars
  alike. He honed his style during his “white period” (c. 1909-1914),
  painting a thick paste of predominantly white tints—perfect for
  capturing Sacré-Cœur. In later years, after he moved out of
  Montmartre, he still painted the world he knew in his youth, using
  postcards and photographs as models. Utrillo’s mom, Suzanne
  Valadon, was a former trapeze performer and artist’s model who posed
  for Toulouse-Lautrec, slept with Renoir, studied under Degas, and
  went on to become a notable painter in her own right.


• Backtrack uphill on Rue des Saules to “ground zero.” Circle around the
side of the golden souvenir shop and head downhill on Rue Lepic (the street
that curves right). Staying on Rue Lepic, you come to a fine view of a
windmill, the...

14   Moulin de la Galette
Only two windmills (moulins) remain on a hill that was once dotted with 30
of them. Originally, they pressed monks’ grapes and farmers’ grain and
crushed gypsum rocks into powdery plaster of Paris. When the gypsum
mines closed (c. 1850) and the vineyards sprouted apartments, the grounds
around these windmills were turned into the ceremonial centerpiece of a
popular outdoor dance hall. Renoir’s Bal du Moulin de la Galette (in the
Orsay—see here) shows it in its heyday—a sunny Sunday afternoon in the
acacia-shaded gardens with working-class people dancing, laughing,
drinking, and eating the house crêpes, called galettes. Some call Renoir’s
version the quintessential Impressionist work and the painting that best
captures—on a large canvas in bright colors—the joy of the Montmartre
lifestyle. The namesake restaurant inside is well respected and worth
considering.




• Do an about-face, backtrack several steps, and turn right, heading
downhill on narrow Rue d’Orchampt. Stop where it curves left and look
right to see a memorial plaque to Dalida—a Madonna-like pop star
Europeans still idolize. Continue along Rue d’Orchampt and turn right on
Rue Ravignan. Next to the Timhotel, at 13 Place Emile-Goudeau, is another
studio that Picasso lived in.

15   Le Bateau-Lavoir (Picasso’s Studio)
A humble facade marks the place where modern art was born. In this lowly
abode (destroyed by fire in 1970 and rebuilt a few years later), as many as
10 artists lived and worked. Formerly a piano factory, it was converted into
cheap housing and earned the nickname “the Laundry Boat” for its
swaying, creaking, and crude facilities (sharing one water tap). It was “a
weird, squalid place,” wrote one resident, “filled with every kind of noise:
arguing, singing, bedpans clattering, slamming doors, and suggestive moans
coming from studio doors.”
    In 1904, a poor, unknown Spanish émigré named Pablo Picasso (1881-
1973) moved in. He met dark-haired Fernande Olivier, his first real
girlfriend, in Place Emile-Goudeau, the romantic square outside. She soon
moved in, lifting him out of his melancholy Blue Period into his rosy Rose
Period. La belle Fernande posed nude for him, inspiring a freer treatment of
the female form.
    In 1907, Picasso started on a major canvas. For nine months he produced
hundreds of preparatory sketches, working long into the night. When he
unveiled the work, even his friends were shocked. Les Demoiselles
d’Avignon showed five nude women in a brothel (Fernande claimed they
were all her), with primitive masklike faces and fragmented bodies. Picasso
had invented Cubism.
    For the next two years, he and his neighbors Georges Braque and Juan
Gris revolutionized the art world. Sharing paints, ideas, and girlfriends, they
made Montmartre “The Cubist Acropolis,” attracting freethinking
“Moderns” from all over the world to visit their studios—the artists
Amedeo Modigliani, Marie Laurencin, and Henri Rousseau; the poet
Guillaume Apollinaire; and the American expatriate writer Gertrude Stein.
By the time Picasso moved to better quarters (and dumped Fernande), he
was famous. Still, Picasso would later say, “I know one day we’ll return to
Bateau-Lavoir. It was there that we were really happy—where they thought
of us as painters, not strange animals.”
• Go a few steps downhill to the railing of Place Emile-Goudeau and
marvel at Paris. While the rest of this tour is a lot of walking and thin on
sights, it’s a great chance to simply enjoy a vibrant Parisian neighborhood.
   Now, descend 10 steps and continue straight down Rue Ravignan. You’ll
pass an inviting café with fine terrace seating and views, and the Pâtisserie
Gilles Marchal, selling top-end treats. Continue down Rue Ravignan to the
T-intersection with Rue des Abbesses. (At this point, you could turn left to
return to Place des Abbesses, where we started our walk—with several
good lunch options.) To continue this walk, turn right on Rue des Abbesses.
Continue a few blocks on this thriving neighborhood street, past bakeries,
cheese shops, and tempting cafés. When you come to Rue Lepic, consider a
short detour uphill on that street to #54, where you’ll find...

16   Vincent van Gogh’s House
Vincent van Gogh lived here with his brother Theo from 1886 to 1888,
enjoying a grand city view from his third-floor window. In those two short
years, Van Gogh transformed from a gloomy Dutch painter of brown and
gray peasant scenes into an inspired visionary with wild ideas and
Impressionist colors.
• Retrace your steps down Rue Lepic to Rue des Abbesses and make a hard
right at #36 (still Rue Lepic). Proceed downhill on Rue Lepic, now a lively
market street. Take in the small shops and bustling ambience. Two blocks
down, on the corner to your right (at #15), you’ll find the pink...
17   Café des Deux Moulins
For some time after it was featured in the quirky 2001 film Amélie, this café
was a pilgrimage site for movie buffs worldwide (see the photo over the
bar). Today it’s just another funky place with unassuming ambience and
reasonably priced food and drinks, frequented by the next generation of
real-life Amélies who ignore the movie poster on the back wall (15 Rue
Lepic, +33 1 42 54 90 50).
• Continue downhill on Rue Lepic to Place Blanche. On busy Place Blanche
is the...

18   Moulin Rouge
Oh là là. The new Eiffel Tower at the 1889 World’s Fair was nothing
compared to the sight of pretty cancan girls kicking their legs at the newly
opened “Red Windmill.” The nightclub seemed to sum up the belle époque
—the age of elegance, opulence, sophistication, and worldliness. The big
draw was amateur night, when working-class girls in risqué dresses danced
“Le Quadrille” (dubbed “cancan” by a Brit). Wealthy Parisians slummed it
by coming here.




    On most nights you’d see a small man in a sleek black coat, checked
pants, a green scarf, and a bowler hat peering through his pince-nez glasses
at the dancers and making sketches of them—Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec.
Perhaps he’d order an absinthe, the dense green liqueur (evil ancestor of
today’s pastis) that was the toxic muse for so many great (and so many
forgotten) artists. Toulouse-Lautrec’s sketches of dancers Jane Avril and
Louise Weber, known as La Goulue, hang in the Orsay (see reproductions in
the entryway).
   After its initial splash, the Moulin Rouge survived as a venue for all
kinds of entertainment. In 1906, the novelist Colette kissed her female lover
onstage, and the homophobic authorities closed the “Dream of Egypt”
down. Yves Montand opened for Edith Piaf (1944), and the two fell in love
offstage. It has hosted such diverse acts as Ginger Rogers, Dalida, and the
Village People—together on one bill (1979). Mikhail Baryshnikov leaped
across its stage (1986). And, the club celebrated its centennial (1989) with
Ray Charles, Tony Curtis, Ella Fitzgerald, and...a French favorite, Jerry
Lewis.
   Tonight they’re showing...well, find out for yourself: Walk into the
open-air entryway or step into the lobby to mull over the photos, show
options, and prices. Tickets start at about €150. Their souvenir shop is back
up Rue Lepic a few steps at #9.
• Our tour is over. The Blanche Métro stop is here in Place Blanche.
(Plaster of Paris from the gypsum found on this mount was loaded sloppily
at Place Blanche...the white square.)
   If you want more, you can stroll eastward down racy Boulevard de
Clichy (known as “Pig Alley”), where you’ll find another Métro stop
(Pigalle) and the start of my Rue des Martyrs boutique stroll (see the
Shopping in Paris chapter).

19   Pig Alley
The stretch of the Boulevard de Clichy from Place Blanche to Place Pigalle
is the den mother of all iniquities. Remember, this was once the border
between Montmartre and Paris, where bistros had tax-free status, wine was
cheap, and prostitutes roamed freely. Today, sex shops, peep shows, the
Museum of Erotic Art, live sex shows, chatty pitchmen, and hot-dog stands
line the busy boulevard. Dildos abound.
    In the Roaring Twenties, this neighborhood at the base of the hill
became a new center of cabaret nightlife. It was settled by African
American jazz musicians and WWI veterans who didn’t want to return to a
segregated America. Black-owned nightclubs sprang up. There was Zelli’s
(located at 16 bis Rue Fontaine, a block southeast of the Moulin Rouge),
where clarinetist-saxophonist Sidney Bechet played. A block away was the
tiny Le Grand Duc (at Rue Fontaine and Rue Pigalle), where poet Langston
Hughes bused tables. Next door was the most famous of all, Bricktop’s (at
#73 and then at 66 Rue Pigalle), owned by the vivacious redhead who
hosted Cole Porter, Duke Ellington, Picasso, the Prince of Wales, F. Scott
Fitzgerald, Josephine Baker, and many more. The area was “Harlem East,”
where rich and poor, black and white, came for a good time.
