Marmottan Museum Tour

MARMOTTAN MUSEUM TOUR
Musée Marmottan Monet
Orientation
  OVERVIEW
The Tour Begins
  CLAUDE MONET (1840-1926)
    1870s: PURE IMPRESSIONISM
    1890s: SERIES
    PAINTINGS OF GIVERNY (1883-1926)
    NYMPHEAS AND LARGE-SCALE CANVASES
    REST OF THE MUSEUM
The Marmottan has the best collection of works by the master Impressionist
Claude Monet. In this mansion on the southwest fringe of urban Paris, you
can walk through Monet’s life, from black-and-white sketches to colorful
open-air paintings to the canvas that gave Impressionism its name. The
museum’s highlights are scenes of his garden at Giverny, including larger-
than-life water lilies. The Marmottan also features a world-class collection
of works by Impressionist painter Berthe Morisot.
    Paul Marmottan (1856-1932) lived here amid his collection of exquisite
19th-century furniture and paintings. He donated his home and possessions
to a private trust (which is why your Museum Pass isn’t valid here). After
Marmottan’s death, the more daring art of Monet and others was added. The
combination of the mansion, the furnishings, the Impressionist and Empire
paintings, and the many Monet masterpieces makes the Marmottan an
aesthetic pleasure.



                           Orientation
Cost: €12, not covered by Museum Pass; €21.50 combo-ticket with
   Monet’s garden and house at Giverny.
Hours: Tue-Sun 10:00-18:00, Thu until 21:00, closed Mon.
Information: +33 1 44 96 50 33, www.marmottan.fr.
Avoiding Lines: Advance tickets can be purchased at FNAC stores or on
   the Marmottan’s website for special exhibits, which are frequent.
   Without a reservation, arrive close to opening time to minimize crowds.
Getting There: It’s in Paris’ west end at 2 Rue Louis-Boilly.
      By Métro: Take Métro line 9 to La Muette. Exit via sortie 1. It’s a
   six-block, 10-minute walk: Cross Chaussée de la Muette street, turn left,
   and walk toward a major intersection (you’ll see a brick building called
   La Gare—formerly a train station). Follow Chaussée de la Muette to a
   second intersection, where you’ll continue straight onto a tree-lined
   pedestrian lane, Avenue Ranelagh. Walk through the peaceful park to
   the museum at the far end.
      By RER Train (handy from Rue Cler): Catch RER/Train-C from
   Austerlitz, St-Michel, Orsay, Invalides, or Pont de l’Alma (board any
   train called NORA or GOTA), get off at the Boulainvilliers stop, and
   follow signs to sortie Boulainvilliers. Turn right up Rue Boulainvilliers,
   then turn left down Chaussée de la Muette, and follow the directions
   above to reach the museum. When returning to your hotel on
   RER/Train-C, make sure your stop is listed on the monitor: You don’t
   want to end up in Versailles.
      By Bus: Handy east-west bus #63 gets you kinda close, but requires a
   walk of about 600 yards. Get off at the Octave Feuillet stop on Avenue
   Henri Martin, cross Avenue Henri Martin, and follow the tree-lined
   street to the right that curves around to the museum.
Tours: The €4 audioguide, while overkill for some, supplements my tour
   well and includes coverage of temporary exhibits. Small information
   displays are in many rooms.
Length of This Tour: Allow one hour.
Services: There are two WCs, one on the second floor (usually with lines)
   and one downstairs by the Monet collection (bigger and quieter).
Cuisine Art: Cafés, boulangeries, and bistros are 10 minutes away around
   the La Muette Métro stop (Rue Mozart has good choices).
Nearby: The kid-friendly park in front of the museum is terrific for
   families with small kids. Parents can take turns visting the museum.
      Make the most of the long trip here by combining a visit to the
   Marmottan with Trocadéro-area sights, a short Métro or bus ride away
   (see here).
Starring: Claude Monet, including Impression: Sunrise (shown at the top
   of this chapter); paintings of cathedrals, train stations, and beaches;
   scenes from Giverny; and water lilies.
OVERVIEW
The 19th-century Marmottan mansion, formerly a hunting lodge, has three
pleasant, manageable floors, all worth perusing. (You might be free to see
them in any order or, depending on crowd flow, be directed along a
prescribed route.) The ground floor has several rooms of Paul Marmottan’s
period furnishings and notable paintings by French artists. Temporary
exhibits are usually displayed in a gallery on this floor. Upstairs is the
permanent collection, featuring illuminated manuscripts and works by
Monet’s fellow Impressionists—Edgar Degas, Camille Pissarro, Paul
Gauguin, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Edouard Manet, and especially Berthe
Morisot. Monet’s works—the core of the collection—are in the basement.




    Because the museum rotates its large collection of paintings, this chapter
is not designed as a room-by-room tour. Use it as a general background on
Monet’s life and some of the paintings you’re likely to encounter. Read it
once before you go, then let the museum surprise you.
                       The Tour Begins
• You’ll enter the museum on the ground floor. Pass through the temporary
exhibition gallery (consider taking time to enjoy these works now) to reach
the stairs leading down to the basement level. Descending the stairs, you’re
immediately plunged into the colorful and messy world of Claude Monet.


CLAUDE MONET (1840-1926)
In this one long room, you’ll find some 50 paintings by Monet spanning his
lifetime. They’re generally (and very roughly) arranged in chronological
order—from Monet’s youthful discovery of Impressionism, to his mature
“series” paintings, to his last great water lilies from Giverny.
    Claude Monet was the leading light of the Impressionist movement that
revolutionized painting in the 1870s. Fiercely independent and dedicated to
his craft, Monet gave courage to Renoir and other like-minded artists, who
were facing harsh criticism.
Let’s survey Monet’s long life:
    Born in Paris in 1840, Monet grew up in seaside Le Havre as the son of
a grocer and began his art career sketching caricatures of townspeople. He
realized he had a gift for quickly capturing an overall impression with a few
simple strokes. Monet defied his family, insisted he was an artist, and
sketched the world around him—beaches, boats, and small-town life.
Fellow artist Eugène Boudin encouraged Monet to don a scarf, set up his
easel outdoors, and paint the scene exactly as he saw it. Today, we say,
“Well, duh!” But “open-air” painting was unorthodox for artists of the day,
who were trained to study their subjects thoroughly in the perfect lighting
of a controlled studio setting.



                          Monet’s Family
  You’ll likely see portraits of Monet’s wife and children. Monet’s first
  wife, Camille, died in 1879, leaving Monet to raise 12-year-old Jean
  and babe-in-arms Michel. (Michel would grow up to inherit the family
  home and many of the paintings that ended up here.) But Monet was
  also involved with Alice Hoschede, who had recently been abandoned
  by her husband. Alice moved in with her six kids and took care of the
  dying Camille, and the two families made a Brady Bunch-style
  merger. Baby Michel became bosom buddies with Alice’s baby, Jean-
  Pierre, while teenage Jean Monet and stepsister Blanche fell in love
  and later married.


   At 19, Monet went to Paris but refused to enroll in the official art
schools. His letters to friends make it clear he was broke and paying the
price for his bohemian lifestyle.
   In 1867—the same year the Salon rejected his work—he and his partner
Camille had their first child, Jean. They moved to the countryside of
Argenteuil, where he developed his open-air, Impressionist style.
Impression: Sunrise was his landmark work at the breakthrough 1874
Impressionist Exhibition. He went on to paint several series of scenes, such
as Gare Saint-Lazare, at different times of day. His career was gaining
steam.
   After the birth of their second son, Michel, Camille’s health declined,
and she later died. Monet traveled a lot, painting landscapes (Bordighera),
people (Portrait de Poly), and more series, including the famous Cathedral
of Rouen. In 1890, he settled down at his farmhouse in Giverny and married
Alice Hoschede. He traveled less, but visited London to paint the Halls of
Parliament. Mostly, he painted his own water lilies and flowers in an
increasingly messy style. He died in 1926 a famous man.


1870s: PURE IMPRESSIONISM
While living at Argenteuil, Monet and Camille played host to Renoir,
Edouard Manet, Alfred Sisley, and other painters. Monet led them on open-
air painting safaris to the countryside. Inspired by the realism of Manet,
they painted everyday things—landscapes, seascapes, street scenes, ladies
with parasols, family picnics—in bright, basic colors.
    They began perfecting the distinct Impressionist style—painting nature
as a mosaic of short brushstrokes of different colors placed side by side,
suggesting shimmering light.
    First, Monet simplified. A lady’s dress might be composed of just a few
thick strokes of paint (as in his early work On the Beach at Trouville, 1870-
1871). Monet gradually broke things down into even smaller “pixels”—
small dots of different shades. If you back up from a Monet canvas, the
pigments blend into one (for example, red plus green plus yellow equals a
brown boat). Still, they never fully resolve, creating the effect of
shimmering light. Monet limited his palette to a few bright basics—cobalt
blue, white, yellow, two shades of red, and emerald green abound. But no
black—even shadows are a combination of bright colors.




   Monet’s constant quest was to faithfully reproduce nature in blobs of
paint. His eye was a camera lens set at a very slow shutter speed to admit
maximum light. Then he “developed” the impression made on his retina
with an oil-based solution.
   In search of new light and new scenes, Monet traveled throughout
France and Europe, painting landscapes in all kinds of weather. Picture
Monet at work, hiking to a remote spot—carrying an easel, several
canvases, brushes (large-size), a palette, tubes of paint (an invention that
made open-air painting practical), food and drink, a folding chair, and an
umbrella (and this was before the invention of backpacks)—and wearing
his trademark hat, with a cigarette on his lip. He weathered the elements,
occasionally putting himself in danger by clambering on cliffs to get the
scenes he wanted.
    The key was to work fast, before the weather changed and the light
shifted, completely changing the colors. Monet worked “wet-in-wet,”
applying new paint before the first layer dried, mixing colors on the canvas,
and piling them up into a thick paste.
• Monet’s most famous “impression” was the one that gave the movement
its name.

Impression: Sunrise (Impression Soleil Levant), 1873
This is the painting that started the revolution—a simple, serene view of
boats bobbing under an orange sun. At the first public showing by Monet,
Renoir, Degas, and others in Paris in 1874, critics howled at this work and
ridiculed the title. “Wallpaper,” one called it. The sloppy brushstrokes and
ordinary subject looked like a study, not a finished work. The style was
dubbed “Impressionist”—an accurate name.
    The misty harbor scene obviously made an “impression” on Monet, who
faithfully rendered the fleeting moment in quick strokes of paint. The waves
are simple horizontal brushstrokes. The sun’s reflection on the water is a
few thick, bold strokes of orange tipped with white. They zigzag down the
canvas the way a reflection shifts on moving water.


1890s: SERIES
Monet’s claim to fame became a series of paintings of a single scene,
captured at different times of day under different light. He first explored the
idea with one of Paris’ train stations, Gare St. Lazare, in the 1870s. Soon, he
conceived paintings to be shown as a group, giving a time-lapse view of a
single subject.
    In Rouen, he rented several rooms offering different angles overlooking
the Rouen Cathedral. He worked on up to 14 different canvases at a time,
shuffling the right one onto the easel as the sun moved across the sky. The
cathedral is made of brown stone, but at sunset it becomes gold and pink
with blue shadows, softened by thick smudges of paint. The true subject is
not the cathedral but the full spectrum of light that bounces off it.
    He did another series in London. Turning his hotel room into a studio,
Monet—working on nearly a hundred canvases simultaneously—painted
the changing light on the River Thames. He caught the reflection of the
Houses of Parliament on the river’s surface, stretching and bending with the
current. London’s famous fog epitomized Monet’s favorite subject—the
atmosphere that distorts distant objects. That filtering haze gives even
different-colored objects a similar tone, resulting in a more harmonious
picture. When the light was just right and the atmosphere glowed, the
moment of “instantaneity” had arrived, and Monet worked like a madman.
    Monet started many of his canvases in the open air and then
painstakingly perfected them later in the studio. He composed his scenes
with great care—clear horizon lines give a strong horizontal axis, while
diagonal lines (of trees or shorelines) create solid triangles.
    These series—of London, the cathedral, haystacks, poplars, and
mornings on the Seine—were very popular. Monet, poverty-stricken until
his mid-40s, was slowly becoming famous, first in America, then London,
and finally in France. He soon took up residence in what would be his home
for the rest of his life: Giverny.


PAINTINGS OF GIVERNY (1883-1926)
Rose Trellises (L’Allée des Rosiers) and The Japanese Bridge (Le
Pont Japonais)
In 1883, Monet’s brood settled into a farmhouse in Giverny (50 miles west
of Paris). Financially stable and domestically blissful, he turned Giverny
into a garden paradise and painted nature without the long commute.
    In 1890, Monet started work on his Japanese garden, inspired by tranquil
scenes from the Japanese prints he collected. He diverted a river to form a
pond, planted willows and bamboo on the shores, filled the pond with water
lilies, then crossed it with this wooden footbridge. As years passed, the
bridge became overgrown with wisteria. Compare several versions. He
painted the bridge at different times of day and year, exploring different
color schemes.




   Monet uses the bridge as the symmetrical center of simple, pleasing
designs. The water is drawn with horizontal brushstrokes that get shorter as
you move up the canvas (farther away), creating the illusion of distance.
The horizontal water contrasts with the vertical willows, while the bridge
“bridges” the sides of the square canvas and laces the scene together.
   In 1912, Monet began to go blind. Cataracts distorted his perception of
depth and color and sent him into a tailspin of despair. The (angry?) red
paintings date from this period.

Early Water Lilies, Nymphéas, c. 1900
As his vision slowly failed, Monet concentrated on painting close-ups of the
surface of the pond and its water lilies—red, white, yellow, and lavender.
Some lilies are just a few broad strokes on a bare canvas (a study); others
are piles of paint formed with overlapping colors.




   But more than the lilies, the paintings focus on the changing reflections
on the surface of the pond. Pan slowly around the room and watch the pond
go from predawn to bright sunlight to twilight.
   Early lily paintings show the shoreline as a reference point. But
increasingly, Monet crops the scene ever closer, until there is no shoreline,
no horizon, no sense of what’s up or down. Stepping back from the canvas,
you see the lilies just hang there on the museum wall, suspended in space.
The surface of the pond and the surface of the canvas are one. Modern
abstract art—a colored design on a flat surface—is just around the corner.
• The climax of the visit is a round room (with benches), where you can
immerse yourself in the...


NYMPHEAS AND LARGE-SCALE CANVASES
Later Water Lilies, Nymphéas, 1915-1926
In the midst of the chaos of World War I, Monet began a series of large-
scale paintings of water lilies. They were installed at the Orangerie
Museum. Here at the Marmottan are smaller-scale studies for that series.
But the sheer size of these studies is impressive.




    Get close—Monet did—and analyze how he composed these works.
Some lilies are patches of thick paint circled by a squiggly “caricature” of a
lily pad. Monet simplifies in a way that Henri Matisse and Pablo Picasso
would envy. You can see that the simple smudge of paint that composes the
flower is actually a complex mix of different colors. But to get these colors
to fully resolve in your eye, you’d have to back up all the way to Giverny.
    When Monet died in 1926, he was a celebrity. Starting with meticulous
line drawings, he had evolved into an open-air realist, then Impressionist
color analyst, then serial painter, and finally master of reflections. In the
latter half of his life, Monet’s world shrank—from the broad vistas of the
world traveler to the tranquility of his home, family, and garden. But his
artistic vision expanded as he painted smaller details on bigger canvases
and helped invent modern abstract art.
• After seeing Monet, continue upstairs through the gift shop and visit the
rest of the Marmottan; it’s worth browsing. I’d head to the first floor up for
the eclectic permanent collection and finish off with furnished rooms on the
ground floor.



                   Berthe Morisot (1841-1895)
  The Marmottan’s large collection of Berthe Morisot’s work cements
  her reputation as one of Impressionism’s Founding Mothers. Born into
  a cultured, supportive family, she found early success painting
  landscapes (in the open air) in the proto-Impressionist style of her
  mentor, Camille Corot. Still in her 20s, Morisot exhibited to good
  reviews at the official Salon for seven straight years.
