Day Trip: Giverny & Auvers-sur-Oise

GIVERNY & AUVERS-SUR-OISE
Giverny
Map: Giverny
  Orientation to Giverny
  Sights in Giverny
  Sleeping and Eating in Giverny
 Auvers-sur-Oise
   Orientation to Auvers-sur-Oise
   Sights in Auvers-sur-Oise
   Eating in Auvers
Paris is the unofficial capital of Impressionism, its museums speckled with
sun-dappled paintings. But hard-core Impressionist fans will want to do
what the Impressionist painters did: Don a scarf and beret, and escape to the
countryside.
    At Giverny and Auvers-sur-Oise, follow in the footsteps of Monet, Van
Gogh, Pissarro, Cézanne, and others. See the landscapes and small-town
life that inspired these great masters. Little has changed over time: You’ll be
surrounded by pastoral scenes that still look like an Impressionist painting
come to life.
    At Giverny, you can visit Monet’s home and flower-filled garden. (Be
warned: the gardens are pretty, but they’re bursting with tourists, so time
your visit carefully.) Auvers-sur-Oise is a quieter village, with Van Gogh’s
grave, recognizable settings of several of the artist’s paintings, and a
multimedia museum on Impressionism. Both places are about an hour’s
journey from Paris and accessible by public transportation.


                               Giverny
Claude Monet’s gardens at Giverny are like his paintings—brightly colored
patches that are messy but balanced. Flowers were his brushstrokes, a bit
untamed and slapdash, but part of a carefully composed design. Monet
spent his last (and most creative) years cultivating his garden and his art at
Giverny (zhee-vayr-nee), the spiritual home of Impressionism (1883-1926).
Visiting the Marmottan and/or the Orangerie museums in Paris before your
visit here, or at least reading the chapters on those museums, heightens your
appreciation of these gardens.
   In 1883, middle-aged Claude Monet, his wife Alice, and their eight
children from two families settled into this farmhouse, 50 miles northwest
of Paris (for more on Monet’s family, see sidebar on here). Monet, already a
famous artist and happiest at home, would spend 40 years in Giverny,
traveling less with each passing year. He built a pastoral paradise complete
with a Japanese garden and a pond full of floating lilies.
    In 1912, Monet—the greatest visionary, literally, of his generation—
began to go blind with cataracts. To compensate, he used larger canvases
and painted fewer details. The true subject of these later works is not really
the famous water lilies but the changing reflections on the pond’s surface—
of the blue sky, white clouds, and green trees that line the shore.


GETTING TO GIVERNY
Minivan and big bus tours take groups to Giverny. The trip is also doable in
a half-day by car or public transportation by train with a connection by bus,
taxi, bike, or hike. This website gives a clear explanation of your options:
Giverny.org/transpor.
   By Tour: Minivan tours will pick you up at your hotel and whisk you
painlessly there and back. Paris Webservices tours are excellent, with
informative drivers and ample time to savor the experience (figure $95-
120/person for groups of 4 or more; see contact info on here). Big bus tour
companies do a Giverny day trip from Paris for around €80 (5 hours,
includes entry, get details at your hotel or www.pariscityvision.com).
    By Car: From Paris’ périphérique ring road, follow A-13 toward Rouen,
exit at Sortie 14 to Vernon, and follow Centre Ville signs, then signs to
Giverny. You can park right at Monet’s house or at one of several nearby
lots. Romantics can take the scenic route from the same exit by following
tiny D-201 over the river and through the woods.
    By Train: This option is less expensive than a tour and puts you in
charge of your own time (allow about 6 hours round-trip). Take the Rouen-
bound train from Paris Gare St. Lazare Station to Vernon, about four miles
from Giverny (normally leaves from tracks 20-25, 1 hour, about €30 round-
trip). The train that leaves Paris at around 8:15 is ideal, with departures
about hourly after that. Before boarding, use an information desk in Gare
St. Lazare to get return times from Vernon to Paris.
    Getting from Vernon’s Train Station to Giverny: From the Vernon
station to Monet’s garden, you have four options: bus, taxi, bike, or hike.
The Vernon-Giverny bus generally departs every 2 hours for the 15-minute
run to Giverny (9:15-17:15, €10 round-trip, pay driver). A bus-and-train
timetable is available at the bus stops, on the bus, and online
(www.giverny.org/transpor)—note return times. To reach the bus stop,
across from the L’Arrivée de Giverny café, walk through the station and
keep straight. Don’t dally in the station—the bus may leave soon after your
train arrives.
    Returning to the station, the bus leaves Giverny from the same stop
where it drops you off (near the pedestrian underpass—see map; TI and
good WCs on the north side of the underpass). Return buses generally run
hourly in the morning and afternoon (every two hours midday, at :25 after
the hour, last departure about 19:10, confirm times by checking schedule
upon arrival). Get to the stop at least 15 minutes early to ensure a space. If
you miss the return bus and can’t wait for the next one, ask any
approachable service personnel to call a taxi.
    Taxis wait in front of the station in Vernon (allow €20 one-way for up to
3 people). Try Damien Taxi at mobile +33 6 03 30 85 47 or +33 2 77 02 94
97 (for other taxis call +33 6 77 49 32 90 or +33 6 50 12 21 22).
    Another option is to rent a bike at L’Arrivée de Giverny café (opposite
the station, closed Mon, +33 2 32 21 16 01) and take a 30-minute ride along
a well-signed, paved bike path (piste cyclable) that runs from near Vernon
along an abandoned railroad right-of-way.
    Hikers can go on foot to Giverny (4 level miles, about 1.5 hours one
way) following the bike path and take a bus or taxi back.
    Extension to Rouen: Consider combining your morning Giverny visit
with an afternoon excursion to nearby Rouen—together they make an
efficient and memorable day trip from Paris. Note that Rouen’s museums
are closed on Tuesdays. From Vernon (the halfway point between Rouen
and Paris), it’s about 40 minutes by train to Rouen; the return trip from
Rouen back to Paris takes 70-90 minutes. Plan to arrive at Monet’s garden
when it opens (at 9:30) so you can be back to the Vernon train station by
13:00. You’ll land in Rouen by 14:00 and have just enough time to see
Rouen’s cathedral and surrounding medieval quarter. In Rouen, the TI is a
15-minute walk from the station and offers an audioguide walking tour (or,
better yet, get your hands on the Rouen section from the Normandy chapter
of my Rick Steves France guidebook). If you leave Rouen around 18:00,
you’ll pull into Paris about 19:15, having spent a wonderful day sampling
rural and urban Normandy.



                 Orientation to Giverny
Giverny is a tiny village about four miles from the town of Vernon. All of
Giverny’s sights and shops string along Rue Claude Monet, which runs in
front of Monet’s house. The TI is located by the WCs in the parking lot
near the road to Vernon (see map, daily April-Sept, closed off-season, 80
Rue Claude Monet, +33 2 32 64 45 01).



                       Sights in Giverny
▲MONET’S GARDEN AND HOUSE
All kinds of people flock to Giverny. Gardeners admire the earth-moving
landscaping and layout, botanists find interesting new plants, art lovers can
see paintings they’ve long admired come to life, and romantics can glue
themselves to a bench surrounded by water lily views. Fans enjoy
wandering through the house where Monet spent half his life and seeing the
rowboat he puttered around in, as well as the henhouse where his family got
the eggs for their morning omelets.
    There are two gardens, split by a busy road, plus the house, which
displays Monet’s prized collection of Japanese prints. The gardens are
always flowering with something; they’re at their most colorful April
through July.
    Cost and Hours: €11, not covered by Paris Museum Pass, €19 combo-
ticket with nearby Museum of Impressionisms, ask about combo-tickets
with Paris’ Orangerie or Marmottan Museum; daily April-Oct 9:30-18:00,
closed Nov-late March; +33 2 32 51 90 31, http://fondation-monet.com.
    Crowd-Beating Tips: Though lines may be long and tour groups may
trample the flowers, true fans still find magic in the gardens. Minimize
crowds by arriving a little before 9:30, when it opens, or come after 16:00
and stay until it closes. The busiest months are May and June. Sunday
mornings are busiest in any season when cruise groups arrive in force.




   Advance ticket and combo-ticket holders skip the ticket-buying line and
use the nifty group entrance, a huge advantage in high season (see map).
You can buy advance tickets online or at any FNAC store in Paris
(www.fnactickets.com), or at the TI in Vernon. Alternately, buy combo-
tickets with either the Orangerie or Marmottan Museum in Paris, or the
Museum of Impressionisms here.

Visiting the House and Gardens
There are two parts to the gardens: the Walled Garden (next to the house)
and the Water Garden (across the road). Most visitors use the main entry
and start in the Walled Garden (Clos Normand). Those able to use the group
entrance should start with the Water Garden and end with the Walled
Garden and house.
    Walled Garden: Smell the pretty scene. Monet cleared this land of pine
trees and laid out symmetrical beds, split down the middle by a “grand
alley” covered with iron trellises of climbing roses. He did his own
landscaping, installing flowerbeds of lilies, irises, and clematis. The arched
arbors leading to the home’s entry form a natural tunnel that guides your
eye down the path—an effect exploited in his Rose Trellis paintings (on
display in Paris at the Marmottan Museum). In his carefree manner, Monet
throws together hollyhocks, daisies, and poppies. The color scheme of each
flowerbed contributes to the look of the whole garden.
              An Impressionist’s Garden
Impressionism was a revolutionary movement and all the rage in
European art in the 1880s. Artists abandoned realism in favor of a
wispy style that captured light, glimmers, feelings, and impressions.
Committed to conveying subtle atmospheric effects, the Impressionists
captured nature as a mosaic of short brushstrokes of different colors
placed side by side, suggesting shimmering light. And there is no
better nature for an Impressionist ready to paint than Monet’s
delightful mix of weeping willows, luminous clouds, delicate bridges,
reflecting ponds...and lush water lilies.
    Water Garden: In the southwest corner of the Walled Garden (near the
group entrance), you’ll find a pedestrian tunnel that leads under the road to
a garden with Monet’s famous pond and lilies. Follow the meandering path
to the Japanese bridge, under weeping willows, over the pond filled with
water lilies, and past countless scenes that leave artists aching for an easel.
Find a bench and stop for a while. Monet landscaped like he painted—he
built an Impressionist pattern of blocks of color. After he planted the
gardens, he painted them, from every angle, at every time of day, in all
kinds of weather. Assisted by his favorite stepdaughter, Blanche (also a
painter, who married Monet’s son Jean, from an earlier marriage), he
worked on several canvases at once, moving with the sun from one to the
next. In a series of canvases, you can watch the sunlight sweep over the
gardens from early dawn to twilight.
    House: End your visit with a wander through Monet’s charming, I-
could-retire-here home, with period furnishings, Japanese prints, old
photos, and rooms filled with copies of his and other artists’ paintings. The
gift shop at the exit is the actual sky-lighted studio where Monet painted his
masterpiece water-lily series (displayed at the Orangerie Museum in Paris).
Many visitors spend more time in this tempting gift shop than in the
gardens themselves.


NEARBY SIGHTS
Village of Giverny
The village is a sight in itself, with flowery lanes home to a few souvenir
shops, art galleries, and cafés. Cars are not allowed to enter the center of the
village.

Museum of Impressionisms (Musée des Impressionnismes)
This bright, modern museum, dedicated to the history of Impressionism and
its legacy, houses temporary exhibits of Impressionist art. Check its website
for current shows or just drop in. Meander through its colorful, picnic-
friendly gardens for more color.
    Cost and Hours: €9, €19 combo-ticket with Monet’s Garden and
House, free first Sun of month; open April-Nov 6 daily 10:00-18:00, Nov 7-
Dec Fri-Sun only, closed Jan-March and for 10 days in mid-July to change
exhibitions; audioguide-€4; to reach the museum, turn left after leaving
Monet’s place and walk 200 yards; +33 2 32 51 94 00, www.mdig.fr.

Claude Monet’s Grave
Monet’s grave is a 15-minute walk from his door. Turn left out of his house
and walk down Rue Claude Monet, pass the Museum of Impressionisms
and the Hôtel Baudy, and find it in the backyard of the white church Monet
attended (Eglise Sainte-Radegonde). Look for flowers, with a cross above.
The inscription says: Here lies our beloved Claude Monet, born 14
November 1840, died 5 December 1926; missed by all.

Vernon Town
If you have extra time at Vernon’s train station, take a five-minute walk into
town and sample the peaceful village. From the station, pass Café de
l’Arrivée on your left, follow the street as it curves left, and keep straight.
You’ll find a smattering of half-timbered Norman homes near Hôtel de Ville
(remember, you’re in Normandy), several good cafés and shops, and the
town’s towering Gothic church.


          Sleeping and Eating in Giverny
Sleeping: $$ Hôtel la Musardière*** is nestled in the village of Giverny
two blocks from Monet’s home (exit right when you leave Monet’s) with 10
comfortable rooms and a fine $$ restaurant serving beautifully presented
dishes in a smart dining room—or better, on the sun-dappled terrace (123
Rue Claude Monet, tel. 02 32 21 03 18, www.lamusardiere.fr,
hotelmusardieregiverny@wanadoo.fr).
   $ Le Clos Fleuri is a family-friendly B&B with three spacious and very
comfortable rooms, each with a king-size bed and a private terrace facing
the grassy garden. The rooms also share handy cooking facilities. It’s a 15-
minute walk from Monet’s place and is run by charming, English-speaking
Danielle (with Australian heritage), who serves up a good included
breakfast (cash only, 5 Rue de la Dîme, +33 2 32 21 36 51, www.giverny-
leclosfleuri.fr, leclosfleuri27@gmail.com).
    Eating: You’ll find various snack places just outside the entrance to
Monet’s home. Your best lunch option is a block to the left at $ La
Capucine’s self-serve restaurant. Eat tasty, cheap soups, salads, and quiches
at a table in the warm interior or the welcoming garden (Wed-Sun 12:00-
18:00, closed Mon-Tue).




    Rose-colored $$ Hôtel Baudy, once a hangout for American
Impressionists, offers an appropriately pretty setting for lunch or dinner.
The décor looks as though it has not changed since painters hung their
brushes here (outdoor tables in front, good-value menus, popular with tour
groups at lunch, daily, 5-minute walk past Museum of Impressionisms at 81
Rue Claude Monet, +33 2 32 21 10 03). Don’t miss a stroll through the
artsy gardens behind the restaurant.
    For finer dining, consider the restaurant at Hôtel la Musardière, listed
earlier.


                      Auvers-sur-Oise
This small town draws Van Gogh pilgrims and those in search of a green
escape from the city. Auvers-sur-Oise (oh-vehr soor wahz) is a peaceful
place on a bend of the lazy Oise River, northwest of Paris. A manageable
day trip by car, it takes patience by train. Here you’ll get an intimate
glimpse into life (and death) during the Impressionist era. Walkers enjoy
stretching their legs between the sights in this countryside setting.




   Auvers was a magnet for artists in the late 1800s. Charles-François
Daubigny, Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, Camille Pissarro, and Paul
Cézanne all adored this rural retreat (they were also unknowns then). But
Auvers is best known as the village where Vincent van Gogh committed
suicide. He moved here from southern France to be near his brother Theo
(who lived in Paris). Vincent had talked his way out of the asylum in St-
Rémy-de-Provence with assurances that he would be under good care from
an understanding doctor and avid painter, Auvers resident Paul Gachet.
Fans of the 2017 movie Loving Vincent, about Van Gogh’s final days, will
find a trip to Auvers-sur-Oise a moving experience. Watching the movie
before you visit makes this trip more meaningful.
    Today, this modest little town opens its doors to visitors with a handful
of sights and walking trails leading to scenes painted by various artists
(some with copies of the paintings posted). Most sights are closed Mondays
(some are also closed Tue) and from November to Easter. Several less-
essential sights are also closed in the morning. Auvers makes a convenient
first or last overnight stop for drivers using Charles de Gaulle airport, as it
avoids traffic hassles (Auvers is about 20 miles from the airport). Allow a
good half-day to appreciate the package of sights offered in little Auvers-
sur-Oise.




GETTING TO AUVERS-SUR-OISE
The TI’s website offers a clear overview of your transportation options in
English (www.tourisme-auverssuroise.fr).
    By Train: Main-line trains direct to Auvers-sur-Oise run on weekends
and holidays from Gare du Nord (one round-trip per day April-mid-Oct, 45
minutes, departs at about 9:35, returns at about 18:30). This is your surest
bet for a stress-free trip, but it leaves you there all day. Because several
sights don’t open until the afternoon, consider arriving later by RER train
(see below) and take the main-line train back. The station in Auvers-sur-
Oise is unmanned on weekends, so use the ticket machines or buy round-
trip tickets in Paris, and confirm the return schedule in advance.




   Frequent RER trains get you there daily but take 75-90 minutes each
way and require a transfer. Take RER/Train-C to Pontoise (2/hour, 1 hour to
Pontoise, catch in Paris at St. Michel, Musée d’Orsay, Invalides, or Pont de
l’Alma stops). Pontoise is the end of the line, where it’s easy to transfer to
Auvers (the route is covered by the Navigo Découverte pass or five-zone
Navigo Easy card). Ask at any RER/Train-C station for the best connection
or check www.ratp.fr for RER lines. Service from Pontoise back to Paris is
frequent, with trains to Gare du Nord, Gare St. Lazare, and points along the
RER/Train-C route.
                      Vincent van Gogh
In the dead of winter in 1888, 35-year-old Vincent van Gogh left big-
city Paris for the town of Arles in Provence, hoping to jump-start his
floundering career and personal life. Coming from the gray skies and
flat lands of the north, Vincent was bowled over by everything
Provençal—the sun, bright colors, rugged landscape, and raw people.
For two years, he painted furiously, creating a new masterpiece every
few days.
    The son of disinterested parents, Vincent never found the social
skills necessary to sustain close friendships. Lonely Vincent—who
dreamed of making Arles a magnet for fellow artists—persuaded Paul
Gauguin to join him there. At first, the two got along well, but within a
few months, their relationship deteriorated. Gauguin left Arles, leaving
Vincent deeply depressed. The local paper reported what happened
next: “At 11:30 p.m., Vincent Vaugogh (sic), painter from Holland,
appeared at the brothel at no. 1, asked for Rachel, and gave her his cut-
off earlobe, saying, ‘Treasure this precious object.’ Then he vanished.”
Vincent woke up the next morning at home with his head wrapped in a
bloody towel and his earlobe missing.
    The bipolar genius (a modern diagnosis) admitted himself to the St.
Paul Monastery and Hospital in St-Rémy-de-Provence in the spring of
1889. He spent a year in the hospital, thriving in the care of nurturing
doctors and nuns. Painting was part of Vincent’s therapy, so they gave
him a studio to work in, and he produced more than 100 paintings.
Alcohol-free and institutionalized, he did some of his wildest work.
With thick, swirling brushstrokes and surreal colors, he made his
placid surroundings throb with restless energy.
    In the spring of 1890, Vincent left St-Rémy and traveled to Auvers-
sur-Oise to enter the care of Dr. Paul Gachet, whom he hoped could
help stabilize his mental condition. Gachet advised the artist to throw
himself into his work as a remedy for his illness, which he did—
Vincent spent the last 70 days of his life in this little town, knocking
out a masterpiece each day.
    On July 27, Vincent shot himself by his easel in the famous Auvers
  wheat field, dying of his injuries two days later.


    To get from Pontoise to Auvers, a 10-minute ride away, you have three
options. Take the train (direction: Creil, hourly, before leaving Auvers’
train station, get return times to Pontoise—posted on signs). Bus #9507
stops right outside the Pontoise train station, and in Auvers stops are below
the TI and below the château (runs hourly, look for the posted schedule—
you’re at Chemin de la Gare in Pontoise, and you want the Marie stop in
Auvers). Or you can go by taxi (around €15; for a bit more money, the
same taxi can pick you up in Auvers for the return; see “Helpful Hints,”
later).
    By Car, Taxi, or Tour: Auvers is about 45 minutes northwest of Paris.
Take the A-15 autoroute to A-115, follow Beauvais and exit at Auvers-sur-
Oise. Allow €100 by taxi one-way. Tour companies combine Auvers-sur-
Oise with Giverny for about €270 per person.


          Orientation to Auvers-sur-Oise
Tourist Information: The TI is well-signed in the small Parc Van Gogh
(from the train station, it’s about a block to the left toward town). The TI
has Wi-Fi and good information on all sights, as well as bus and train
schedules (generally open Tue-Sun 9:30-12:30 & 14:00-18:00, closed Mon
year-round, +33 1 30 36 71 81, www.tourisme-auverssuroise.fr). Pick up
the helpful town map that shows all of the Van Gogh sights. You can also
take advantage of the good WCs behind the TI.
    Helpful Hints: There’s a handy supermarket and bakery on your way
into town from the station. For a taxi in Auvers, call +33 6 05 07 94 20 or
+33 1 30 74 45 45, or in Pontoise +33 1 30 30 45 45.



               Sights in Auvers-sur-Oise
The best way to spend a few hours in Auvers is to wander the village lanes
and nearby paths connecting the sights that interest you. I’ve described the
sights below in the order that works best to visit them. Doing the entire loop
would take 45 minutes with no stops. Orange signs identify sight locations.
• Start by climbing the path behind the TI, then veer right, joining the small
road that leads to the...




Church at Auvers (Notre-Dame d’Auvers)
This small church at the edge of town was built in the 1100s, is beautifully
lit inside, and was made famous by Van Gogh’s paintings (interior open
daily 9:30-19:00).
   In a letter to his sister Wilhelmina, Vincent wrote: “I have a larger
picture of the village church—an effect in which the building appears to be
violet-hued against a sky of simple deep blue color, pure cobalt; the stained-
glass windows appear as ultramarine blotches, the roof is violet and partly
orange. In the foreground some green plants in bloom, and sand with the
pink flow of sunshine in it.”
• From here, follow signs for Tombes de Théo et Vincent up the small street
behind the church and walk about 300 yards to the simple cemetery.

Vincent’s Grave
Vincent and his caring brother are buried side by side against the cemetery’s
upper wall about halfway down (look for the ivy). No one can be sure why
Vincent ended his life at 37, but standing at his grave, you can feel the
weight of the tragedy and only imagine the paintings he might have created.
You can thank Japanese travelers if you spot gray dust on the ivy that
covers Vincent’s and Theo’s graves: Vincent is wildly popular among the
Japanese, some of whom ask to have their ashes spread over his grave.
Vincent lies in a coffin made by the same carpenter who built his picture
frames.
• Leave the cemetery and follow the dirt path that bisects a broad wheat
field, following signs to Château via Sente du Montier, and find...

Wheatfield with Crows
Find the copy of Vincent’s famous painting and stop there. Vincent shot
himself in this field and died two days later in his bedroom at the Auberge
Ravoux (described later). His brother was at his side. Wheatfield with
Crows, painted in this very field in 1890, was one of his very last paintings.




• Continue on to the woods on the far side of the field and drop down to a
street. Turn left when you reach the “T,” and pass...

La Maison-Atelier de Daubigny
This well-preserved home/studio once belonged to Charles-François
Daubigny, who created the artist colony that Auvers became in the 1880s.
   Cost and Hours: €6, Thu-Fri 10:00-12:00 & 14:00-18:30, Sat-Sun
10:30-12:30 & 14:00-18:30, closed Mon-Wed and Nov-March, tel. 01 30 36
60 60.
• Past the Maison-Atelier de Daubigny, veer right at signs to the château.
You’ll soon pass...

Musée de l’Absinthe
This small, one-of-a-kind tribute features the highly alcoholic, herb-based
beverage popular among artists and writers (including Van Gogh) in the late
1800s. Considered dangerously addictive, absinthe was banned in 1915.
Another anise-flavored drink—pastis—took its place; it tasted similar but
was less toxic. Then, in 2011, absinthe was again declared legal in France.
The museum has only minimal English information, but the staff make a
good effort to explain the displays.
    Cost and Hours: €5, Sat-Sun 13:30-18:00, July-Aug likely also Wed-
Fri 13:30-18:00, closed mid-Oct-mid-April, last entry one hour before
closing, bottled absinthe for sale.
• From here it’s a straight, 300-yard shot to...

▲Château d’Auvers
This château has been transformed into a multimedia re-creation of life
during the Impressionist years, using state-of-the-art technology to immerse
visitors into this lively era. The “show” is changed every few years but
always features an immersive experience with impressive displays and
sounds designed to transport you to another time. The château has a fine
café with outdoor seating in the summer.
   Cost and Hours: €12, family rates, not covered by Paris Museum Pass;
Tue-Sun 10:00-18:00, Oct-March until 17:00, closed Mon; +33 1 34 48 48
48, www.chateau-auvers.fr.
• A healthy walk beyond the château, Van Gogh fans can visit the restored
home of Dr. Gachet (well signed), but I’d skip it and be satisfied with the
description below.

Maison du Docteur Gachet
It was at Camille Pissarro’s suggestion that Dr. Gachet agreed to see Van
Gogh, who made an immediate connection with the doctor—“I have found
a friend in Dr. Gachet...and something of a new brother, since we are so
similar both mentally and physically.” In addition to being Vincent’s
personal physician in Auvers, Dr. Gachet was an avid painter and adored
entertaining famous artists such as Cézanne, Monet, Renoir, and Pissarro.
He inherited all of Van Gogh’s works from his time in Auvers (those you
see at the Orsay Museum were donated by Dr. Gachet’s family). Dr. Gachet
is buried at Père Lachaise cemetery in Paris.
    The small home is furnished as it was when Vincent lived in Auvers,
with bits of memorabilia. The “wild” garden has medicinal plants that the
homeopath Dr. Gachet cultivated and used to treat Van Gogh, but there are
no English descriptions.
    Cost and Hours: Free, Wed-Sun 10:30-18:30, closed Mon-Tue and
Nov-March, 78 Rue du Dr. Gachet.
• Follow the main road leading down from the château to return to the TI
and find...

Auberge Ravoux
Vincent lived and died in an attic room of this rustic inn (also called
“Maison de Van Gogh”). His modest room has been re-created to look
exactly as it did during his short time here, though his few furnishings were
burned by church officials shortly after his death (suicide was considered a
sin and not tolerated). Start with the 12-minute slideshow (English subtitles)
and read the large information displays in the courtyard that explain
Vincent’s tragic life. Guides escort groups up the steps to Van Gogh’s room
and give some commentary in English (allow 30 minutes total for this
sight).
    Cost and Hours: €6, Wed-Sun 10:30-18:30, closed Mon-Tue and Nov-
early March.
• Food connoisseurs can enjoy a tasty lunch in the Auberge Ravoux’s
perfectly preserved restaurant (described later). Nearby, you could visit...

Musée Daubigny
This skippable museum houses a small collection of works by Charles-
François Daubigny and other artists who came to work with him. Daubigny
was a big supporter of the Impressionist movement (€5, Tue-Fri 14:00-
17:30, Sat-Sun 10:30-12:30 & 14:00-18:00, closed Mon, Rue de la
Sansonne).
                      Eating in Auvers
The most atmospheric place to eat in Auvers is $$$ Auberge Ravoux,
unchanged (except for its prices) since 1876, when painters would meet
here over a good meal. It’s wise to make a reservation for lunch on
weekends (closed Mon-Tue, on Place de la Mairie, +33 1 30 36 60 60,
www.maisondevangogh.fr).
   Auvers also has grocery stores, cafés, crêperies, restaurants, and
bakeries with sandwiches, all within blocks of the TI.
