Cluny Museum Tour

CLUNY MUSEUM TOUR
Musée National du Moyen Age
Orientation
The Tour Begins
  Roman Bath
  Roman Pillar of the Boatmen
    Early Medieval Artifacts
    Stained Glass
    High Middle Ages
    Stone Heads from Notre-Dame
    Lady and the Unicorn Tapestries
    The Rest of the Cluny
The National Museum of the Middle Ages doesn’t sound quite so boring as
I sink deeper into middle age myself. Aside from the solemn religious art,
there’s some surprisingly lively stuff here.
    Paris emerged on the world stage in the Middle Ages, the time between
ancient Rome and the Renaissance. Europe was awakening from a
thousand-year slumber. Trade was booming, people actually owned chairs,
and the Renaissance was moving in like a warm front from Italy.


                           Orientation
Cost: €12, free first Sun of the month, covered by Museum Pass.
Hours: Tue-Sun 9:30-18:15, first and third Thu of the month until 21:00,
   closed Mon, last entry 45 minutes before closing.
Information: +33 1 53 73 78 00, www.musee-moyenage.fr.
Expect Changes: The museum has been closed for a major renovation but
   should reopen by the time you visit. This tour reflects the collection
   before the museum’s closure, but the highlights should still be on
   display upon its reopening.
Getting There: The museum, a five-minute walk from Ile de la Cité, is a
   block above the intersection of Boulevards St. Germain and St. Michel,
   at 6 Place Paul Painlevé (Mo: Cluny La Sorbonne, St-Michel, or Odéon;
   bus #63 from Rue Cler and #86 or #87 from the Marais).
Length of This Tour: You can see the highlights—the Roman Bath and the
   Lady and the Unicorn tapestries—in less than an hour, but definitely
   allow browsing time for this underrated museum.
Baggage Check: Required and free for bags larger than a purse.
Cuisine Art: Just a few blocks away, the charming Place de la Sorbonne
   has several good cafés (see here; walk up Boulevard St. Michel toward
   the Panthéon). The peaceful square facing the museum entry has
   flowers, children playing, and plenty of picnic benches. To eat or drink
   with a smashing view of the Panthéon, walk a few blocks farther and
   find Le Soufflot (16 Rue Soufflot).


                       The Tour Begins
This chapter is less a room-by-room tour and more a chronological
overview of the highlights.
• First up is the biggest, oldest, and most venerable part of the museum—
the 2,000-year-old...

Roman Bath
This echoing cavern was a Roman frigidarium. Pretty cool. The museum is
located on the site of a Roman bathhouse, which was in the center of town
during the Roman years. The sunken area you see in the alcove was exactly
what it looks like: a swimming pool. After hot baths and exercise in
adjoining rooms, ordinary Romans would take a cold dip there, then relax
cheek to cheek with such notables as Emperor Julian the Apostate (see his
statue), who lived next door. As the empire decayed in the fourth century,
Julian avoided the corrupt city of Rome and made Paris a northern power
base.
    The 40-foot-high ceiling is the largest surviving Roman vault in France,
and it took the French another 1,000 years to improve on that crisscross-
arch technology. The sheer size of this room—constructed in AD 200, when
Rome was at its peak—gives an idea of the epic scale on which the Romans
built. It inspired Europeans to greatness during the less civilized Middle
Ages.
• Among the ruins that littered medieval Paris after the fall of Rome was
the...

Roman Pillar of the Boatmen
Four fragments remain of the Pillar of the Boatmen (Le Pilier des Nautes),
which decorated the ancient Roman temple to Jupiter that stood where
Notre-Dame is today. These fragments, probably the oldest man-made
objects you’ll see from Paris, once fit together to support a 20-foot-high
altar to the king of the gods in the Roman temple. Take a closer look at
three of these:
    One fragment (the pierre de la dédicace, or dedication stone) is
inscribed “TIB. CAESARE,” announcing that the altar was built under
Emperor Tiberius (AD 14-37; he reigned during the time of Jesus Christ)
and was paid for by the Parisian boatmen’s union (see them holding their
shields).
    Another fragment (the Pierre aux quatre divinités) depicts the horned
Celtic god Cernunnos, who is also known as the Stag Lord and god of the
hunt. The eclectic Romans allowed this local “druid” god to support the
shrine of Jupiter in league with their own Vulcan, who hammers, and Castor
and Pollux, who pet their horses.
   The fragment labeled Bloc dit “de Jupiter” shows Jupiter in his royal
robes leaning on a spear, as well as the god Vulcan hammering in his fiery
forge.
• The museum leads you from the fall of Rome (AD 476) to France’s next
chapter, beginning with the reign of the Frankish king Clovis I, the father of
modern France.

Early Medieval Artifacts
The museum’s exquisite collection of objects from c. 500-1000 makes it
clear that Roman art and learning lived on even after the empire’s fall.
Columns and capitals evoke the Roman-esque grandeur of early Christian
churches. Statues of the Virgin Mary, decorative flourishes from church
buildings, and exquisitely carved miniature altarpieces in ivory reveal
Roman style and artistic techniques.
• Throughout your visit, you’ll see stunning examples of...




Stained Glass
At a time when life could be harsh and brutal, stained glass gave people a
glimpse of the glories of heaven. The panels displayed here once adorned
some of Paris’ most venerable churches, such as St. Denis (the world’s first
truly Gothic church) and the glorious Sainte-Chapelle. Some are rare 800-
year-old originals that were removed during renovations and replaced. They
give us a window into the magical, supernatural, miraculous—and often
violent—medieval mind.
High Middle Ages
Around the year 1200, Parisians were emerging from the Dark Ages.
They’d survived their Y1K crisis, trade was booming, a university was
founded (today’s Sorbonne), and Paris was becoming a major European
capital. The High Middle Ages produced art that was less about grim
crucifixions and more a celebration of the beauty of the world. You’ll see
surprisingly joyful tapestries, golden altarpieces, statues with a budding
realism, and inviting Madonnas with smiles and sashaying hips. One ivory
box (c. 1300), finely carved from an elephant tusk, gives a look at the age
of courtly love, with ladies shooting flowers as arrows and a tournament
shown as a battle for love.

Stone Heads from Notre-Dame
The Cluny has some treasured artifacts from the High Middle Ages’ most
famous cathedral—Notre-Dame. Twenty-one stone heads (sculpted 1220-
1230), depicting the biblical kings of Judah, once sat atop statues decorating
the front of the cathedral. In 1793 an angry mob of revolutionaries,
mistaking the kings of Judah for the kings of France, abused and
decapitated the statues. (Today’s heads on the Notre-Dame statues are
reconstructions.) Someone gathered up the heads and buried them in his
backyard near the present-day Opéra Garnier. There they slept for two
centuries, unknown and noseless, until 1977, when someone accidentally
unearthed them and brought them to an astounded world. Their stoic
expressions accept what fate, time, and liberals have done to them.




   A statue of Adam is also from Notre-Dame. It will be another 200 years
before naked Adam, scrawny and flaccid, can step out from behind that
bush.
• As Europeans rediscovered the beauty of the world around them, a new
sensuality crept into their artwork. A marvelous celebration of the senses—
and the high point of the Cluny’s collection—is the late medieval
masterpiece known as the...
Lady and the Unicorn Tapestries
Designed by an unknown (but probably French) artist before 1500, these six
tapestries were woven in Belgium from wool and silk. Loaded with
symbols—some serious, some playful—they have been interpreted in many
ways, but, in short, the series deals with each of the five senses.
    In medieval lore, unicorns were enigmatic, solitary creatures, so wild
that only virgins could entice and tame them. In secular society, they
symbolized how a feral man was drawn to his lady love. Religiously, the
unicorn was a symbol of Christ—radiant, pure, and somewhat remote—
who is made accessible to humankind by the Virgin Mary. These tapestries
likely draw inspiration from all these traditions.




• Moving clockwise around the room...
    Touch: This is the most basic and dangerous of the senses. The scene is
set in the wild: monkeys, a leopard, and exotic birds. A blond lady “strokes
the unicorn’s horn”—if you know what I mean—and the lion gets the
double entendre. Medieval Europeans were exploring the wonders of love
and the pleasures of sex.
    Taste: The lady takes candy from a servant’s dish to feed it to her
parakeet. A unicorn—a species extinct since the Age of Reason—and a lion
look on. At the lady’s feet, a monkey also tastes something, while the little
white dog behind her wishes he had some. This was the dawn of the Age of
Discovery, when overseas explorers spiced up Europe’s bland gruel with
new fruits, herbs, and spices.
    The lion (symbol of knighthood?) and unicorn (symbol of “bourgeois
nobility,” purity, or fertility?) wave flags with the coat of arms of the family
that commissioned the tapestries—three silver crescents in a band of blue.
    Smell: The lady picks flowers and weaves them into a sweet-smelling
wreath. On a bench behind, the monkey apes her. The flowers, trees, and
animals are exotic and varied. Each detail is exquisite alone, but if you step
back they blend together into pleasing patterns.
    Hearing: Wearing a stunning dress, the lady plays sweet music on an
organ, which soothes the savage beasts around her. The pattern and folds of
the tablecloth are lovely. Humans and their fellow creatures (cats, dogs, and
rabbits) live in harmony in an enchanted blue garden filled with flowers, all
set in a red background.
    Sight: The unicorn cuddles up and looks at himself in the lady’s mirror,
pleased with what he sees. The lion turns away and snickers. As the
Renaissance dawns, vanity is a less than deadly sin.
    Admire the great artistic skill in some of the detail work, such as the
necklace and the patterns in the lady’s dress. This tapestry had quality
control in all its stages: the drawing of the scene, its enlargement and
transfer to a cartoon, and the weaving. Still, the design itself is crude by
Renaissance 3-D standards. The fox and rabbits, supposedly in the distance,
simply float overhead, as big as the animals at the lady’s feet.
    Tapestry #6: The most talked-about tapestry gets its name from the
words on our lady’s tent: A Mon Seul Désir (To My Sole Desire). What is
her only desire? Is it jewelry, as she grabs a necklace from the jewel box?
