Day Trip: More Grand Châteaux (Vaux-le-Vicomte, Fontainebleau, Chantilly)

MORE GRAND CHATEAUX
Vaux-le-Vicomte • Fontainebleau • Chantilly
Vaux-le-Vicomte
  GETTING THERE
  ORIENTATION TO VAUX-LE-VICOMTE
  BACKGROUND
   VISITING THE CHATEAU
 Fontainebleau
   GETTING THERE
   ORIENTATION TO FONTAINEBLEAU
   VISITING THE CHATEAU
   TOWN OF FONTAINEBLEAU
 Chantilly
   GETTING THERE
   ORIENTATION TO CHANTILLY
   VISITING THE CHATEAU
   TOWN OF CHANTILLY
The region around Paris (called the Ile de France) is studded with
sumptuous palaces. The city’s booming elite class made this the heartland
of European château-building in the 16th and 17th centuries. Most of these
châteaux were lavish hunting lodges—getaways from the big city. The only
things they defended were aristocratic egos.
   If you’re planning to visit just one palace in all of Europe, it should be
Versailles (see previous chapter). But unlike heavily touristed Versailles, the
three châteaux recommended here are quiet (at least on weekdays), letting
you enjoy their original pastoral ambience. Consider visiting at least one;
they are each very different.

▲▲▲Vaux-le-Vicomte
For sheer beauty and intimacy (open daily, closed Nov-March); see next
page.

▲▲Fontainebleau
For its history, fine interior, and pleasant city (closed Tue, covered by Paris
Museum Pass); see here.

▲Chantilly
For its beautiful setting and fine collection of paintings (open daily, closed
Tue Nov-March, covered by Paris Museum Pass); see here.

Transit Passes: Travelers with a Navigo Découverte Pass can use it to
travel to Fontainebleau and Vaux-le-Vicomte, but not to Chantilly. Without
this pass, day-trippers to Vaux-le-Vicomte or Fontainebleau should
purchase a Navigo Easy five-zone day pass, which covers a day of travel in
the greater Paris region (€18, buy at any Métro station). This single-day
pass covers Métro rides to and from the train station and round-trip train
fare (for Fontainebleau, it also includes the bus to and from the château),
saving you about €9 total (see here for more on these passes).
    Travelers heading to Chantilly must buy train tickets for this trip (see
later in this chapter).


                      Vaux-le-Vicomte
Versailles may be most travelers’ first choice for its sheer historic
importance, but Vaux-le-Vicomte (voh luh vee-komt) is just flat-out
ravishing. With a harmony of architecture, interior decor, and garden design
that you won’t find anywhere else, it gets my vote for one of the most
beautiful châteaux in all of France.
   Compared with Versailles, it’s also more intimate, better furnished, and
comes with a fraction of the crowds. Though getting to Vaux-le-Vicomte
requires more effort, it’s an absolute joy to tour. Located in a huge forest,
with magnificent gardens and no urban sprawl in sight, Vaux-le-Vicomte
gives me more than a twinge of palace envy.


GETTING THERE
By Train via Verneuil-l’Etang: Ideally, leave Paris from Gare de l’Est
before 12:00, traveling to Verneuil-l’Etang (on Transilien line P, direction:
Provins). Buying a Navigo Découverte or Easy card saves time and money
(explained earlier, under “Transit Passes”). Otherwise, buy a round-trip
ticket at the white ticket machines. Trains generally depart Paris from tracks
13-22 (€18 round-trip, hourly at :46 past the hour, 30 minutes; return trains
depart Verneuil-l’Etang’s track 2 at :32 past the hour). A train schedule is
available on the château’s website.
    Outside the station at Verneuil-l’Etang, a Châteaubus shuttle, timed to
train arrivals, takes you to Vaux-le-Vicomte (€10 round-trip, cash only, pay
driver, daily April-early Nov plus Sat evenings May-Sept). Return shuttles
leave the château at 12:05, 13:05, 15:05, and 18:05, with additional
Saturday departures at 16:05, 19:05, and 22:05. A 23:30 shuttle (€25) takes
you all the way back to Paris’ Gare de Lyon after candlelit events.
    By Train via Melun: Using a Navigo pass you can take RER/Train-D to
Melun from Gare de Lyon, Gare du Nord, or Châtelet-Les Halles
(direction: Melun, 3/hour, 50 minutes). Faster Banlieue/Transilien R trains
to Melun leave from Gare de Lyon (nearly hourly, 30 minutes; direction:
Montereau, Montargis, or Laroche-Migennes; Melun is the first stop). The
last return train from Melun to Paris departs at about 23:45.


             Combining Vaux-le-Vicomte and
                    Fontainebleau
  These two châteaux can be combined into a full, though manageable,
  day trip by car, taxi, excursion bus, or train from Paris (except on Tue,
  when Fontainebleau is closed). Fontainebleau is 12 minutes by train
  from Melun or a 25-minute drive from Vaux-le-Vicomte (about €50 by
  taxi). Without a car, the City Vision excursion is the most economical
  solution, as you’d spend just as much visiting both châteaux by train
  and taxi. If you want to sleep out here, check out my recommended
  hotels in Fontainebleau (listed on here).


    From Melun’s scruffy train station, taxis make the 15-minute drive to
Vaux-le-Vicomte (about €22 one-way Mon-Sat, €30 evenings and Sun, taxi
+33 1 64 52 51 50). Ask a staffer at the château to call a cab for your return,
or schedule a pickup time with your driver. Seek others with whom you can
split the fare.
    By Excursion Bus: The City Vision tour company offers a handy
excursion bus that combines Vaux-le-Vicomte and Fontainebleau, making
this day trip a breeze (from €105, includes châteaux entry; runs April-Oct a
few days a week, check website, +33 1 44 55 60 00,
www.pariscityvision.com).
   By Car: From Paris, take the A-6 autoroute toward Lyon, then follow
signs to Melun. In Melun, follow signs to Meaux, then Vaux-le-Vicomte.


ORIENTATION TO VAUX-LE-VICOMTE
Cost: €17—smart to book ahead, €11 for kids 17 and under, €20 for
   candlelit visits (described below); ticket includes entire château,
   gardens, carriage museum, and audioguide; family deals available, not
   covered by Paris Museum Pass.
Hours: Daily 11:00-19:00 except on candlelit visit days (described below),
   when the château opens at 14:00 and closes at 24:00 (Sat in mid-May-
   Sept plus Fri in July-Aug); last entry 1.5 hours before closing.
      The château is generally closed in winter (Nov-March) but often
   reopens, with special decorations, during the holidays (€20, weekends
   only Dec-early Jan 11:00-18:30).
Information: +33 1 64 14 41 90, www.vaux-le-vicomte.com.
Tours: The excellent audioguide is included. Guided tours are also
   available, though most are in French only (check website).
Services: Parking is easy and free. The gift shop has fine palace
   guidebooks. Outside the shop are a WC and the $ L’Ecureuil (“The
   Squirrel”) cafeteria, with a limited but reasonably priced selection (daily
   10:00-18:00, until 22:30 during candlelit visits). The leafy $$$ Les
   Charmilles restaurant serves dinner only during candlelit visits (see
   next). Picnics are welcome in designated areas before you enter the
   grounds or on the very far end of the gardens. A variety of additional
   activities is possible for a price, including period costume rentals.
Candlelit Visits: On Fridays and Saturdays in high season, the château
   opens and closes later for candlelit visits (see “Hours,” above). Two
   thousand candles illuminate the palace, and piped-in classical music and
   impressive fountains provide ambience. These visites aux chandelles re-
   create a party thrown in Louis XIV’s honor in 1661. Note that the
   gardens are hard to see by candlelight (although it doesn’t get truly dark
   until around 22:00 from late May through July). Buses provide service
   to and from Verneuil-l’Etang’s train station for these events (see
   “Getting There,” earlier). Fancy dinners are available in the Les
   Charmilles garden restaurant (€65 menus, reservations required—book
   online).


BACKGROUND
When Vaux-le-Vicomte and Versailles were built, France was slowly
heading toward a revolution. Of its 18 million people, 200,000 were clergy
(“those who pray”), 150,000 were nobles (those who fight or “carry a
sword”), and the rest (17.6 million) were the Third Estate (“those who
work”). Of course, there was no democracy—just one king and his
ministers who ran the show. Somewhat like modern bankers and financiers,
these people controlled the workings of the economy, amassing almost
unfathomable wealth.




    One of them was Nicolas Fouquet, France’s finance minister during the
reign of Louis XIV, in the 17th century. Vaux-le-Vicomte was his home. A
brilliant collaboration between three masters—architect Louis Le Vau, artist
Charles Le Brun, and landscape designer André Le Nôtre (who pioneered
the French formal garden)—this château was the architectural inspiration
for Versailles and set the standard for European palaces to come. In fact,
after several visits to the château during its construction, a very young
Louis XIV found himself impressed that one man could create such
magnificence. He was also curious how one man (other than himself) could
pay for it. So Louis had the overly ambitious Fouquet arrested, hired his
talented trio, and proceeded to have his bigger and costlier (but not
necessarily more splendid) palace of Versailles built.
    Monsieur Fouquet’s arrest features prominently in the third Musketeer
book by Alexandre Dumas (and at least two versions of The Man in the Iron
Mask were filmed here). From the prison cell where he died, Fouquet wrote
longingly of his lost home, “This was the estate I regarded as my principal
seat and where I intended to leave some traces of the status I had enjoyed.”
    If the château feels a bit quirky in the way it’s run today, remember it’s
not national property. It’s private. The château has been in the same family
for five generations and was opened to the public in 1968 by Patrice de
Vogüé, who still lives on the grounds (but not in the château).


VISITING THE CHATEAU
Start your tour in the stables, at the fine Museum of Carriages (Musée des
Equipages), where you can gallop through two long halls lined with elegant
carriages from a time when horses were a big part of daily life. The exhibit
begins with a reminder that when the château was built, France had 2.5
million horses (more than 100 horses per thousand people). Today France
has 300,000 horses (just five per thousand people). While these stables are
worth a look, there is no English info other than the entrance and exit signs.
   Next, stroll like a wide-eyed peasant across the stone bridge that spans
the ornamental moat facing the palace. Take some time to survey the grand
design and admire the symmetry and elegance of the grounds, the
outbuildings, and the palace itself. The gardens stretch far beyond the
palace, but their main axis runs straight through the center of the château.
   Enter the palace (pick up the included audioguide here). As you wander
through Fouquet’s dream home, you’ll understand Louis XIV’s envy.
Versailles was a simple hunting lodge when this was built. Most of the
paintings and furniture you’ll see here are not original—Louis confiscated
what he liked for Versailles.
    The one-way route first takes you through lavish rooms, then gives you
the option of climbing upstairs to a simple attic for an exhibition on
carpentry and a peek at the wood structure of the building. Next you can
climb 80 steps between the inner and outer domes (claustrophobic for
some) to a small terrace at the very top, where you can look out to the
magnificent grounds—the first French formal gardens (€3, pay at château
entry, kids must be taller than four feet, five inches).
    Continue through the last rooms on the tour route—these are among the
best and are explained with concise histories on the walls. Next, make your
way to the lower levels of the château to see where the servants and cooks
shared their meals. You’ll see the servants’ dining room and the castle’s
kitchen, then pass by a cell re-creating the imprisonment of the “Man with
the Iron Mask” from the film for which the château was used as the
backdrop.
    Exit and stand on the palace’s back steps to survey André Le Nôtre’s
first claim to fame. This garden was the cutting edge of sculpted French
gardens. The designer integrated ponds, shrubbery, and trees in a style that
would be copied in palaces all over Europe. Consider the long 30-minute
walk (one-way) to the viewpoint atop the grassy hill far in the distance.
Rentable golf carts are worth the fee to make the trip easier (€20/45
minutes, 4 passengers maximum, ID and deposit required).


                        Fontainebleau
When it comes to showing the sweep of French history, the Château of
Fontainebleau is unrivaled among French palaces. But don’t expect
Versailles-like unity here. It’s a gangly and confusing series of wings that
has grown with centuries of kings. Still, rooms are lavishly furnished and
well explained in English.
    Its core was built by François I in 1528 over medieval foundations.
While Vaux-le-Vicomte and Versailles are French-designed, Fontainebleau
was built a century earlier by an Italian. Inspired by his travels through
Renaissance Italy, François I hired Italian artists to build his palaces. He
even encouraged one artist—Leonardo da Vinci—to abandon his native
Italy and settle in France for the last three years of his life.
    It seems every king, queen, and emperor since has loved this place—
Louis XIII was born here, Louis XV got married here, and Napoleon III
was baptized here. And many years later, General George Patton set up
headquarters here on his way to Berlin.
    Above all, Fontainebleau has more Napoleon Bonaparte connections
than any other palace in France. It was here that the pope met Napoleon
before the general’s 1804 coronation as emperor. And it was from the
château’s famous horseshoe-shaped staircase that Napoleon gave his
stirring abdication speech, trading his rule of France for exile to Elba in
1814.
    Tourist Information: Fontainebleau’s TI is located in the city center in
the pedestrian-only Place de la République. It has hiking and biking maps,
information on where to rent bikes fit for the forest trails, and posted
train/bus schedules (Mon-Sat 10:00-18:00, Sun 10:00-13:00 & 14:00-17:30,
Nov-March closed Sun afternoon, 4 Place de la République, +33 1 60 74 99
99, www.fontainebleau-tourisme.com).


GETTING THERE
By Train: For a day trip to Fontainebleau, use a Navigo Découverte or
Easy card)—see details at the start of this chapter.
    From Gare de Lyon, catch a train to Fontainebleau-Avon station (nearly
hourly, 45 minutes, direction: Montereau, Montargis, or Laroche-
Migennes). Trains leave from the Grandes Lignes tracks, typically in Hall 1,
but finding the right train can be tricky in huge Gare de Lyon. Arrive at
your track at least 20 minutes early to pass ticket control (your ticket or
reservation will be scanned). Check return times before leaving Paris, as
there can be big gaps.
    From Fontainebleau-Avon station, take a bus or taxi to reach the
château. Bus line 1 (direction: Les Lilas/Château) leaves from the bus stall
marked #1-Château and makes the 20-minute trip to the Château stop
(4/hour, €2 if purchased on board, Paris Métro passes valid, included with
Navigo Découverte pass—validate onboard, fewer buses on Sun). To return
to the station, board bus #1 (direction: Avon Gare). Confirm when you
board the bus by asking, “Bonjour, ce bus va à la gare?” (seh bews vah ah
lah gar?).
    A taxi from the train station to the château costs under €10 and is worth
the convenience (taxis are scarce on Sun and after 19:00, taxi +33 6 07 30
13 09).
    By Car: Follow signs to Centre, then Château. Several lots are close by,
including Parking du Château next to the Hôtel Londres and Parking du
Marché near the TI. To reach Vaux-le-Vicomte from Fontainebleau (about
20 minutes), follow signs to Melun.


ORIENTATION TO FONTAINEBLEAU
Cost: €13, free for kids 17 and under, free first Sun of the month except
   July-Aug, €9 last hour of the day, covered by Paris Museum Pass. It’s
   smart to buy a timed-entry ticket online in advance in high season. If
   you don’t have an eticket or Museum Pass and there’s a line, try the
   ticket machine in the main entrance, just past security (US credit cards
   should work).
Hours: Wed-Mon 9:30-18:00, Oct-March until 17:00, closed Tue year-
   round, last entry 45 minutes before closing. The ballroom often closes
   one hour before château, and the Papal Apartment is sometimes closed
   11:30-14:30.
Information: +33 1 60 71 50 70, www.chateaudefontainebleau.fr [URL
   inactive].
Tours: The worthwhile videoguide costs €4.
Services: Free lockers are available to store your bags.


VISITING THE CHATEAU
The château’s complex floor plan can seem overwhelming, but visitors
follow a one-way route when touring the place—don’t struggle to
understand the overall design. Find the entry (inside the main gate on the
right), and follow along through the Napoleon I Museum, special exhibit,
and royal apartments.
    The Napoleon I Museum is fascinating. The first room to the left
features grand portraits of Emperor Napoleon and his first wife, Empress
Josephine (painted by Gérard after their coronation). Other rooms—each
drenched in the Empire style—are dedicated to Napoleon at war (with his
battle coat, tent, and camp gear); his second wife, Empress Marie Louise
(whom he married for her Habsburg heritage, which Napoleon hoped would
color his Corsican blood blue); and to their son, the “King of Rome,”
Napoleon II (who lived in exile after his dad’s defeat and died of
tuberculosis at 21).
    The hallway is lined with busts and portraits of the sprawling imperial
family Napoleon created—relatives he put on various thrones across his
empire. Looking at the final painting, which depicts Napoleon with symbols
of the legal system he gave France, the “Code Napoléon,” it’s fascinating to
consider the mix of idealism, charisma, and megalomania of this leader.
This revolutionary hero came out of a movement that killed off the Old
Regime—only to create a new Old Regime.
    After a swing through the portrait gallery, you’ll enter the royal
apartments. The highlights are many. The Papal Apartment was renovated
by Napoleon to house Pope Pius VII. The stunning Renaissance hall of
François I, which dates from 1528, inspired other royal galleries, including
the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles. The opulent ballroom (salle de bal) comes
with piped-in music and has garden views that evoke royal fêtes.
Napoleon’s throne room is the only French salle du trône that survives with
its original furniture. You’ll also see the emperor’s bathroom, bed, and very
important-looking desk.




   The palace is slathered in royal and imperial symbolism, and its walls
are hung with exquisite tapestries. As you walk its halls, track the artistic
shift in style, from Renaissance to Rococo—whose whimsy infuriated the
revolutionary mobs—to the more sober, postrevolutionary Neoclassical.
   After touring the palace, the gardens—designed in the 17th century by
landscape architect André Le Nôtre—are worth a stroll.


TOWN OF FONTAINEBLEAU
The town itself has a helpful TI (described earlier), a few hotels, and lots of
eating options. The English bookstore ReelBooks, at 9 Rue de Ferrare, has
a good collection of new, used, and children’s books. If you stop in, say hi
to Sue (Tue-Sat 11:00-19:00, open some Sun, closed Mon, +33 1 64 22 85
85).
   Sleeping: $$$ Hôtel de Londres*** is run by avid golfer Philippe, who
rents 16 immaculate rooms, some with views of the château, all with air-
conditioning. He also loans out free golf clubs—one of France’s most
famous golf courses is close by (no elevator, 1 Place du Général de Gaulle,
+33 1 64 22 20 21, www.hoteldelondres.com, hdelondres1850@aol.com).
   $$ Hôtel Ibis Château de Fontainebleau,** a five-minute walk from
the château, is central, clean, and easy (18 Rue Ferrare, +33 1 64 23 45 25,
www.ibishotel.com, h1028@accor.com).
   Eating: Scads of restaurants, and shops perfect for picking up picnic
fare, are in the town center. To reach the center, turn right out of the château
courtyard and walk down Rue Denecourt. An appealing collection of
pedestrian lanes begins after Place Napoléon Bonaparte. Rue des Sablons is
a market street bustling with cheese shops, bakeries, fruit stands, and
butchers roasting chickens. Rue Montebello is restaurant row; you’ll find
quieter places along the lanes off Rue de la Corne.
   $$ Le Bistrot, a top option with tasty, traditional cooking in a cozy
atmosphere, has a loyal local clientele and friendly staff (open daily, lunch
only on Sun, 9 Rue Montebello, +33 1 64 22 87 84).
   $ Le Ferrare makes a decent lunch spot for working locals, with good
prices and classic fare (closed Sun, 23 Rue de France, +33 1 60 72 37 04).
   $$ Le Grand Café sits prettily on the main square in front of the garden
entrance to the château, serving convenient brasserie dishes (daily, 33 Place
Napoléon Bonaparte, +33 1 64 22 20 32).


                              Chantilly
Chantilly (shahn-tee-yee), 30 minutes north of Paris, floats serenely on a
reflecting pond. This extravagant hunting palace delivers a peaceful château
setting, great art, and formal (read: no flowers) French gardens, but you
won’t get a feel for authentic château life here. The rooms are 19th-century
re-creations, as the place was pretty much razed during the Revolution. And
while the famous cream’s invention is often attributed to this château, the
sweet white stuff predates the palace by a long shot (though it gained a
certain status in the 17th century thanks to the château’s chef).




   Tourist Information: The TI is located in Chantilly’s town center, a few
blocks before the château-like stables (Grandes Ecuries) when coming from
the train station (Wed-Sat 9:30-12:30 & 14:00-17:30, Sun until 17:00,
closed Mon-Tue, 73 Rue du Connétable, +33 3 44 67 37 37, www.chantilly-
tourisme.com).


GETTING THERE
Taking a train to Chantilly is a breeze, but the last 1.5 miles from the station
to the château is tricky unless you spring for a cab (wise idea at least one
way) or enjoy a good walk. Leave from Paris’ Gare du Nord for Chantilly-
Gouvieux (on the Creil and Compiègne lines, Grandes Lignes). RER/Train-
D serves Chantilly, but service is twice as fast on the Grandes Lignes main
lines and the same price. Main line trains and RER trains each run about
every 1.5 hours (check schedules at http://reiseauskunft.bahn.de—TER is
the faster train). You can also ask at the Gare du Nord information desk for
the next departure (fewer on weekends, 25 minutes by TER train, 50
minutes by RER/Train-D, €9 one-way).
    Upon arrival in Chantilly, confirm return times to Paris as there are
service gaps in the afternoon.
    Getting from the Station to the Château: It’s a level, easy-to-follow,
30-minute walk to the château (remember that you’ll also be walking a lot
once there). Walk straight out of the train station and cross the big road that
separates the town from the woods, turn left, and follow Château signs. The
first grand building you see after about 20 minutes is not the château but the
elaborate stables (the château gate is another five minutes on foot). To
return to the station on foot, follow the sign from the horse stables and walk
the broad path with the racetrack off to your left. You’ll enter the main drag
in Chantilly where you’ll turn left (and find cafés, etc.) to the station. Don’t
hesitate to ask, “La gare?”
    The no-brainer station-to-château trip is by taxi (€10 one-way, Central
Taxis, +33 9 74 56 53 81, www.central-taxis-senlis.com; minivans available
if you call ahead). The ticket office at the château will call a cab for your
return.
    The free city DUC bus runs infrequently (75 yards to the left as you
leave the train station) to the château, and usually is not well timed with
train arrivals (no buses on Sun). It’s easier to return to the station by bus;
the schedule is posted at the stop across from the château entry (check
return times before you enter the château).


ORIENTATION TO CHANTILLY
Cost: The basic Domaine ticket is €17 (€13.50 for kids ages 7-17, kids
   under 7 free), covered by Paris Museum Pass. The basic ticket covers
   the château, gardens, horse museum (Musée du Cheval), stables
   (Grandes Ecuries), and dressage horse demonstration (when available).
   To visit the gardens only, buy the Billet Parc (€8). Or for €30, see it all
   (including Spectacle Equestre horse show; see below).
Hours: Daily 10:00-18:00, Nov-March Wed-Mon 10:30-17:00, closed Tue;
   last entry one hour before closing.
Information: +33 3 44 27 31 80, www.domainedechantilly.com.
Tours: A free official app in English is available.
WCs: You’ll find WCs at the horse stables and at the entry to the château.
Horse Shows: Horse enthusiasts can buy a €22 ticket for just the horse
   museum, stables, dressage demonstration (check website for times), and
   the fancy Spectacle Equestre horse show. These well-choreographed,
   one-hour performances take place mid-April-June and mid-Sept-Oct on
   Thu and Sun at 14:30 (show dates and times on website).


VISITING THE CHATEAU
The château dates from the 1500s and, like so many in the Loire Valley, its
aristocratic history is tied to France’s most popular sport at the time,
hunting. That explains the focus on horses.
    Chantilly has a turbulent history. Because of the social upheaval in
France during the Revolution of 1848, the château’s owner, Prince de
Condé, fled to England. Twenty years later, when blue blood was safe again
in France, he returned to his château with a fabulous collection of art (800
paintings, including three Raphaels) and priceless books. He turned his
palace into the museum you see today and willed it to France on the
condition that it would be maintained as he left it and the collections would
never be loaned to any other museum.
    Lacking the grandiose interiors of other châteaux, Chantilly lays its
claim to fame with its art collection. The château was destroyed during the
French Revolution—today’s palace is a fanciful 19th-century-style
reconstruction. The château that you can tour today is divided into three
parts: apartments, art gallery, and library.
    The château’s lovely waterfront setting is a highlight, though its
remarkable art collection is the main draw. Start with the main gallery,
through the lavish dining room immediately to the right as you enter the
château. The art is scattered among many smaller rooms that branch off the
main gallery (tour it counterclockwise). Read the handheld translations and
wall-posted explanations. Gallery highlights include paintings by Raphael,
Poussin, Ingres, Van Dyck, Géricault, and Delacroix (Raphael’s tiny works
are in the Santuario room out the left side of the main gallery).
    Tour the library and other gold-leafed rooms after the art galleries, each
well described in English. Of the 13,000 books in the prince’s library, the
most exquisite is the brilliantly illuminated Book of Hours by Jean Fouquet
(c. 1460). You’ll exit from the lower level through the book shop and
graphite art collection (good Delacroix works here).
    Gardens: Immediately behind the château, you’ll see geometric and
austere gardens. Find the water ponds behind the château and walk down to
them. Turn right along the canal following signs for 10 minutes to le
Hameau, where you’ll find a sweet little garden café (limited menu features
pricey desserts served with real Chantilly cream, open April-Oct). This little
hamlet of three half-timbered, thatched-roofed homes was the prototype for
the more famous hameau at Versailles. While the homes are peasant-simple
on the outside, they are lavishly decorated within: The prince had certain
needs when he played peasant.




   Stables: The prince believed he’d be reincarnated as a horse, so he built
an opulent horse château—now a museum/training center (it’s the huge
building to the right as you look out from the château—allow five minutes
to walk there from the château; those walking from the station will pass it
on the way). I imagine that such a sumptuous structure devoted solely to
horses did not go over well with locals in prerevolutionary France.
