Père Lachaise Cemetery Tour

PERE LACHAISE CEMETERY TOUR
Cimetière du Père Lachaise
Orientation
  OVERVIEW
The Tour Begins
   1 Columbarium/Crematorium
     2 Oscar Wilde (1854-1900)
    Map: Père Lachaise Cemetery Tour
    3 Gertrude Stein (1874-1946)

    4 Mur des Fédérés

    5 Edith Piaf (1915-1963)

    6 Bernard Verlhac (pseudonym Tignous, 1957-2015)

    7 Molière (1622-1673)

    8 Jim Morrison (1943-1971)

    9 Frédéric Chopin (1810-1849)

    10 Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann (1809-1891) / Famille

    Haussmann
    11 Gioacchino Rossini (1792-1868)

    12 Colette (1873-1954)

    Thank God You Can Leave
Enclosed by a massive wall and lined with 5,000 trees, the peaceful, car-
free lanes and dirt paths of Père Lachaise cemetery encourage parklike
meandering. Named for Father (Père) La Chaise, whose job was listening to
Louis XIV’s sins, the cemetery is relatively new, having opened in 1804 to
accommodate Paris’ expansion. Today, this 100-acre city of the dead (pop.
70,000) still accepts new residents, but real estate prices are sky high (a 21-
square-foot plot costs more than €14,000). Père Lachaise has become a kind
of national cemetery—like a Westminster Abbey of honored dead. French
people come here to remember their history, mourn over national tragedies,
and find inspiration from the past.
   This walk takes you on a one-way tour through the cemetery. Start from
the convenient Métro/bus stops at Place Gambetta, connect a handful of
graves from some of this necropolis’ best-known residents, and take a last
bow at either the Père Lachaise or Philippe Auguste Métro stops, or a
nearby bus #69 stop.


                            Orientation
Cost: Free.
Hours: Mon-Fri 8:00-18:00, Sat from 8:30, Sun from 9:00, closes at 17:30
   in winter.
Getting There: Take bus #69 eastbound to Place Gambetta (see the Bus
   #69 Sightseeing Tour chapter) or ride the Métro to the Gambetta stop
   (not to the Père Lachaise stop), exit at Gambetta Métro, and take sortie
   #3 (Père Lachaise exit). From Place Gambetta, it’s a two-block walk up
   Avenue du Père Lachaise to the cemetery.
Information: Maps are sold only at florists right across from the Porte
   Gambetta entrance (€2). An unofficial website, www.pere-lachaise.com,
   has a searchable map (cemetery info: +33 1 55 25 82 10).
Length of This Tour: Allow 1.5 hours for this walk and another 30
   minutes for your own detours. Bring good walking shoes for the rough,
   cobbled streets.
Tours: Download my Père Lachaise Cemetery audio tour.
Services: WCs are at the start of this tour, just inside the Porte Gambetta
   entrance to the right (BYO toilet paper), and at the end of this tour, to
   the left just before you exit Porte Principale.
Eating: You’ll pass several cafés between Place Gambetta and the
   cemetery. After the tour, you can walk down Rue de la Roquette to a
   gaggle of lively, affordable cafés on the right side of the street, near the
   return stop for bus #69.
Starring: Oscar Wilde, Edith Piaf, Gertrude Stein, Molière, Jim Morrison,
   Frédéric Chopin, Colette, and Rossini.


OVERVIEW
From the Porte Gambetta entrance, we’ll walk roughly southwest (mostly
downhill) through the cemetery. At the end of the tour, we’ll exit Porte
Principale onto Boulevard de Ménilmontant, near the Père Lachaise and
Philippe Auguste Métro entrances and another bus #69 stop. You could
follow the tour in the other direction, but it’s not recommended—it’s
confusing, and almost completely uphill.




    This cemetery is big, with thousands of graves and tombs crammed
every which way, and only a few pedestrian pathways to help you navigate.
Pay close attention to this chapter’s directions, refer to the map in this
chapter, and follow street signs posted at intersections. The more detailed
map available from florists near the entrance can also help guide you. Be
patient, and ask passersby for graves you can’t locate. You may be tempted
to stray off my route to find graves on your own, but beware—it’s very easy
to get lost, and they’ll bury you where they find you.



                       The Tour Begins
• Entering the cemetery at the Porte Gambetta entrance, walk straight up
Avenue des Combattants Etrangers past world war memorials dedicated to
foreigners who fought for France: Armenians, Poles, Italians, and
Russians. Cross Avenue Transversale No. 3, pass the first building, and look
left to the...
 1   Columbarium/Crematorium
Marked by a dome with a gilded flame and working chimneys on top, the
columbarium sits in a courtyard surrounded by about 1,300 niches—small
cubicles for cremated remains, often decorated with real or artificial
flowers.
    Beneath the courtyard (steps leading underground) are about 12,000
smaller niches, including one for Maria Callas (1923-1977), an American-
born opera diva known for her versatility, flair for drama, and affair with
Aristotle Onassis (niche #16258, on the immediate left, 20 yards down aisle
J).




• Turn around and walk back to the intersection with Avenue Transversale
No. 3 and turn right. As you walk, notice how families built small chapels
for several generations of loved ones to share. Turn left on Avenue Carette,
and walk half a block to the block-of-stone tomb (on the left) with heavy-
winged angels trying to fly.
 2   Oscar Wilde (1854-1900)
The writer and martyr to homosexuality is mourned by “outcast men” (as
the inscription says) and by wearers of heavy lipstick, who used to cover
the tomb and the angels’ emasculated privates with kisses. (Now the tomb is
behind glass, which has not stopped committed kissers.) Despite Wilde’s
notoriety, an inscription says, “He died fortified by the Sacraments of the
Church.” There’s a short résumé scratched (in English) into the back side of
the tomb. For more on Wilde and his death in Paris, see the sidebar on here.




        “Alas, I am dying beyond my means.”
                                                     —Oscar Wilde
• Continue along Avenue Carette and turn right (southeast) down Avenue
Circulaire. In about 100 yards you’ll pass monuments to national airline
tragedies on your left (Sharm el-Sheikh, a 2004 crash in Egypt killing 135
people—mostly French tourists; crashes in Venezuela, including one in
2005 that took the lives of 152 French citizens; and a flight that blew up
over Niger, killing 54 French, in 1989). Almost two blocks down, you’ll
reach Gertrude Stein’s unadorned, easy-to-miss grave (it’s the grave
covered with pebbles, on the right, immediately before a beige-yellow stone
structure—if you reach Avenue Pacthod, you’ve passed it by about 30
yards).
 3   Gertrude Stein (1874-1946)
While traveling through Europe, the twentysomething American dropped
out of med school and moved to Paris, her home for the rest of her life. She
shared an apartment at 27 Rue de Fleurus (a couple of blocks west of
Luxembourg Garden) with her brother Leo and, later, with her life partner,
Alice B. Toklas (who’s also buried here, see gravestone’s flipside). Every
Saturday night, Paris’ brightest artistic lights converged chez vingt-sept (at
27) for dinner and intellectual stimulation. Picasso painted her portrait,
Hemingway sought her approval, and Virgil Thompson set her words to
music.
   America discovered “Gerty” in 1933 when her memoirs, the slyly titled
Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas, hit the best-seller list. After 30 years
away, she returned to the United States for a triumphant lecture tour. Her
writing is less well known than her persona, except for the oft-quoted, “A
rose is a rose is a rose.”
   Stein’s last words: When asked, “What is the answer?” she replied,
“What is the question?”
• Ponder Stein’s tomb again and again and again, and continue southeast
on Avenue Circulaire to where it curves to the right. Emaciated statues
remember victims of the concentration camps and Nazi resistance heroes.
Pebbles on the tombstones represent Jewish prayers. About 50 yards past
Avenue Pacthod, veer left off the cobbled lane where you see the green
Avenue Circulaire street sign to find the wall marked Aux Morts de la
Commune.
 4   Mur des Fédérés
The “Communards’ Wall” marks the place where the quixotic Paris
Commune came to a violent end.
   In 1870, Prussia invaded France, and the country quickly collapsed and
surrendered—all except the city of Paris. For six months, through a bitter
winter, the Prussians laid siege to the city. Defiant Paris held out, even
opposing the French government, which had fled to Versailles and was
collaborating with the Germans. Parisians formed an opposition
government that was revolutionary and socialist, called the Paris Commune.
    The Versailles government sent French soldiers to retake Paris. In May
of 1871, they breached the west walls and swept eastward. French soldiers
fought French citizens, and tens of thousands died during a bloody week of
street fighting (La Semaine Sanglante). The remaining resisters holed up
inside the walls of Père Lachaise and made an Alamo-type last stand before
they were finally overcome.
    At dawn on May 28, 1871, the 147 Communards were lined up against
this wall and shot by French soldiers. They were buried in a mass grave
where they fell. With them the Paris Commune died, and the city entered
five years of martial law.
• Return up five steps to the road, continue to the next (unmarked) street,
Avenue Transversale No. 3, and (at the Mauthausen Memorial on the right
corner) turn right. A half-block uphill, Edith Piaf’s grave is on the right. It’s
one grave off the street, behind a white tombstone with a small gray cross
(Salvador family). Confusingly, Piaf’s tombstone is labeled Gassion. Edith
Gassion-Piaf rests among many graves. Hers is often adorned with photos,
fresh flowers, and love notes.
 5   Edith Piaf (1915-1963)
A child of the Parisian streets, Piaf was raised in her grandma’s bordello
and her father’s traveling circus troupe. The teenager sang for spare change
in Paris’ streets, where a nightclub owner discovered her. Waif-like and
dressed in black, she sang in a warbling voice under the name “La Môme
Piaf” (The Little Sparrow). She became the toast of pre-WWII Paris society.




    Her offstage love life was busy and often messy, including a teenage
pregnancy (her daughter is buried along with her, in a grave marked
Marcelle Dupont, 1933-1935), a murdered husband, and a heartbreaking
affair with co-star Yves Montand.
    With her strong but trembling voice, she buoyed French spirits under the
German occupation, and her most famous song, “La Vie en Rose” (The
Rosy Life) captured the joy of postwar Paris. In her personal life she
struggled with alcohol, painkillers, and poor health, while onstage she sang,
“Non, je ne regrette rien” (“No, I don’t regret anything”).
• From Edith Piaf’s grave, continue uphill, cross Avenue Pacthod, and turn
left on the next street, Avenue Greffulhe. Follow Greffulhe straight for
roughly 80 yards until you reach a shiny black grave on the left, just beyond
a grave with a slender cylindrical statue on it (10 yards before crossing
Avenue Transversale No. 2).
 6   Bernard Verlhac (pseudonym Tignous, 1957-2015)
A cartoonist for the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, Tignous was
one of 12 people assassinated by terrorists at the magazine’s office in
January 2015. Charlie Hebdo had long attracted controversy and episodes
of violence due to its inflammatory cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad.
The magazine’s editor-in-chief, Stéphane Charbonnier, who also was killed
in the attack, once said about their work: “We have to carry on until Islam
has been rendered as banal as Catholicism.”
    As Paris has suffered other terrorist attacks since the Charlie Hebdo
massacre, Verlhac’s tomb has become a rallying point for mourners of those
other tragedies as well. Visitors here remember the slogan of solidarity that
was expressed around the world: “Je suis Charlie.”
• Continue up Avenue Greffulhe (even when it narrows) until it dead-ends at
Avenue Transversale No. 1. Cross the street and venture down a dirt section
that veers slightly to the right, then make a hard right onto another dirt lane
named Chemin Molière et La Fontaine. Molière lies 30 yards down, on the
right side of the street, just beyond the highest point of this lane.
 7   Molière (1622-1673)
In 1804, the great comic playwright was the first to be reburied in Père
Lachaise, a publicity stunt that gave instant prestige to the new cemetery.
    Born in Paris, Molière was not of noble blood, but as the son of the
king’s furniture supervisor, he had connections. The 21-year-old Molière
joined a troupe of strolling players who ranked very low on the social scale,
touring the provinces. Twelve long years later, they returned to Paris to
perform before Louis XIV. Molière, by now an accomplished comic actor,
cracked the king up. He was instantly famous—writing, directing, and often
starring in his own works. He satirized rich nobles, hypocritical priests, and
quack doctors, creating enemies in high places.
    On February 17, 1673, an aging Molière went on stage in the title role of
his latest comedy, The Imaginary Invalid. Though sick, he insisted he had to
go on, concerned for all the little people. His role was of a hypochondriac
who coughs to get sympathy. The deathly ill Molière effectively faked
coughing fits...which soon turned to real convulsions. The unaware crowd
roared with laughter while his fellow players fretted in the wings.
    In the final scene, Molière’s character becomes a doctor himself in a
mock swearing-in ceremony. The ultimate trouper, Molière finished his
final line—“Juro” (“I accept”)—and collapsed while coughing blood. The
audience laughed hysterically. He died shortly thereafter.
    Irony upon irony for the master of satire: Molière—a sick man whose
doctors thought he was a hypochondriac—dies playing a well man who is a
hypochondriac, succumbing onstage while the audience cheers. Molière lies
next to his friend and fellow writer, La Fontaine (1621-1695), who wrote a
popular version of Aesop’s Fables.
         “We die only once, and for such a long time.”
                                                          —Molière
• Continue downhill on Chemin Molière et La Fontaine (which becomes the
cobbled Chemin du Bassin, bending right and ever downhill) to where it
ends. Turn left (on Avenue de la Chapelle, going steeper downhill). Twenty
steps down, on the left, find the train-engraved headstone of K Gilbert
Morard, father of the Paris Métro. Continue to the Rond Point roundabout
intersection.
    Cross Carrefour Rond Point and continue straight (opposite where you
entered). This puts you going downhill on a street that’s probably unmarked
(though the official name is Chemin de la Bédoyère). Just a few steps along,
turn right onto Chemin Lauriston. Keep to the left at the fork (now on
Chemin de Lesseps) and look for the temple about 10 yards on the right
with three wreaths. Jim Morrison lies just behind, often watched over by a
personal security guard. You can’t miss the commotion.
 8   Jim Morrison (1943-1971)
Perhaps the most visited tomb in the cemetery belongs to this American
rock star—lead singer for The Doors, named for the “Doors of Perception”
they aimed to open. An iconic, funky bust of the rocker was stolen by fans
and replaced with a more toned-down headstone. Even so, Morrison’s
faithful still gather here at all hours. The headstone’s Greek inscription
reads: “To the spirit (or demon) within.” Graffiti-ing nearby tombs, fans
write: “You still Light My Fire” (referring to Jim’s biggest hit), “Ring my
bell at the Dead Rock Star Hotel,” and “Mister Mojo Risin’” (referring to
the legend that Jim faked his death and still lives today).
    When Morrison arrived in Paris in the winter of 1971, he was famous,
notorious for his erotic onstage antics, and a burned-out alcoholic. Paris was
to be his chance to leave celebrity behind, get healthy, and get serious as a
writer.
    Living under an assumed name in a nondescript sublet apartment near
Place de la Bastille, he spent his days as a carefree artist. He scribbled in
notebooks at Café de Flore and Les Deux Magots (in the Left Bank),
watched the sun set from the steps of Sacré-Cœur, visited Baudelaire’s
house, and jammed with street musicians. He drank a lot, took other drugs,
gained weight, and his health declined.
    In the wee hours of July 3, he died in his bathtub at age 27, officially of
a heart attack, but likely from an overdose. (Any police investigation was
thwarted by Morrison’s social circle of heroin users, leading to wild rumors
surrounding his death.)
    Jim’s friends approached Père Lachaise Cemetery about burying the
famous rock star there, in accordance with his wishes. The director refused
to admit him, until they mentioned that Jim was a writer. “A writer?” he
said, and found a spot.
        “This is the end, my only friend, the end.”
                                                      —Jim Morrison
• Return to Rond Point. The statue in the center remembers Casimir Pèrier:
President of France in 1894 for only six months—shortest of any French
president—he still got a big monument. Casimir is looking directly through
a forest of tombstones at the tomb of Frédéric Chopin, about 50 yards away.
To get there, you’ll need to tip-toe through the tombstones.
    Leave the roundabout near the Mallet Family tomb. Go straight ahead
about a dozen steps (carefully past three or four tombs) and turn left when
you reach a cobbled lane. Follow the lane downhill for 20 yards, then take
your first right on another small cobbled lane. This leads to a white tomb
(50 yards on the right) with a statue of a woman with her head bowed in
mourning—the tomb of...
 9   Frédéric Chopin (1810-1849)
Fresh-cut flowers and geraniums on the gravestone speak of the emotional
staying power of Chopin’s music, which still connects souls across the
centuries. A muse sorrows atop the tomb, and a carved relief of Chopin in
profile captures the delicate features of this sensitive artist.
    The 21-year-old Polish pianist arrived in Paris, fell in love with the city,
and never returned to his homeland (which was occupied by an increasingly
oppressive Russia). In Paris, he could finally shake off the “child prodigy”
label and performance schedule he’d lived with since age seven. Cursed
with stage fright (“I don’t like concerts. The crowds scare me, their breath
chokes me, I’m paralyzed by their stares...”) and with too light a touch for
big venues, Chopin preferred playing at private parties for Paris’ elite. They
were wowed by his technique; his ability to make a piano sing; and his
melodic, soul-stirring compositions. Soon he was recognized as a pianist,
composer, and teacher and even idolized as a brooding genius. He ran in
aristocratic circles with fellow artists, such as pianist Franz Liszt, painter
Delacroix, novelists Victor Hugo and Balzac, and composer Rossini. (All
but Liszt and Hugo lie in Père Lachaise.)
    Chopin composed nearly 200 pieces, almost all for piano, in many
different styles—from lively Polish dances to the Bach-like counterpoint of
his Preludes to the moody, romantic Nocturnes.
    In 1837, the quiet, refined, dreamy-eyed genius met the scandalous,
assertive, stormy novelist George Sand (see here of the Left Bank Walk
chapter). Sand was swept away by Chopin’s music and artistic nature. She
pursued him, and sparks flew. Though the romance faded quickly, they
continued living together for nearly a decade in an increasingly bitter love-
hate relationship. When Chopin developed tuberculosis, Sand nursed him
for years (Chopin complained she was killing him). Sand finally left,
Chopin was devastated, and he died two years later at age 39. At the
funeral, they played perhaps Chopin’s most famous piece, the Funeral
March (it’s that 11-note dirge that everyone knows). The grave contains
Chopin’s body, but his heart lies in Warsaw, embedded in a church column.
        “The earth is suffocating. Swear to make them cut me open,
        so that I won’t be buried alive.”
                                          —Chopin, on his deathbed
• Facing Chopin, walk left, uphill about 100 yards, until the lane dead ends
at Avenue Laterale du Sud. Trespass straight ahead over three gravesites to
the next lane and head left, downhill. About 20 steps after that lane hits the
road, on the right is...

10Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann (1809-1891) / Famille
Haussmann
Squint through the green door. Love him or hate him, Baron Haussmann
made the Paris we see today. In the 1860s, Paris was a construction zone,
with civil servant Haussmann overseeing the city’s modernization. Narrow
medieval lanes were widened and straightened into broad, traffic-carrying
boulevards. Historic buildings were torn down. Sewers, bridges, and water
systems were repaired. Haussmann rammed the Boulevard St. Michel
through the formerly quaint Latin Quarter (as part of Emperor Napoleon
III’s plan to prevent revolutionaries from barricading narrow streets). The
Opéra Garnier, Bois de Boulogne park, and avenues radiating from the Arc
de Triomphe were all part of Haussmann’s grand scheme, which touched 60
percent of the city. How did he finance it all? That’s what the next
government wanted to know when they canned him.
                Other Notable Residents
Though not along our walking tour, the following folks can be found
on our map, as well as the maps for sale from vendors.
 A Jacques-Louis David (1748-1825), Section 56

The Neoclassical painter David chronicled the heroic Revolution and
the Napoleonic Era. See his Coronation of Emperor Napoleon in the
Louvre (here).
 B Théodore Géricault (1791-1824), Section 12
Géricault was the master of painting extreme situations (shipwrecks,
battles) and extreme emotions (noble sacrifice, courage, agony,
insanity) with Romantic realism. See his Raft of the Medusa in the
Louvre (here).
 C Eugène Delacroix (1798-1863), Section 49

For more on this Romantic painter, see his Liberty Leading the People
in the Louvre (here) or visit the Delacroix Museum (here).
 D Jean-August-Dominique Ingres (1780-1867), Section 23

Often considered the anti-Delacroix, Ingres painted placid portraits
and bathing nudes, using curved outlines and smooth-surfaced paint.
Despite his deliberate distortions (as in his beautifully deformed La
Grande Odalisque in the Louvre, here), he was hailed as the champion
of traditional Neoclassical balance against the furious Romantic style
(see The Source in the Orsay, here).
 E Georges Seurat (1859-1891), Section 66

Georges spent Sunday afternoons in the park with his easel, capturing
shimmering light with tiny dots of different-colored paint.
 F Amadeo Modigliani (1884-1920), Section 96, near Edith Piaf

Poor, tubercular, and strung out on drugs and alcohol in Paris, this
young Italian painter forged a distinctive style. His portraits and nudes
have African masklike faces and elongated necks and arms.
 G Marcel Proust (1871-1922), Section 85

Some who make it through the seven volumes and 3,000 pages of
Proust’s autobiographical novel, Remembrance of Things Past, close
the book and cry, “Brilliant!” Others get lost in the meandering,
stream-of-consciousness style, and forget that the whole
“Remembrance” began with the taste of a madeleine (a type of cookie)
that triggered a flashback to Proust’s childhood, as relived over the last
10 years of his life, during which he labored alone in his apartment on
Boulevard Haussmann—midway between the Arc de Triomphe and
Gare de l’Est—penning his life story with reflections on Time (as we
experience it, not as we measure it on the clock) and Memory...in long
sentences.
 H Sarah Bernhardt (1844-1923), Section 44
The greatest actress of her generation, she conquered Paris and the
world. Charismatic Sarah made a triumphant tour of America and
Europe (1880-1881), starring in La Dame aux Camélias. No one could
die onstage like Sarah, and in the final scene—when her character
succumbs to tuberculosis—she had cowboys and railroad workers
sniffling in the audience. Of her hundred-plus stage roles and many
silent films, her most memorable one may have been playing...Hamlet
(1899). Offstage, her numerous affairs and passionate, capricious
personality set a standard for future divas.
 I Yves Montand (1921-1991) and Simone Signoret (1921-1985),
Section 44
Yves Montand was a film actor and nightclub singer with blue-collar
roots, left-wing politics, and a social conscience. Montand’s career
was boosted by his lover, Edith Piaf, when they appeared together at
the Moulin Rouge during World War II. Yves went on to stardom
throughout the world (except in America, thanks partly to a 1960 flop
film with Marilyn Monroe, Let’s Make Love). In 1951, he married
actress Simone Signoret, whose on-screen persona was the long-
suffering lover. They remain together still, despite rumors of Yves’
womanizing. After their deaths, their eternal love was tested in 1998,
when Yves’ body was exhumed to take a DNA sample for a paternity
suit. (It wasn’t him.)
 J Héloïse (c. 1101-1164) and Abélard (1079-1142), Section 7
The oldest residents in Père Lachaise have a timeless story.
Independent scholar Peter Abélard shocked and titillated 12th century
Paris with his reasoned critique of Church doctrine. He set up a Left
Bank school that would become the University of Paris, bringing
bright minds from all over Europe, including Héloïse, niece of the
powerful canon of Notre-Dame. Abélard was hired to give private
instruction to Héloïse. Their intense intellectual intercourse quickly
flared into physical passion and a spiritual bond. They fled Paris and
married in secret, and a year later Héloïse gave birth to a son (named
Astrolabe). News got out and, in the middle of the night, thugs went to
Abélard’s bedroom and castrated him.
    Disgraced, he retired to a monastery and she to a convent, but they
remained intimately connected by the postal service. (The dog at
  Abélard’s feet symbolizes their fidelity.) Abélard, who was on trial for
  heresy when he died, bounced back with some of his most critical
  writings, using logic to analyze Church pronouncements—a practice
  that flowered into the “scholasticism” accepted by the Church a
  century later. The canopy tomb we see today (1817) is made out of
  stones from both Héloïse’s convent and Abélard’s monastery.


• Four doors downhill from Haussmann is Rossini.

11   Gioacchino Rossini (1792-1868)
Dut. Dutta-dut. Dutta dut dut dut dut dut dut dut dut, dut dut dut dut dut dut
dut dut...
   The composer of the William Tell Overture (a.k.a. the Lone Ranger
theme) was Italian, but he moved to Paris (1823) to bring his popular comic
operas to France. Extremely prolific, he could crank out a three-hour opera
in weeks, including the highly successful Barber of Seville (based on a play
by Pierre Beaumarchais, who is also buried in Père Lachaise). When
Guillaume Tell debuted (1829), Rossini, age 37, was at the peak of his
career as an opera composer.
   Then he stopped. For the next four decades, he never again wrote an
opera and scarcely composed anything else. He moved back to Italy, went
through a stretch of bad health, and then returned to Paris, where his health
and spirits revived. He even wrote a little music in his old age. Rossini’s
impressive little sepulcher is empty, as his remains were moved to Florence.
• Downhill ahead, on Avenue Principale, is the gate to the land of the living.
But we have one more stop. Take a few steps downhill, then turn right at the
corner and find the second gravesite. Here lies Colette.
12   Colette (1873-1954)
France’s most honored female writer led an unconventional life—thrice
married and often linked romantically with other women—and wrote about
it in semi-autobiographical novels. Her first fame came from a series of
novels about naughty teenage Claudine’s misadventures. In her 30s, Colette
went on to a career as a music hall performer, scandalizing Paris by
showing her breasts. Her late novel, Gigi (1945)—about a teenage girl
groomed to be a professional mistress, who blossoms into independence—
became a musical film starring Leslie Caron and Maurice Chevalier (1958).
Thank heaven for little girls!




       “The only misplaced curiosity is trying to find out here, on
       this side, what lies beyond the grave.”
                                                            —Colette

Thank God You Can Leave
To leave the cemetery, continue downhill on Avenue Principale and exit
onto Boulevard de Ménilmontant (WCs on the left before leaving). The
Père Lachaise Métro stop is two long blocks to the right and the closer
Philippe Auguste Métro stop is one block to the left. To find the return stop
for bus #69 heading west to downtown, cross Boulevard de Ménilmontant
and walk downhill on the right side of Rue de la Roquette; the stop is a few
blocks down, on the right-hand side. Go in peace.
