Bus #69 Sightseeing Tour

BUS #69 SIGHTSEEING TOUR
From the Eiffel Tower to Père Lachaise Cemetery
Orientation
  OVERVIEW
  Map: Bus #69 Tour
The Tour Begins
    Champ de Mars and the Eiffel Tower
    Rue St. Dominique
    Esplanade des Invalides
    Government Buildings
    Boulevard St. Germain
    Tuileries Garden and Louvre Museum
    Ile de la Cité
    Le Marais
    Place de la Bastille
    Rue de la Roquette
    Père Lachaise Cemetery
Why pay €35 for a tour company to give you an overview of Paris when
city bus #69 can do it for the cost of a Métro ride? Get on the bus and settle
in for a trip through some of the city’s most interesting neighborhoods. Or
use this tour as a handy way to lace together many of Paris’ most important
sightseeing districts. On this ride from the Eiffel Tower to Père Lachaise
Cemetery, you’ll learn how great Paris’ bus system is—and you’ll wonder
why you’ve been tunneling by Métro under this gorgeous city. And if
you’re staying in the Marais, Ile St. Louis, or Rue Cler neighborhoods, line
#69 is a useful route for just getting around town. The end-of-the-line stop
is right by the start of my Père Lachaise Cemetery Tour.
   The bus often goes faster than you can read. It’s best to look through this
chapter and peruse the map ahead of time, then ride with an eye out for the
various sights described here.


                            Orientation
Length of This Tour: Allow one hour. With limited time, get off at
   Bastille, with good Métro connections.
When to Go: You can board daily until 22:30 (last departure from Eiffel
   Tower stop). It’s best to avoid weekday rush hours (8:00-9:30 & 17:30-
   19:30) and hot days (no air-conditioning). Sundays are quietest, and it’s
   easy to get a window seat. Evening bus rides are pretty from fall
   through spring (roughly Sept-April), when it gets dark early enough to
   see the floodlit monuments before the bus stops running—though some
   of the finer points are harder to see in the dark (and you’ll need a light
   to read by).
Getting There: Eastbound line #69 leaves from the Eiffel Tower on
   Avenue Joseph Bouvard (the street that becomes Rue St. Dominique as
   it crosses the Champ de Mars, two blocks from the tower through the
   park—for a more detailed view, see the map on here). Board at one of
   the first few stops to secure a view seat. The first stop is at the
   southwestern end of the avenue; the second stop is at the eastern end
   (just before Avenue de la Bourdonnais). Stops are located and clearly
   posted about every three blocks along the route. To see all the stop
   names, check the official Plan de Lignes at www.ratp.fr (click
   “Timetables” if viewing in English, then “Bus,” then enter line number
   “69” in the box, then click on “Hours PDF” to see the route diagram).
   The map on here shows part of the bus #69 route.
Bus Tips: You must use a Navigo card or pass, which can be purchased at
   staffed Métro stations and most tabacs (or loaded to your phone on the
   RATP app). Board through the front door, then validate your Navigo
   card in the machine behind the driver.
      If it’s hot, you can usually open the upper part of the window. Push
   the red button to request a stop. Exit through the rear door. Buses run
   every 10-15 minutes except in the late evening. The time until the next
   bus is usually displayed at the bus stop.
Tours: Many sights along this route are covered in more detail elsewhere in
   the book. Many have self-guided tours and some have audio tours.
   See the Eiffel Tower Tour, Orsay Museum Tour, Louvre Museum Tour,
   Left Bank Walk, Historic Paris Walk, Marais Walk, and Père Lachaise
   Cemetery Tour chapters. You can also download my free Historic
   Paris Walk, Orsay Museum, Louvre Museum, and Père Lachaise
   Cemetery audio tours.


OVERVIEW
Handy line #69 crosses the city east-west, running between the Eiffel Tower
and Père Lachaise Cemetery. In between, it passes close to these great
monuments and neighborhoods: Ecole Militaire; Rue Cler; Les Invalides
(Army Museum and Napoleon’s Tomb); the Rodin, Orsay, and Louvre
museums; Ile de la Cité (Notre Dame and Sainte-Chapelle); Ile St. Louis;
Hôtel de Ville; Pompidou Center; Marais; and Bastille.
   This tour is best done in the direction it’s written (east from the Eiffel
Tower to Père Lachaise Cemetery)—in the other direction, one-way streets
change the route. It’s still a scenic ride if going westbound—riders get to
pass through the Louvre courtyard, with its stunning pyramid aglow after
dark.
    Grab a window seat—either side toward the back is good (rear seats are
higher). If you get on at one of the first stops, you’re likely to secure a good
seat. Follow your progress by reading the stop names on the bus display or
on the bus shelters you pass.
    Many find the Bastille a good ending point (where you can begin this
book’s walking tour of the Marais). This ride also ties in well after a visit to
the Eiffel Tower or on your way to visiting Père Lachaise Cemetery. OK—
let’s roll.



                        The Tour Begins
Champ de Mars and the Eiffel Tower
Your tour begins below this 1,000-foot, reddish-brown hood ornament. The
park surrounding you is called the Champ de Mars (named for the god of
war). It served as a parade ground for the military school, Ecole Militaire,
which seals the park at the right end. Napoleon Bonaparte is the school’s
most famous graduate.
    In 1889, the Champ de Mars was covered with a massive temporary
structure to house exhibitions of all sorts; it was a celebration of the
Centennial World’s Fair (the 100th anniversary of the French Revolution),
the same event for which the Eiffel Tower was built. The apartments
surrounding the park are among the most exclusive in Paris.
    The grass that runs down the center of the park becomes a playground at
night, when much of Paris seems to descend on it (if it’s not fenced off to
give the grass a fighting chance). Picnics here are a delight, and warm
evenings reveal Paris’ multicultural population. Dogs and kids romp as
soccer balls fly past, all within the glow of the Eiffel Tower.
• Leaving the Champ de Mars, the bus slices through the 7th
arrondissement along its primary shopping street.

Rue St. Dominique
Paris functions as a city of hundreds of small neighborhoods. This area was
once the village of Grenelle (before it was consumed by Paris). Many locals
feel little need to leave the area, and neighbors trust each other. The dry
cleaner knows that if customers forget to bring their wallet, they’ll return to
pay another time. If the plumber can only come during work hours, locals
can leave their apartment keys with the nearest shop owner.
   This neighborhood has long been an attraction for Americans. The
American Library is a block to the left after crossing Avenue de la
Bourdonnais, the American University of Paris is on the far left as you cross
Avenue Bosquet, the American Church sits on the river farther to the left,
and the American Cathedral is just across the river, on the Right Bank.
• After crossing Boulevard de la Tour Maubourg, you’ll enter the open
world of Esplanade des Invalides.

Esplanade des Invalides
This sprawling green esplanade links the river (to the left) and Europe’s
first veterans’ hospital, Les Invalides (right), built by Louis XIV. Napoleon
lies powerfully dead under the brilliant golden dome.
    Look left and see the Pont Alexandre III (Alexander III Bridge)
crossing the Seine. Spiked with golden statues and ironwork lamps, the
bridge was built to celebrate a turn-of-the-20th-century treaty between
France and Russia. Just across the bridge are the glass-and-steel-domed
Grand and Petit Palais exhibition halls, built for the 1900 World’s Fair.
Like the bridge, they are fine examples of belle époque architecture.
• Leaving Les Invalides, you’ll reenter narrow streets lined with...




Government Buildings
Many of France’s most important ministries occupy these flag-bearing,
golden-hued buildings with police guarding doorways, heavily barred
windows, and people in suits speaking in hushed tones. The sprawling
Ministry of Defense (on your left) was originally the mansion of
Napoleon’s mother.
• After the Bellechasse stop, you’ll emerge from the government area onto
the broad, stylish, and leafy...

Boulevard St. Germain
Colorful home-decorating stores and fine Haussmann-era architecture mark
this upper-crust neighborhood. The boulevard is famous for its cafés
frequented by existentialists Simone de Beauvoir, Albert Camus, and Jean-
Paul Sartre.
   But we turn left onto Rue du Bac, with its art galleries, antique shops,
and smart clothing boutiques. The Orsay Museum is just a few blocks to
the left at the Pont Royal bus stop.
• Next, you’ll cross the river (with a view of the Orsay Museum behind on
the left) and enter the Right Bank.

Tuileries Garden and Louvre Museum
The lovely Tuileries Garden (Jardin des Tuileries), well worth a stroll, lies
ahead and to the left after you cross the Seine. This was once the royal
garden of the Louvre palace, which is just ahead and to the right.
    The bus turns right on the Right Bank and begins to travel the entire
length of the looooong Grand Gallery of the Louvre. Once the biggest
building in the world, the Louvre’s 12 miles of galleries house some of the
world’s greatest works of art. The medallions on the facade show the initials
of each king who made his small contribution to building the massive
Louvre. Notice the bus lane you’re in, separated from the slow-moving
traffic by a low curb. Bicyclists have the right to use these lanes as well,
making vast parts of Paris bike-friendly.
    A few bridges ahead is the view-perfect pedestrian bridge Pont des
Arts. Get off here if you’d like to take my self-guided Left Bank Walk. That
curved building with a dome on the other side is where the Académie
Française has met since the 1600s to compose the official French dictionary
and defend the French language from corrupting influences (like English).
Some 2,000 barges line the river below you.
    The riverside promenade below, but out of view, was until recently an
express lane carrying over 20,000 cars per day. Now it accommodates
strolling Parisians and bike riders (see my recommended bike route on
here).
    Lining the sidewalk on the right are the green metal stalls of
bouquinistes—independent booksellers who have plied this trade along the
Seine for centuries.
• As you roll past the end of the long Louvre building, on the right is the
tree-lined tip of the narrow island called the...

Ile de la Cité
Paris began here more than 2,000 years ago. The bridge you’ll pass is the
Pont Neuf, or “new bridge,” though it’s now Paris’ oldest (1600).
   To your left, you’ll pass quirky plant shops and pet stalls. On the right,
across the river, are the round towers (wearing pointy black cones) of the
Conciergerie, where Marie-Antoinette was imprisoned during the French
Revolution, awaiting the guillotine. Behind the Conciergerie is the slender
spire of Sainte-Chapelle, with the most beautiful stained glass in Paris.




    Farther ahead, on the right, you’ll see the tops of the twin towers of
Notre-Dame Cathedral. The huge crane hovering above it will be visible
for many years as the roof structure is rebuilt. (Châtelet is the best stop if
you’d like to tour the cathedral.)
    Back to the left, the grand Hôtel de Ville (Paris’ City Hall) stands
proudly behind playful fountains. Each of the 20 arrondissements
(governmental areas) in Paris has its own City Hall, and this one is the big
daddy of them all. It’s beautifully lit after dark all year.
• The bus turns left—away from the river. It angles past St. Gervais Church
—one of the first churches built on the Right Bank—and into the Marais
neighborhood.
Le Marais
This is jumbled, medieval Paris at its finest. On your left, a couple of blocks
past St. Gervais near #13 (before the Jouy stop), stand some of the oldest
houses in Paris—tall, skinny, and half-timbered. The Marais has been a
swamp, an aristocratic district, and a bohemian hangout. Today, classy stone
mansions sit alongside trendy bars, fashion boutiques, and top-notch
museums—the Picasso Museum, Carnavalet, Victor Hugo’s House, Jewish
Art and History Museum, and Pompidou Center.




    The narrow street merges into the boulevard Rue St. Antoine, the main
street of Paris in medieval times. On the right, at #103, are the dome and
red door of the small-but-grand Church of St. Paul and St. Louis—the
only Jesuit church in Paris and the church where Victor Hugo prayed.
    If you want to explore the charming Marais—stretching to the left of
Rue St. Antoine—get off at the Bastille-Rue St. Antoine stop (after the
Birague stop). You could do my Marais Walk, visit La Coulée Verte
Promenade-Park (see here), or get a bite to eat (see the Eating in Paris
chapter).
• Rue St. Antoine leads straight into Place de la Bastille, a vast round
intersection with a giant pillar in the center.

Place de la Bastille
This now-empty square is where the fortress-turned-prison called the
Bastille once stood. For centuries, it was used to defend the city—mostly
from its own people, becoming a symbol of royal tyranny. On July 14,
1789, angry Parisians swarmed the Bastille, released its prisoners, and
kicked off the French Revolution. (The building was destroyed.) Since then,
the French have celebrated Bastille Day every July 14 as enthusiastically as
Americans commemorate July 4. The column in the middle of the square
honors France’s ongoing struggle for democracy.
    As you cross the square (usually a traffic mess—admire your driver’s
patience and agility), you’ll pass over the covered Canal St. Martin, which
runs under your feet from the Seine to northern Paris. Those red awnings
lining the long boulevard to the left provide shade for vendors at one of
Paris’ best outdoor markets, the Marché Bastille (see here). Next you’ll
curve in front of the reflecting-glass Opéra Bastille, today’s primary
theater for the national opera company. Place de la Bastille (and
surrounding streets) has become a trendy place for cafés and nightlife.
• Leaving Place de la Bastille, the bus angles left up...

Rue de la Roquette
This street gives a glimpse of the quirky, less-touristy Bastille neighborhood
—an intriguing mix of galleries, wholesale clothing shops, seedy bars, and
trendy eateries. The first street to the right is Rue de Lappe, one of the
wildest nightspots in Paris, with a dizzying array of wacky bistros, bars, and
dance halls.
   The bus continues straight for about 10 minutes. As you go, notice how
the cool cafés and chic boutiques give way to traditional businesses, though
in Paris, you’re never more than a short walk from a café.
• The bus eventually turns left onto Boulevard de Ménilmontant (which
locals happily associate with a famous Maurice Chevalier tune). From here,
the bus travels alongside the wall of Père Lachaise Cemetery (on your
right). Get off at Place Gambetta to visit the cemetery. As you exit the bus
into the square, you’ll see its centerpiece—the grandiose City Hall for the
20th arrondissement. To reach Père Lachaise Cemetery from here, follow
Avenue du Père Lachaise for 100 yards, past inviting cafés and flower
shops selling cyclamen, heather, and chrysanthemums—the standard
flowers for funerals and memorials—to the gate of the cemetery. Our bus
tour is over. What better place for your final stop?
