Pompidou Center Tour

POMPIDOU CENTER TOUR
Centre Pompidou
Orientation
  OVERVIEW
The Tour Begins
  FIFTH FLOOR
    Map: Pompidou Center–Fifth Floor
    FOURTH FLOOR
The Pompidou Center contains what is possibly Europe’s best collection of
20th-century art. After the super-serious Louvre and Orsay museums, finish
things off with this artistic kick in the pants. You won’t find classical beauty
here—no dreamy Madonnas-and-children—just a stimulating, offbeat, and,
if you like, instructive walk through nearly every art style of the wild-and-
crazy last century.
    The Pompidou’s “permanent” collection...isn’t. But while the paintings
(and other pieces) change amid regular renovations (expect some room
closures), the museum generally keeps the artists and various styles in a set
order. That’s why, rather than a painting-by-painting description, this
chapter is more a general overview of the major trends of 20th-century art
in the sequence you’ll likely see them as you visit the rooms. I’ve put the
emphasis on artists you’re most likely to find on display. See the classics—
Picasso, Matisse, etc.—but be sure to leave time to browse the thought-
provoking and fun art of more recent artists.


                            Orientation
Cost: €14, €11 for youth 18-25, free for kids 17 and under, €5 for escalator
   to sixth-floor view (but no museum entry). The regular ticket gets you
   into everything—both the permanent collection (the Musée National
   d’Art Moderne) and the special exhibits that make this place so edgy.
   The museum is free on the first Sunday of the month.
      Using the Museum Pass here provides access to the permanent
   collection, the sixth-floor view, and some special exhibits.
      Buy tickets on the ground floor. If lines are long, use the red ticket
   machines (credit cards only).
Hours: Permanent collection open Wed-Mon 11:00-21:00, closed Tue,
   ticket counters close at 20:00; rest of the building open until 22:00 (Thu
   until 23:00).
Information: +33 1 44 78 12 33, www.centrepompidou.fr.
Renovation: The museum is scheduled to close in late 2024 for a multiyear
   facelift.
When to Go: Crowds (mainly for special exhibits) are worst from 11:00-
   12:00 and on weekends. It’s least crowded after 17:00.
Getting There: Take the Métro to Rambuteau or Hôtel de Ville. Bus #69
   from the Marais and Rue Cler also stops a few blocks away at Hôtel de
   Ville. The wild, color-coded exterior of the museum makes it about as
   hard to locate as the Eiffel Tower.
Visitor Information: There’s a helpful info desk in the lobby. The Espace
   de Médiation on the fifth floor is the museum’s main information office.
   Note that Parisians call the complex the “Centre Beaubourg” (sahn-truh
   boh-boor), but official publications call it the “Centre Pompidou.” The
   free Centre Pompidou app covers both the permanent collection and
   special exhibits.
Length of This Tour: Allow one hour.
Services: Baggage check is free and required for bags bigger than a large
   purse. The terrific museum store on the main floor has zany gift ideas.
Cuisine Art: For a quick bite, there’s a sandwich-and-coffee café on the
   mezzanine (nice interior views). For a stylish splurge with a grand and
   gourmet view (or an affordable drink), consider the $$$ Georges
   Restaurant on the sixth floor, with €20-30 lunch plates and €30-40
   dinner plates (Wed-Mon 12:00-23:30, closed Tue, formal service,
   amazing seating inside and out, +33 1 44 78 47 99). You can picnic with
   the students on the museum’s stony, sloping front yard (Monop’
   grocery store facing the museum at #135, plenty of takeout places
   nearby). And for a casual sit-down €14 lunch across from the kid action
   at the crazy Stravinsky fountain, head to the big square on the
   museum’s river side for $ Dame Tartine (tartines or French pizzas) and
   $ Crêperie Beaubourg (sweet and savory crêpes).
Nearby: The studio of sculptor Constantin Brancusi (see here) is housed
   in the gray concrete bunker in front of the Pompidou and is free to visit.
   Brancusi (1876-1957) often hosted Paris’ artistic glitterati in his humble
   studio, where he served home-cooked dishes of his native Romania.
   After Brancusi’s death, the Pompidou Center had the studio
   reconstructed here. See the unique space and some of his revolutionary
   work (Wed-Mon 14:00-18:00, closed Tue, same contact info as
   Pompidou).
Starring: Matisse, Picasso, Chagall, Dalí, Warhol, and contemporary art.


OVERVIEW
That slight tremor you may feel comes from Italy, where Michelangelo has
been spinning in his grave ever since 1977, when the Pompidou Center first
disgusted Paris. Still, it’s an appropriate modern temple for the
controversial art it houses.
   The building itself is “exoskeletal” (like Notre-Dame, or a crab), with its
functional parts—the pipes, heating ducts, and escalator—on the outside
and the meaty art inside. It’s the epitome of modern architecture, where
form follows function.




    Inside you’ll find this general scheme (but confirm as you enter—
galleries move around): ground floor—all services; basement—
photography exhibits and always free; floors 1 and 6—temporary exhibits;
floors 4 and 5—the museum (what you’re likely here for). The museum
starts on floor 5 with a one-way route, with the collection displayed in
chronological order. It’s that easy.
    This chapter covers the Musée National d’Art Moderne: Collection
Permanente (labeled simply Musée on signs), which is on the fourth and
fifth floors. Generally, art from 1905 to 1980 is on the fifth floor (the core
of this chapter), while the fourth floor contains more recent art. Use the
museum’s floor plans (posted on the wall) to find specific artists. The
museum is bigger than you think—and you’re smart to focus on a limited
number of artists. Don’t hesitate to ask, “Où est Kandinsky?”
    The following text is not a “tour” of the museum per se—it’s a
chronological overview of modern art—but it does tend to follow the
museum’s general layout.
                        The Tour Begins
• Buy your ticket on the ground floor, then head up to the galleries. The
series of escalators are in a long glass tube that rises diagonally to the top.
   Behold the city! The city that, in the early 1900s, was the most cultured
place on earth and the cradle of modern art. Survey famous buildings
peeking above the commotion of roofs like mountain peaks breaking the
urban cloudscape. You could go all the way to the top to the pricey view
restaurant, but the best view is actually from a terrace within the permanent
collection.




• The permanent collection entrance is either on the fourth or fifth floor (it
varies). Enter and show your ticket. Make several spins and click your
heels. Toto, we’re not in Kansas anymore.


FIFTH FLOOR
Modern Art from 1905 to 1980
AD 1900: A new century dawns. War is a thing of the past. Science will
wipe out poverty and disease. Rational Man is poised for a new era of peace
and prosperity...
    Right. This cozy Victorian dream was soon shattered by two world wars
and rapid technological change. Nietzsche murdered God. Freud washed
ashore on the beach of a vast new continent inside each of us. Einstein
made everything merely “relative.” Even the fundamental building blocks
of the universe, atoms, were behaving erratically.




   The 20th century—accelerated by technology and fragmented by war—
was exciting and chaotic, and the art reflects the turbulence of that century
of change.
   Paris in the early 1900s was the cradle of modern art. For the previous
300 years (1600-1900), Paris had been the capital of the wealthiest, most
civilized nation on earth. Europe’s major artists—most of whom spoke
French—flocked to Paris, knowing that if you could make it there, you’d
make it anywhere.
   The groundwork of modern art was first laid by the Impressionists and
Post-Impressionists in the late 1800s. They pioneered the notion that the
painted surface—of thick, colorful brushstrokes—was as inherently
interesting as the subject itself. You can almost see the evolution: Monet’s
blurry Water Lilies canvases are patterns of color similar to a purely abstract
canvas. Van Gogh would build a figure out of brushstrokes of different
colors, Cezanne would turn those brushstrokes into patches of paint, then
Picasso sharpened those patches into “cubes,” which he would later shatter
beyond recognition.
    As you tour the Pompidou, remember that most of the artists, including
foreigners, spent their formative years in Paris. In the 1910s, funky
Montmartre was the mecca of Modernism—the era of Picasso, Braque, and
Matisse. In the 1920s, the center shifted to the grand cafés of Montparnasse,
where painters mingled with American expats such as Ernest Hemingway
and Gertrude Stein. During World War II, it was Jean-Paul Sartre’s
Existentialist scene around St. Germain-des-Prés. After World War II, the
global art focus moved to New York, but by the late 20th century, Paris had
reemerged as a cultural touchstone for the world of modern art.
• Start your visit with…

Post-Impressionism to Fauvism
The Fauves (“wild beasts”) were artists inspired by African and Oceanic
masks and voodoo dolls; they tried to inject a bit of the jungle into bored
French society. The result? Modern art that looked primitive: long, masklike
faces with almond eyes; bright, clashing colors; simple figures; and “flat,”
two-dimensional scenes.

Henri Matisse, 1869-1954
Matisse’s colorful “wallpaper” works are not realistic. A man is a few black
lines and blocks of paint. The colors are unnaturally bright. There’s no
illusion of the distance and 3-D that were so important to Renaissance
Italians. The “distant” landscape is as bright as any close-up, and the slanted
lines meant to suggest depth are crudely done.
    Traditionally, the canvas was like a window you looked “through” to see
a slice of the real world stretching off into the distance. Now, a camera
could do that better. With Matisse, you look “at” the canvas, like wallpaper.
Voilà! What was a crudely drawn scene now becomes a sophisticated and
decorative pattern of colors and shapes.
   Though fully “modern,” Matisse built on 19th-century art—the bright
colors of Vincent van Gogh, the primitive figures of Paul Gauguin, the
colorful designs of Japanese prints, and the Impressionist patches of paint
that blend together only at a distance.
Cubism and Beyond
I throw a rock at a glass statue, shatter it, pick up the pieces, and glue them
onto a canvas. I’m a Cubist.

Pablo Picasso, 1881-1973, and Georges Braque, 1882-1963
Born in Spain, Picasso moved to Paris as a young man, settling into a studio
(Le Bateau-Lavoir) in Montmartre (see here). He worked with next-door
neighbor Georges Braque in poverty so dire they often didn’t know where
their next bottle of wine was coming from. They corrected each other’s
paintings (it’s hard to tell whose is whose without the titles), and they
shared ideas, meals, and girlfriends while inventing a whole new way to
look at the world.
    They show the world through a kaleidoscope of brown and gray. The
subjects are somewhat recognizable (with the help of the titles), but they are
broken into geometric shards (let’s call them “cubes,” though there are
many different shapes), then pieced back together.
    Cubism gives us several different angles of the subject at once—say, a
woman seen from the front and side angles simultaneously, resulting in two
eyes on the same side of the nose. This involves showing three dimensions,
plus Einstein’s new fourth dimension, the time it takes to walk around the
subject to see other angles. Newfangled motion pictures could capture this
moving 4-D world, but how to do it on a 2-D canvas? The Cubist “solution”
is a kind of Mercator projection, where the round world is sliced up like an
orange peel and then laid as flat as possible.
    Notice how the “cubes” often overlap. A single cube might contain both
an arm (in the foreground) and the window behind (in the background),
both painted the same color. The foreground and the background are woven
together so that the subject dissolves into a pattern.

Picasso’s Synthetic Cubism and Other Periods
If the Cubists were as smart as Einstein, why couldn’t they draw a picture to
save their lives? Picasso was one modern artist who could draw
exceptionally well (see his partly finished Harlequin). But he constantly
explored and adapted his style to new trends, and so became the most
famous painter of the century. Scattered throughout the museum are works
from the many periods of Picasso’s life.




    Picasso soon began to use more colorful “cubes” (1912-1915).
Eventually, he used curved shapes to build the subject, rather than the
straight-line shards of early Cubism.
    Picasso married and had children. Works from this period (the 1920s)
are more realistic, with full-bodied (and big-nosed) women and children.
He tries to capture the solidity, serenity, and volume of classical statues.
    As his relationships with women deteriorated, he vented his sexual
demons by twisting the female body into grotesque balloon-animal shapes
(1925-1931).
    All through his life, Picasso explored new materials. He made collages,
tried his hand at making “statues” out of wood, wire, or whatever, and even
made statues out of everyday household objects. These multimedia works,
so revolutionary at the time, have become stock-in-trade today.

Fernand Léger, 1881-1955
Fernand Léger’s style has been called “Tubism,” breaking the world down
into cylinders, rather than cubes. (He supposedly got his inspiration during
World War I from the gleaming barrel of a cannon.) Léger captures the feel
of the encroaching Age of Machines, with all the world looking like an
internal-combustion engine.

Marc Chagall, 1887-1985
At age 22, Marc Chagall arrived in Paris with the wide-eyed wonder of a
country boy. Lovers are weightless with bliss. Animals smile and wink at
us. Musicians, poets, peasants, and dreamers ignore gravity, tumbling in
slow-motion circles high above the rooftops. The colors are deep, dark, and
earthy—a pool of mystery with figures bleeding through below the surface.
(Chagall claimed his early poverty forced him to paint over used canvases,
inspiring the overlapping images.)
    Chagall’s very personal style fuses many influences. He was raised in a
small Belarus village, which explains his “naive” outlook and fiddler-on-
the-roof motifs. His simple figures are like Russian Orthodox icons, and his
Jewish roots produced Old Testament themes. Stylistically, he’s thoroughly
modern—Cubist shards, bright Fauve colors, and Primitive simplification.
This otherworldly style was a natural for religious works, and so his murals
and stained glass, which feature both Jewish and Christian motifs, decorate
buildings around the world—including the ceiling of Paris’ Opéra Garnier.
Abstract Art
Abstract art simplifies. A man becomes a stick figure. A squiggle is a wave.
A streak of red expresses anger. Arches make you want a cheeseburger.
These are universal symbols that everyone from a caveman to a banker
understands. Abstract artists capture the essence of reality in a few lines and
colors, and they capture things even a camera can’t—emotions, abstract
concepts, musical rhythms, and spiritual states of mind. Again, with abstract
art, you don’t look through the canvas to see the visual world, but at it to
read the symbolism of lines, shapes, and colors.

Wassily Kandinsky, 1866-1944
The bright colors, bent lines, and lack of symmetry tell us that Kandinsky’s
world was passionate and intense.
   Notice titles like Improvisation and Composition. Kandinsky was
inspired by music, an art form that’s also “abstract,” though it still packs a
punch. Like a jazz musician improvising a new pattern of notes from a set
scale, Kandinsky plays with new patterns of related colors as he looks for
just the right combination. Using lines and color, Kandinsky translates the
unseen reality into a new medium...like lightning crackling over the radio.
Go, man, go.




Piet Mondrian, 1872-1944
Like a blueprint for Modernism, Mondrian’s T-square style boils painting
down to its basic building blocks (black lines, white canvas) and the three
primary colors (red, yellow, and blue), all arranged in orderly patterns.
   (When you come right down to it, that’s all painting ever has been. A
schematic drawing of, say, the Mona Lisa shows that it’s less about a
woman than about the triangles and rectangles of which she’s composed.)




    Mondrian started out painting realistic landscapes of the orderly fields in
his native Netherlands. Increasingly, he simplified them into horizontal and
vertical patterns. For Mondrian, who was heavy into Eastern mysticism, “up
vs. down” and “left vs. right” were the perfect metaphors for life’s dualities:
“good vs. evil,” “body vs. spirit,” “man vs. woman.” The canvas is a bird’s-
eye view of Mondrian’s personal landscape.

Constantin Brancusi, 1876-1957
Brancusi’s curved, shiny statues reduce objects to their essence. A bird is a
single stylized wing, the one feature that sets it apart from other animals. He
rounds off to the closest geometrical form, so a woman’s head becomes a
perfect oval on a cubic pedestal.
   Humans love symmetry (maybe because our own bodies are roughly
symmetrical) and find geometric shapes restful, even worthy of meditation.
Brancusi follows the instinct for order that has driven art from earliest
times, from circular Stonehenge and Egyptian pyramids, to Greek columns
and Roman arches, to Renaissance symmetry and the Native American
“medicine wheel.”
   To see a good selection of Brancusi’s work, visit his studio just outside
the Pompidou.
Paul Klee, 1879-1940
Paul Klee’s small and playful canvases are deceptively simple, containing
shapes so basic they can be read as universal symbols. Klee thought a wavy
line, for example, would always suggest motion, whereas a stick figure
would always mean a human—like the psychiatrist Carl Jung’s universal
dreams and symbols manifesting the “collective unconscious.”
    Klee saw these universals in the art of children, who express themselves
without censoring or cluttering things up with learning. His art has a
childlike playfulness and features simple figures painted in an uninhibited
frame of mind.
    Klee also turned to nature. The same forces that cause the wave to draw
a line of foam on the beach can cause a meditative artist to draw a squiggly
line of paint on a canvas. The result is a universal shape. True artists don’t
just paint nature, they become Nature.

Applied Arts
If you can’t handle modern art, sit on it! (Actually, please don’t.) The
applied arts—chairs, tables, lamps, and vases—are as much a part of the art
world as the fine arts. (Some say the first art object was the pot.) As
machines became as talented as humans, artists embraced new technology
and mass production to bring beauty to the masses. Look especially for
examples by the influential designers Gerrit Rietveld (1888-1964) and
Alvar Aalto (1898-1976).
Expressionism and Surrealism
This period could be called “World War I—The Death of Values.” Ankle-
deep in mud, a soldier shivers in a trench, waiting to be ordered “over the
top.” He’ll have to run through barbed wire, over fallen comrades, and into
a hail of machine-gun fire, only to capture a few hundred yards of
meaningless territory that will be lost the next day. This soldier was not
thinking about art.
    World War I left nine million dead. (During the war, France lost more
men in the Battle of Verdun than America lost in the entire Vietnam War.)
The war also killed the optimism and faith in mankind that had guided
Europe since the Renaissance. Now, rationality just meant schemes,
technology meant machines of death, and morality meant giving your life
for an empty cause.

Expressionism
Cynicism and decadence settled over postwar Europe, and artists such as
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Max Beckmann, George Grosz, Chaïm Soutine,
Otto Dix, and Oskar Kokoschka recorded it. They “expressed” their disgust
by showing a distorted reality that emphasized the ugly. Using the lurid
colors and simplified figures of the Fauves, they slapped paint on in thick
brushstrokes and depicted a hypocritical, hard-edged, dog-eat-dog world
that had lost its bearings. The people have a haunted look in their eyes—the
fixed stare of corpses and those who have to bury them.

Dada
When people could grieve no longer, they turned to grief’s giddy twin:
laughter. The war made all old values, including art, a joke. The Dada
movement, choosing a purposely childish name, made art that was
intentionally outrageous: a moustache on the Mona Lisa, a shovel hung on a
wall, or a modern version of a Renaissance “fountain”—a urinal (by either
Marcel Duchamp, or I. P. Freeley, 1917). It was a dig at all the pompous
prewar artistic theories based on the noble intellect of Rational Women and
Men. While the experts ranted on, Dadaists sat in the back of the class and
made cultural fart noises.
    Hey, I love this stuff. My mind says it’s sophomoric, but my heart
belongs to Dada.

Surrealism
Greek statues with sunglasses, a man as a spinning top, shoes becoming
feet, and black ants as musical notes...Surrealism. The world was moving
fast, and Surrealist artists such as Salvador Dalí, Max Ernst, and René
Magritte caught the jumble of images. The artist scatters seemingly
unrelated items on the canvas, which leaves us to trace the links in a kind of
connect-the-dots without numbers. If it comes together, the synergy of
unrelated things can be pretty startling. But even if the juxtaposed images
don’t ultimately connect, the artist has made you think, rerouting your
thoughts through new neural paths. If you don’t “get” it...you got it.
   Complicating the modern world was Freud’s discovery of the
“unconscious” mind that thinks dirty thoughts while we sleep. Many a
Surrealist canvas is an uncensored, stream-of-consciousness “landscape” of
these deep urges, revealed in the bizarre images of dreams.
   In dreams, sometimes one object can be two things at once: “I dreamt
that you walked in with a cat...no, wait, maybe you were the cat...no...”
Surrealists paint opposites like these and let them speak for themselves.
Salvador Dalí, 1904-1989
Salvador Dalí could draw exceptionally well. He painted “unreal” scenes
with photographic realism, thus making us believe they could really
happen. Seeing familiar objects in an unfamiliar setting—like a grand piano
adorned with disembodied heads of Lenin—creates an air of mystery, the
feeling that anything can happen. That’s both exciting and unsettling. Dalí’s
images—crucifixes, political and religious figures, naked bodies—pack an
emotional punch. Take one mixed bag of reality, jumble in a blender, and
serve on a canvas...Surrealism.




Abstract Surrealists
Abstract artists such as Joan Miró, Alexander Calder, and Jean Arp
described their subconscious urges using color and shapes alone, like
Rorschach inkblots in reverse.
    The thin-line scrawl of Miró’s work is like the doodling of a three-year-
old. You’ll recognize crudely drawn birds, stars, animals, and strange cell-
like creatures with whiskers (“Biological Cubism”). Miró was trying to
express the most basic of human emotions using the most basic of
techniques.
    Calder’s mobiles hang like Mirós in the sky, waiting for a gust of wind
to bring them to life.




    And talk about a primal image! Arp builds human beings out of amoeba-
like shapes.

More Modernists
Georges Rouault, 1871-1958
Young Georges Rouault was apprenticed to a maker of stained-glass
windows. Enough said?
   His paintings have the same thick, glowing colors, heavy black outlines,
simple subjects, and (mostly) religious themes. The style is modern, but the
mood is medieval, solemn, and melancholy. Rouault captures the tragic
spirit of those people—clowns, prostitutes, and sons of God—who have
been made outcasts by society.

Decorative Art
Most 20th-century paintings are a mix of the real world (“representation”)
and the colorful patterns of “abstract” art. Artists purposely distort camera-
eye reality to make the resulting canvas more decorative. So, Picasso
flattens a woman into a pattern of colored shapes, Pierre Bonnard makes a
man from a shimmer of golden paint, and Balthus turns a boudoir scene into
colorful wallpaper.

Patterns and Textures
Increasingly, you’ll have to focus your eyes to look at the canvases, not
through them, especially in art by Jean Dubuffet, Lucio Fontana, and Karel
Appel.
   Enjoy the lines and colors, but also a new element: texture. Some works
have very thick paint piled on—you can see the brushstroke clearly. Some
have substances besides paint applied to the canvas, such as Dubuffet’s
brown, earthy rectangles of real dirt and organic waste. Fontana punctures
the canvas so that the fabric itself (and the hole) becomes the subject.
Artists show their skill by mastering new materials. The canvas is a tray,
serving up a delightful array of different substances with interesting colors,
patterns, shapes, and textures.

Alberto Giacometti, 1901-1966
Giacometti’s skinny statues have the emaciated, haunted, and faceless look
of concentration camp survivors. The simplicity of the figures may be
“primitive,” but these aren’t stately, sturdy, Easter Island heads. Here, man
is weak in the face of technology and the winds of history.

Abstract Expressionism
America emerged from World War II as the globe’s superpower. With
Europe in ruins, New York replaced Paris as the art capital of the world.
The trend was toward bigger canvases, abstract designs, and
experimentation with new materials and techniques. It was called “Abstract
Expressionism”—expressing emotions and ideas using color and form
alone.

Jackson Pollock, 1912-1956
“Jack the Dripper” attacks convention with a can of paint, dripping and
splashing a dense web onto the canvas. Picture Pollock in his studio, as he
jives to the hi-fi, bounces off the walls, and throws paint in a moment of
enlightenment. Of course, the artist loses some control this way—control
over the paint flying in midair and over himself, now in an ecstatic trance.
Painting becomes a whole-body activity, a “dance” between the artist and
his materials.




    The act of creating is what’s important, not the final product. The canvas
is only a record of that moment of ecstasy.

Barnett Newman, 1905-1970, and Robert Rauschenberg,
1925-2008
All those huge, sparse canvases with just a few lines or colors—what reality
are they trying to show?
    In the modern world, we find ourselves insignificant specks in a vast and
indifferent universe. Every morning each of us must confront that big,
blank, existentialist canvas and decide how we’re going to make our mark
on it. Like, wow.
    Another influence was the simplicity of Japanese landscape painting. A
Zen master studies and meditates for years to achieve the state of mind in
which he can draw one pure line. These canvases, again, are only a record
of that state of enlightenment. (What is the sound of one brush painting?)
    On more familiar ground, postwar painters were following in the
footsteps of artists such as Mondrian, Klee, and Kandinsky (whose work
they must have considered “busy”). The geometrical forms here reflect the
same search for order, but these artists painted to the 5/4 asymmetry of
Dave Brubeck’s jazz classic, “Take Five.”

Pop Art
America’s postwar wealth made the consumer king. Pop Art is created from
the “pop”-ular objects of that throwaway society—a soup can, a car fender,
mannequins, tacky plastic statues, movie icons, advertising posters.
   Is this art? Are all these mass-produced objects beautiful? Or crap? If
they’re not art, why do we work so hard to acquire them? Pop Art, like
Dada, questions our society’s values.

Andy Warhol, 1928-1987
Warhol (who coined the idea of everyone having “15 minutes of fame” and
became a pop star himself) concentrated on another mass-produced
phenomenon: celebrities. He took publicity photos of famous people and
repeated them. The repetition—like the constant bombardment we get from
repeated images on television—cheapens even the most beautiful things.
    Pop Art makes you reassess what “beauty” really is. Take something out
of Sears and hang it in a museum and you have to think about it in a wholly
different way.
• Exit down the stairs by the ticket-takers on the fifth floor (the escalator
does not connect to the fourth floor) and browse your way back toward the
entrance. Our tour ends here, but there’s more contemporary art on the
fourth floor.


FOURTH FLOOR
Contemporary Art from 1980 to the Present
The “modern” world is history. Picasso and his ilk are now gathering dust
and boring art students everywhere. Minimalist painting and abstract
sculpture are old school. Enter the “postmodern” world, as seen through the
eyes of current artists.
    You’ll see fewer traditional canvases or sculptures. Artists have traded
paintbrushes for blowtorches (Miró said he was out to “murder” painting),
and blowtorches for computer mice. Mixed-media work is the norm,
combining painting, sculpture, photography, video/film, digital graphics and
computer programming, new resins, plastics, industrial techniques, and
lighting and sound systems.
    The Pompidou groups the work of these artists under somewhat arbitrary
labels—the artist as documentarian, as an archivist of events, or as a
producer of commercial goods. Don’t worry about trying to understand
these cryptic conceptual labels. Browse the floor and enjoy some of the
following trends:
    Installations: An entire room is given to an artist to prepare. Like
entering an art funhouse, you walk in without quite knowing what to
expect. (I’m always thinking, “Is this safe?”) Using the latest technology,
the artist engages all your senses by controlling the lights, sounds, and
sometimes even the smells.
    Digital Media: Holograms replace material objects, and elaborate
computer programming creates a fantastic multimedia display.
    Assemblages: Artists raid Dumpsters, recycling junk into the building
blocks for larger “assemblages.” Each piece is intended to be interesting
and tell its own story, and so is the whole sculpture. Weird, useless Rube
Goldberg machines make fun of technology.
    Natural Objects: A rock in an urban setting is inherently interesting.
    The Occasional Canvas: This comes as a familiar relief. Artists of the
New Realism labor over painstaking, hyper-realistic canvases to re-create
the glossy look of a photo or video image.
    Interaction: Some exhibits require your participation, whether you push
a button to get the contraption going, touch something, or just walk around
the room. In some cases the viewer “does” art, rather than just staring at it.
If art is really meant to change, it has to move you—literally.
    Deconstruction: Late-20th-century artists critiqued (or “deconstructed”)
society by examining our underlying assumptions. One way to do it is to
take a familiar object (say, a crucifix) out of its normal context (a church)
and place it in a new setting (a jar of urine). Video and film can deconstruct
something by playing it over and over, ad nauseam. Words printed on a
canvas force you to compare the meaning with the visual meaning of the
painting. Ad copy painted on canvas deconstructs itself.
    Conceptual Art: The concept of which object to pair with another to
produce maximum effect is the key. (Crucifix + urine = million-dollar
masterpiece.)
    Postmodernism: Artists shamelessly recycled older styles and motifs to
create new combinations: Greek columns paired with Gothic arches,
Christmas lights, and a hip-hop soundtrack.
    Performance Art: This is a kind of mixed-media of live performance.
Many artists—who in another day would have painted canvases—have
turned to music, dance, theater, and performance art. This art form is often
interactive, by dropping the illusion of a performance and encouraging
audience participation. When you finish with the Pompidou Center, go
outside for some of the street theater.
