Champs-Élysées Walk

CHAMPS-ELYSEES WALK
From the Arc de Triomphe to Place de la Concorde
Orientation
The Walk Begins
   1 Arc de Triomphe


  Map: Champs-Elysées Walk
     2 Champs-Elysées
    3 Rue de Tilsitt and Qatar Embassy

    4 McDonald’s

    5 Glitz: Lido and Petit Bateau

    6 Louis Vuitton

    7 Café Culture: Fouquet’s and Ladurée

    9 French Shopping: Arcades Mall, Sephora, Guerlain

    11 International Shopping

    12 Rond-Point

    14 Grand and Petit Palais

    15 Place de la Concorde

    Near Place de la Concorde
Don’t leave Paris without a stroll along Avenue des Champs-Elysées
(shahnz ay-lee-zay). This is Paris at its most Parisian: monumental
sidewalks, stylish shops, elegant cafés, glimmering showrooms, and proud
Parisians on parade. The whole world seems to gather here to strut along the
boulevard. It’s a great walk by day, and even better at night, allowing you to
tap into the city’s global scene. On the first Sunday of the month, it’s
delightfully traffic-free.


                            Orientation
Length of This Walk: This two-mile, slightly downhill walk takes three
   hours (including a one-hour visit to the Arc de Triomphe). Métro stops
   are located every few blocks along the Champs-Elysées. With less time,
   end the walk at Rond-Point (Mo: FDR).
Getting There: To reach the Arc de Triomphe at Place Charles de Gaulle,
   take the Métro to Charles de Gaulle-Etoile. Following Sortie #1 and
   Champs-Elysées/Arc de Triomphe signs, which deposit you right at the
   entry to the pedestrian tunnel under all the traffic to the arch itself. From
   Rue Cler and the Montparnasse area, bus #92 works best (see the map
   on here for stop locations).
Arc de Triomphe: Free to view exterior; 284 steps to rooftop—€13, timed-
   entry tickets available online, free for those under age 18, free on first
   Sun of month Nov-March, covered by Museum Pass; daily 10:00-23:00,
   Oct-March until 22:30, last entry 45 minutes before closing, www.paris-
   arc-de-triomphe.fr. With a timed-entry ticket or the Museum Pass,
   you’ll bypass the slow underground ticket line (pass holders do not need
   to reserve a time slot).


             Eating near the Champs-Elysées
  Good eating options on the Champs-Elysées are slim. Most sit-down
  restaurants have lazy service, mediocre food, and inflated prices.
  Instead, try the lovely café at the Petit Palais near the end of this
  walk, or one of these places:
     $$ Comptoir de L’Arc, a block from the Arc toward the Eiffel
  Tower, is a bustling place dishing out good plats du jour to locals, with
  side-Arc views from its terrace tables just below the tourist flow
  (Mon-Fri 7:00 until late, closed Sat-Sun, 73 Avenue Marceau, +33 1
  47 20 72 04).
     $ La Brioche Dorée and $ Boulangerie Paul sit side-by-side
  smack on the Champs-Elysées, each offering great Champs-side tables
  and good sandwiches and salads (about halfway along this walk at
  #82). Dorée has WCs, air-conditioning, and extra seating upstairs. A
  second Dorée is at #144, much closer to the Arc de Triomphe.


     You can tour the base of the Arc sans ticket and line, but you need
   one for the climb to the top (in a line you can’t avoid). The elevator is
   only for people with disabilities and runs only to the museum level, not
   to the top, which requires a 47-step climb (though if you or your partner
   feel unable to make the climb it’s worth asking). The Arc is quieter first
   thing and after 17:00—come for sunset.
Grand Palais: This exhibition venue is closed for renovation until at least
   2024.
Petit Palais: Free, Tue-Sun 10:00-18:00, Fri until 21:00 for special exhibits
   (fee), closed Mon, good café.
Services: A small, often-crowded WC is near the top of the Arc de
   Triomphe. You’ll find others at the Arcades des Champs-Elysées, Petit
   Palais (no lines), Tuileries Garden (end of the walk), and at most bigger
   stores along the route.
Starring: Grand boulevards, grander shops, and grandiose monuments.



                       The Walk Begins
 1   Arc de Triomphe
• Start at the top of the Champs-Elysées and view the Arc from the right side
of the boulevard before crossing to it. There’s just one pedestrian tunnel
(near the Métro entrance, to the right of the Arc as you face it).

Exterior
Construction of the 165-foot-high arch began in 1809 to honor Napoleon’s
soldiers, who, despite being vastly outnumbered by the Austrians, scored a
remarkable victory at the Battle of Austerlitz. Patterned after the ceremonial
arches of ancient Roman conquerors (but more than twice the size), it
celebrates Napoleon as emperor of a “New Rome.” On the arch’s massive
left pillar, a relief sculpture shows a toga-clad Napoleon posing confidently,
while an awestruck Paris—crowned by her city walls—kneels at his
imperial feet. Napoleon died before the Arc’s completion, but it was
finished in time for his 1840 funeral procession to pass underneath, carrying
his remains (19 years dead) from exile in St. Helena to Paris.
    On the right pillar is the Arc’s most famous relief, La Marseillaise (Le
Départ des Volontaires de 1792, by François Rude). Lady Liberty—looking
like an ugly reincarnation of Joan of Arc—screams, “Freedom is this way!”
and points the direction with a sword. The soldiers beneath her are tired,
naked, and stumbling, but she rallies them to carry on the fight against
oppression.
• Now approach the Arc. Take the underground pedestrian walkway—don’t
try to cross the roundabout in all the traffic, as there are no crosswalks.




    It’s worthwhile to explore the base of the arch even if you don’t climb it.
There’s no cost to wander around. After crossing through the tunnel, you’ll
find the ticket booth (you can skip if you have a ticket or Museum Pass, or
are not climbing the tower). Before leaving the tunnel, notice the long photo
on the wall showing the nighttime view circa 1995 from the top of the arch.
It shows 360 degrees: Count the 12 avenues. If you’re climbing to the top,
walk up the stairs to the base of the arch and find the line.
    Today, the Arc de Triomphe is dedicated to the glory of all French
armies. Walk around the arch to reach its center and stand directly beneath
it on the faded eagle. You’re surrounded by the lists of French victories
since the Revolution—19th century on the arch’s taller columns, 20th
century in the pavement. On the shorter columns you’ll see lists of generals
(with a line under the names of those who died in battle). Find the flower-
lined Tomb of the Unknown Soldier (from World War I). Every day at
18:30 since just after World War I, the flame has been rekindled and new
flowers set in place.




    Like its Roman ancestors, this arch has served as a parade gateway for
triumphal armies (French or foe) and important ceremonies. From 1940 to
1944, a large swastika flew from here as Nazis goose-stepped down the
Champs-Elysées. In August 1944 General Charles de Gaulle led Allied
troops under this arch as they celebrated liberation. Today, national parades
start and end here with one minute of silence.

Inside the Arc and the View from the Top
Ascend the Arc via the 284 steps inside the north pillar. Catch your breath
two-thirds of the way up in the small exhibition area (WC also on this
mezzanine level). It hosts ho-hum exhibits about the arch and, of course,
there’s a gift shop.
    From the top you have an eye-popping view of tout Paris. You’re gazing
at the home of 11 million people in greater Paris. (The city center has about
2.3 million residents and covers 40 square miles—a quarter the size of
Denver.) With the highest density of any city in Europe, twice that of New
York City, Paris has a powerful vibrancy day and night.
    Looking East down the Champs-Elysées: Scan the cityscape of
downtown Paris. That lonely hill in the distance a bit to the left is
Montmartre, topped by the white dome of Sacré-Cœur; until 1860, this hill
town was a separate city. Panning right, find the bulky Opéra Garnier’s
pitched roof rising above other buildings, the blue top of the modern
Pompidou Center, and the Louvre and Tuileries Garden capping the east
end of the Champs-Elysées. Let your eyes move right to see the distant twin
towers of Notre-Dame, the dome of the Panthéon breaking the horizon, a
block of small skyscrapers on a hill (the Quartier d’Italie, which is outside
the city center), and the golden dome of Les Invalides. Near Les Invalides,
find the lonely-looking Montparnasse Tower, standing like the box the
Eiffel Tower came in; in the early 1970s, it served as a wake-up call to city
planners that they needed to preserve building height restrictions and
strengthen urban design standards.
   Aside from the Montparnasse Tower, notice the symmetry of this
massive traffic hub. Each corner building surrounding the arch is part of an
elegant grand scheme. The beauty of Paris—basically a flat basin with a
river running through it—is man-made. There’s a harmonious relationship
between the width of its grand boulevards and the standard height and
design of the buildings. If you continue panning right and then look closer,
you’ll spot several small, golden onion domes crowning a vast new Russian
Orthodox cathedral and spiritual center.
   Looking West: Cross the arch and look to the west. In the distance, the
huge, white, rectangular Grande Arche de la Défense, standing amid
skyscrapers, is the final piece of a grand city axis—from the Louvre, up the
Champs-Elysées to the Arc de Triomphe, and continuing on to a forest of
skyscrapers at La Défense, three miles away. Former French president
François Mitterrand had the Grande Arche built as a centerpiece of this
mini-Manhattan. Notice the contrast between the skyscrapers of La Défense
and the more uniform heights of the buildings closer to the Arc de
Triomphe.




    Below you, the wide boulevard lined with grass and trees angling to
your left is Avenue Foch (named after the WWI hero), which ends at the
huge Bois de Boulogne park. Avenue Foch is the best address to have in
Paris. Nicknamed the “Avenue of Millionaires,” it was home to the last shah
of Iran and Aristotle Onassis. Today many fabulously rich Arabs call it
home. To the left of La Défense (in the Bois de Boulogne) are the glassy
“sails” of the Louis Vuitton Foundation. This wavy building, another of
Frank Gehry’s wild creations, offers contemporary art exhibits. The
skyscraper to the right between you and La Défense is the Hôtel Hyatt
Regency Paris Etoile, which delivers a fine view from its bar (described on
here).
    The Etoile: Gaze down at what appears to be a chaotic traffic mess. The
12 boulevards that radiate from the Arc de Triomphe (forming an étoile,
star) were part of Baron Haussmann’s master plan for Paris: the creation of
a series of major boulevards intersecting at diagonals, with monuments
(such as the Arc de Triomphe) as centerpieces of those intersections (see
sidebar on here). Haussmann’s plan did not anticipate the automobile—
obvious when you watch the traffic scene below. But see how smoothly it
functions. Cars entering the circle have the right of way (the only
roundabout in France with this rule); those in the circle must yield. Still,
there are plenty of accidents, many caused by tourists oblivious to the rules.
Tired of disputes, insurance companies split the fault and damages of any
Arc de Triomphe accident 50/50. The trick is to make a parabola—get to the
center ASAP, and then begin working your way out two avenues before you
want to exit.
• We’ll start our stroll down the Champs-Elysées at the Charles de Gaulle-
Etoile Métro stop, on the north (sunnier) side of the street where the tunnel
deposits you. Look straight down the Champs-Elysées toward Tuileries
Garden at the far end.
 2   Champs-Elysées
You’re at the top of one of the world’s grandest and most celebrated streets,
home to big business, celebrity cafés, glitzy nightclubs, high-fashion
shopping, and international people-watching. People gather here to
celebrate Bastille Day (July 14), World Cup triumphs, the finale of the Tour
de France (see sidebar later in the chapter), and the ends of wars.
    In 1667, Louis XIV opened the first section of the street as a short
extension of the Tuileries Garden. This year is considered the birth of Paris
as a grand city. The Champs-Elysées soon became the place to cruise in
your carriage. (It still is today; traffic can be gridlocked even at midnight.)
One hundred years later, the café scene arrived. From the 1920s until the
1960s, this boulevard was pure elegance; Parisians actually dressed up to
come here. It was mainly residences, rich hotels, and cafés. Then, in 1963,
the government pumped up the neighborhood’s commercial metabolism by
bringing in suburban trains to give commuters easy access, and pfft—there
went the neighborhood. Today’s visitors can expect security checks inside
any store on this famous avenue.
• Start your descent, pausing at the first tiny street you cross, Rue de Tilsitt.
This street is part of a “shadow ring road”—an option for drivers who’d
like to avoid the chaos of the Arc—complete with stoplights.
 3   Rue de Tilsitt and Qatar Embassy
A few steps down Rue de Tilsitt is a building housing the Qatar Embassy
(stand as far back as you can to take it in). It’s one of the few survivors of a
dozen uniformly U-shaped buildings from Haussmann’s original 1853
grand design.
   Back on the main drag, look across to the other side of the Champs-
Elysées at the big, gray, concrete-and-glass “Publicis” building. Ugh. In the
1960s, venerable old buildings (similar to the Qatar Embassy building)
were leveled to make way for new commercial operations like Publicis.
Then, in 1985, a law prohibited the demolition of the old building fronts
that gave the boulevard a uniform grace. Today, many modern businesses
hide behind preserved facades.
   Most of this tour is a stroll down the left side, which—because it gets
more sun and therefore lots more pedestrians—earns landlords double the
rent.
   The nouveau Champs-Elysées, revitalized in 1994, has newer benches
and lamps, broader sidewalks, all-underground parking, and a fleet of
green-suited workers who drive motorized street cleaners. Blink away the
modern elements, and it’s not hard to imagine the boulevard pre-1963, with
only the finest structures lining both sides all the way to the palace gardens.
 4   McDonald’s
A hundred yards farther down on the left (at #140), the arrival of
McDonald’s in the 1970s was a shock to the boulevard...and to the country.
At first it was allowed to have only white arches painted on the window.
Today, dining chez MacDo has become typically Parisian. France has more
than a thousand McDonald’s, and the Champs-Elysées branch is considered
the most profitable one in the world.
    A Big Mac here, at a sidewalk table, buys good people-watching. Notice
how many of the happy clients are French and how efficient the big screens
are for managing the onslaught of orders. The popularity of le fast-food in
Paris is a sign that life has changed, and that the era of two-hour lunches is
passé. The most commonly ordered dish in French restaurants is now—by
far and away—the hamburger (both as fast food and as a trendy gourmet
dish). The French must now compete in a global world, and if that means
adopting a more American lifestyle, c’est la vie.



                         Le Tour de France
  On one day every July, the Champs-Elysées is the focus of the world’s
  sports fans, when it serves as the finish line of the Tour de France
  bicycle race. (While the overall winner is decided by the time they
  arrive in Paris, the last stage—which includes 10 laps on this
  boulevard—is one last chance for bikers to take home a yellow jersey.)
    For three weeks, French sporting life comes to a standstill as the
Tour de France whizzes across the nation’s landscape and TV screens,
pushing the world’s top cyclists to their physical extremes and fans to
the edges of their seats. What began in 1903 as a six-day publicity
stunt for a cycling newspaper—in the era of wood-framed bikes and
wine-and-cigarette breaks—has since grown into the sport’s most
prestigious race: a grueling 21-day, 2,000-mile test of strength and
stamina, fueled by cutting-edge equipment and training regimens.
    The route changes each year, but always finishes on the Champs-
Elysées. The riders cycle slowly into Paris from its outskirts, savoring
the views. Then, as they approach the city center, the race begins in
earnest. Up and down the Champs-Elysées they go, making several
laps. Thousands of spectators line the street, cheering them on. Finally,
the cyclists speed down the boulevard one last time and cross the
finish line, spilling into Place de la Concorde. The winner takes a slow
victory lap, followed by the peloton (the pack), to acknowledge the
crowd and then stops at a makeshift podium at the base of the street.
There he’s declared champion and raises his fists in salute, exalted by
the dramatic backdrop of the Arc de Triomphe.
    The long race is divided into daily stages, during which riders
compete both as individuals and as members of their nine-man team.
While the Tour produces only one overall winner, cycling is very
much a team sport, and each member is critical (the loss of any rider
along the way generally dooms a team’s chances).
    Minimizing air resistance is key to strategy, and riders spend most
of each stage “drafting” behind domestiques (“servants,” usually
young riders paying their dues), who take turns pedaling in front. The
team’s constant maneuvering is a matter of choreographed precision,
aimed at minimizing fatigue...and the chance of a collision. At the end
of each stage, fans breathlessly watch for that critical moment when
the lead riders break away for the final sprint. Meanwhile, the team
tries to jockey its way to the best position within the peloton while
plotting how best to tap its members’ varied talents over the course of
the race.
    Specialists ride to bolster their team and to compete for their own
distinctions: Climbers, usually smaller racers, battle to wear the
maillot à pois rouges (red-polka-dot jersey), awarded to the “King of
the Mountains.” Bigger riders are usually sprinters, who vie for the
maillot vert (green jersey). Time trialists help lower the team’s
aggregate time by excelling at individual races, where they must
maintain high speeds over a long distance. The team’s star is its
captain, usually a solid “all-rounder.” He’s going for the famous
maillot jaune (yellow jersey), worn by whoever holds the overall lead
in the “general classification” standings at the end of each stage. A
complex point system helps determine who has the lowest cumulative
time—and, ultimately, who gets the €1.5 million prize, and recognition
as the world’s greatest cyclist.
    If you catch the Tour in person, you’ll experience the excitement
firsthand and hear the loud whoosh of passing cyclists—but they’re
gone in a blink (viewing is best—and most crowded—on uphill
slopes; for dates and details, see www.letour.fr). Any time of year, you
imagine the Tour’s final stretch here on the nation’s grandest avenue,
     where cheering crowds cram the sidewalks, their necks craned for a
     glimpse of the yellow jersey.


 5    Glitz: Lido and Petit Bateau
In the 19th century, this was a district for horse stables; today, it’s the
district of garages, limo companies, and fancy car dealerships.
    At #116 is the famous Lido, Paris’ largest cabaret (and a multiplex
cinema). For 75 years, the Lido has staged glitzy Vegas-style shows
featuring sequined dancers, cabaret singers, and vaudeville acts. You can
step into the lobby, and see a video advertising the show (from €75 for a
seat, €145-330 for dinner and the show). Moviegoing on the Champs-
Elysées provides another kind of fun, with theaters showing the very latest
releases. Find the posted movie schedule and check if there are films you
recognize, then look for the showings (séances). “VOST” (version originale
sous-titrée) next to the time indicates the film will be shown in its original
language with French subtitles; “VF” stands for version française.
    Two doors farther down is Petit Bateau. The store’s presence on the
Champs-Elysées is proof of the success of the government’s efforts to
encourage couples to have more babies. With generous financial rewards
for each child, France’s birthrate is well above the rest of Europe’s.
• Next, cross the boulevard (a few steps uphill), pausing at the center to
enjoy the view and energy. Look back at the Arc de Triomphe, its rooftop
bristling with tourists. Notice the variety of architecture along this street—
old and elegant, new, and new-behind-old-facades. Notice too how the
broad sidewalks and now the bike lanes constrict traffic even more. (They
say city politics here is divided as much by those who own cars and those
who don’t as by left and right.) Continue to the big and proud Louis Vuitton
store.
 6    Louis Vuitton
The flagship store of this famous producer of leather bags may be the
largest single-brand luxury store in the world. Step inside. The store
provides enough salespeople to treat each customer royally—if there’s a
line, it means shoppers have overwhelmed the place. If you need clothing
and shoes to put in your fancy new bag, head upstairs.
• Continue downhill. Cross Avenue George V and find Fouquet’s, a Paris
institution. The white spire you see down Avenue George V is the American
Cathedral.
 7   Café Culture: Fouquet’s and Ladurée
Fouquet’s café-restaurant (#99), under the red awning, is the place to enjoy
a slow (if pricey) coffee on the Champs-Elysées. Opened in 1899 as a
coachman’s bistro, Fouquet’s gained fame as the hangout of France’s WWI
biplane fighter pilots—those who weren’t shot down by Germany’s
infamous “Red Baron.” It also served as James Joyce’s dining room.
    Since the early 1900s, Fouquet’s has been a favorite of French
celebrities. The golden plaques at the entrance honor winners of France’s
Oscar-like film awards, the Césars. There are plaques for Gérard Depardieu,
Catherine Deneuve, Yves Montand, Roman Polanski, Juliette Binoche, and
several famous Americans (but not Jerry Lewis). More recent winners are
shown on the floor just inside. Every February, after the Césars are handed
out at a nearby theater, France’s biggest movie stars descend on Fouquet’s.
Here they emerge from their limos for the night’s grandest red-carpet event
as they make their way inside for the official gala dinner.
    The hushed interior is at once classy and intimidating—and also a grand
experience...if you dare. Enter and be guided to a table, inside or out, where
you can splurge for a €6 espresso. Or, to say “I’m just looking” in French,
say “Je regarde”—zhuh ruh-gard (though fluent English is spoken). The
outdoor setting is more relaxed, but everyone still looks rich and famous to
me.
    Once threatened with foreign purchase and eventual destruction,
Fouquet’s was spared that fate when the government declared it a historic
monument. The upscale café was vandalized in March 2019 by anti-
government “yellow vest” protestors, who saw it as a symbol of France’s
elite. It was restored and back in business within six months.
    Ladurée (two blocks downhill at #75) is a classic 19th-century tea
salon/restaurant/pâtisserie. Nonpatrons can discreetly wander around the
place, though photos are not allowed. A coffee here is très élégant and
reasonable (I prefer the tables upstairs). The bakery sells traditional
macarons and cute little cakes to go. The rear café-bar feels otherworldly
bizarre.
• Cross back to the lively (north) side of the street. Macaron-lovers swoon at
Pierre Hermé. Others turn left and go about 20 yards uphill (to #92) where
a wall plaque marks the 8 place Thomas Jefferson lived while serving as
minister to France (1785-1789). He replaced popular Benjamin Franklin
but quickly made his own mark, extolling the virtues of America’s
Revolution to a country approaching its own. Back downhill, find two good-
value lunch options: Boulangerie Paul and La Brioche Dorée (see the
sidebar at the beginning of this chapter).
 9   French Shopping: Arcades Mall, Sephora, Guerlain
Stroll into the Arcades des Champs-Elysées mall at #76. With its fancy
lamps, mosaic floors, glass skylight, and classical columns, it captures faint
echoes of the années folles—the “crazy years,” as the Roaring ’20s were
called in France. Architecture buffs can observe how the flowery Art
Nouveau of the 1910s became the simpler, more geometric Art Deco of the
1920s. The Starbucks may seem out of place here, but the ambience is
great.
    Next door, at #74, the Galerie du Claridge building sports an old facade.
You’d never guess that its ironwork awning, balconies, putti, and sculpted
fantasy faces disguise an otherwise new building. One of the current tenants
is FNAC, a French version of Best Buy.
    For a noisy and fragrant commercial carnival of perfumes, and a chance
to sense the French passion for cosmetics, take your nose sightseeing at #72
and glide down the ramp of the largest Sephora in France. Grab a
disposable white strip from a lovely clerk, spritz it with a sample, and sniff.
In the main showroom, women’s perfumes line the right wall and men’s line
the left—organized alphabetically by company, from Armani to Versace.
    While Sephora seems to be going all out to attract the general public, the
venerable Guerlain perfume shop sits next door and shows off a dash of the
Champs-Elysées’ old gold-leaf elegance. Notice the 1914 details. Climb
upstairs. It’s très French. If Sephora is a mosh-pit for your nose, Guerlain is
a harem.
    At the intersection with Rue la Boëtie, the English-speaking pharmacy
is open until midnight (entrance around the corner).
    Car buffs should detour across the boulevard and park themselves at the
sleek café (with great Champs-Elysées views) in the 10 Renault store (open
noon-midnight). Though the exhibits change regularly, there’s always
something hot to entertain car buffs.
11   International Shopping
Back on earth, a block or so farther down on the north side, the Disney and
Adidas stores are reminders of global economics: The French may live in a
world of their own, but they love these places as much as Americans do.
12   Rond-Point
At the Rond-Point des Champs-Elysées, the shopping ends and the park
begins. This round, leafy traffic circle is often colorful, lined with flowers
or seasonal decorations (thousands of pumpkins at Halloween, hundreds of
decorated trees at Christmas). Avenue Montaigne, jutting off to the right, is
lined by the most exclusive shops in town—the kinds of places where you
need to make an appointment to buy a dress.
• If you’re pooped, Rond-Point’s Métro stop is a good place to cut this walk
short. Otherwise, continue downhill on the right side. Arc around Rond-
Point and stroll for about 200 yards farther downhill. The square at Place
Clemenceau and Avenue de Marigny features a high-pedestaled 13 statue of
Charles de Gaulle—ramrod-straight and striding purposefully, as he did
the day Paris was liberated in 1944. One long block up Avenue de Marigny
to the north is the well-secured Elysée Palace—the official residence of the
French president. But our walk takes us south to the...




14   Grand and Petit Palais
From the statue of de Gaulle, a grand boulevard (Avenue Winston
Churchill) passes through the site of the 1900 World’s Fair, leading between
the glass- and steel-domed Grand and Petit Palais exhibition halls and
across the river over the ornate bridge called Pont Alexandre III. (You can
view these sights from the statue, if you don’t feel like walking down to the
bridge.) Imagine pavilions like the two you see today lining this street all
the way to the golden dome of Les Invalides—examples of the “can-do”
spirit that ran rampant in Europe at the dawn of the 20th century.
    Today, the huge Grand Palais (on the right side, under renovation until at
least 2024) houses impressive temporary exhibits. The smaller Petit Palais
(left side) has a pleasing permanent collection of lesser paintings by
Courbet, Monet, Pissarro, Cézanne, and other 19th-century masters. It’s free
to enter and has a garden café that’s worth a quick detour (fine WCs with no
lines). For more on these museums, see here.




   Looking to the Seine, notice the exquisite Pont Alexandre III, spiked
with golden statues and ironwork lamps, which was built to celebrate a
turn-of-the-20th-century treaty between France and Russia. The grand and
gilded dome in the distance marks Les Invalides, built by Louis XIV as a
veterans’ hospital for his battle-weary troops (covered in the Army Museum
and Napoleon’s Tomb Tour). The esplanade leading up to Les Invalides—
possibly the largest patch of accessible grass in the city—gives soccer balls
and Frisbees a warm Paris welcome.
• From the de Gaulle statue it’s a straight shot down the rest of the Champs-
Elysées to the finish line. (Speaking of finish lines, this stretch is where the
Tour de France reaches its annual climax—see sidebar.) The plane trees
that you’ll see—a kind of sycamore with peeling bark—thrive even in big-
city pollution. They’re a legacy of Napoleon III—president/emperor from
1849 to 1870—who had 600,000 trees planted to green up the city. Your
final destination is the 21-acre Place de la Concorde. View it from the
obelisk in the center.

15   Place de la Concorde
During the Revolution, this was the Place de la Révolution. The guillotine
sat on this square, and many of the 2,780 people who were beheaded during
the Revolution lost their bodies here during the Reign of Terror. A bronze
plaque in the ground in front of the obelisk memorializes the place where
Louis XVI, Marie-Antoinette, Georges Danton, Charlotte Corday, and
Maximilien de Robespierre, among about 1,200 others, were made “a foot
shorter on top.” Three people worked the guillotine: One managed the
blade, one held the blood bucket, and one caught the head, raising it high to
the roaring crowd. (In 1981, France abolished the death penalty—one of
many preconditions for membership in today’s European Union.)
    The 3,300-year-old, 72-foot, 220-ton, red granite, hieroglyph-inscribed
obelisk of Luxor now forms the centerpiece of Place de la Concorde. Here
—on the spot where Louis XVI was beheaded—his brother (Charles X)
erected this obelisk to honor those who’d been executed. (Charles became
king when the monarchy was restored after Napoleon.) The obelisk was
carted here from Egypt in the 1830s. The gold pictures on the pedestal tell
the story of the obelisk’s incredible two-year journey: pulled down from the
entrance to Ramses II’s Temple of Amon in Luxor; encased in wood; loaded
onto a boat built to navigate both shallow rivers and open seas; floated
down the Nile, across the Mediterranean, along the Atlantic coast, and up
the Seine; and unloaded here, where it was reerected in 1836. Its glittering
gold-leaf cap is a recent addition (1998), replacing the original, which was
stolen 2,500 years ago.
    Looking up the Champs-Elysées, the obelisk forms a center point along
a line that locals call the “royal perspective.” You can hang a lot of history
along this straight line (Louvre-obelisk-Arc de Triomphe-Grande Arche de
la Défense). The Louvre symbolizes the old regime (the divine right of
kings). The obelisk and Place de la Concorde symbolize the people’s
Revolution (cutting off the king’s head). The Arc de Triomphe calls to mind
the triumph of nationalism (victorious armies carrying national flags under
the arch). And the huge modern arch in the distance, surrounded by the
headquarters of multinational corporations, heralds a future in which
business entities are more powerful than nations.
• Our walk is over. From here the closest Métro stop is Concorde (entrance
hides in the northeast corner of the square, away from the river on the
Tuileries Garden side); buses #42 and #73 stop in the square and run up the
Champs-Elysées (#42 continues to the Eiffel Tower). Taxis congregate
outside Hôtel Crillon. But if you’re not quite ready to go, Paris has more to
offer...

Near Place de la Concorde
The beautiful Tuileries Garden (with a public WC just inside on the right) is
just through the iron gates. Pull up a chair next to a pond or at one of the
cafés in the garden. From the garden you can access the Orangerie Museum
and, at the other end, the Louvre (this book includes tours of both
museums).
    On the north side of Place de la Concorde, 16 Hôtel Crillon is one of
Paris’ most exclusive hotels. Of the twin buildings that guard the entrance
to Rue Royale (which leads to the Greek-style Church of the Madeleine),
it’s the one on the left. This hotel is so fancy that one of its belle époque
rooms is displayed in New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art. Eleven
years before Louis XVI lost his head on Place de la Concorde, he met with
Benjamin Franklin in this hotel to sign a treaty recognizing the US as an
independent country. You can enter the hotel and enjoy a pricey hot or cold
drink in the elegant salon or way-classy bar. Today’s low-profile, heavily
fortified US Embassy and Consulate is located next to the hotel.
