Orangerie Museum Tour

ORANGERIE MUSEUM TOUR
Musée de l’Orangerie
Orientation
The Tour Begins
  MONET’S WATER LILIES
  WALTER-GUILLAUME COLLECTION
    Map: Walter-Guillaume Collection
This Impressionist museum is as lovely as a water lily. Step out of the tree-
lined, sun-dappled Impressionist painting that is the Tuileries Garden and
into the Orangerie (oh-rahn-zhuh-ree), a little bijou of select works by
Monet, Renoir, Matisse, Picasso, and others.
    On the main floor you’ll find the main attraction, Monet’s Water Lilies
(Nymphéas), floating dreamily in oval rooms. The rooms were designed in
the 1920s to display this art, following the artist’s exacting specifications.
But in the 1960s the museum added a floor above the Water Lilies, cutting
them off from the daylight that was, after all, their inspiration and subject
matter. In 2006 the upstairs collection was moved underground, and the
upper floor was transformed into a tall skylight—drenching the Water Lilies
in natural light.




    In the underground gallery are select works of other Impressionist
heavyweights well worth your time. The museum is small enough to enjoy
in a short visit, but complete enough to show the bridge from
Impressionism to Modernism. And it’s all beautiful.
                            Orientation
Cost: €12.50 timed-entry ticket required (purchase online in advance), free
   for those under 18, free on the first Sun of the month, €18 combo-ticket
   with Orsay Museum, ask about combo-ticket with Monet’s Garden and
   House at Giverny, covered by Museum Pass.
Hours: Wed-Mon 9:00-18:00, closed Tue.
Information: +33 1 44 77 80 07, www.musee-orangerie.fr.
Reserved Entry: The Orsay requires all visitors—including Museum Pass
   holders—to reserve a time slot for your visit. In quiet times, you might
   be able to get a reservation in person for the same day, but I’d err on the
   side of booking ahead.
When to Go: The museum is small and popular. It’s most crowded on
   weekends and 14:00-18:00.
Getting There: It’s in the Tuileries Garden near Place de la Concorde (Mo:
   Concorde) and a lovely 15-minute stroll from the Orsay Museum
   through the Tuileries.
Getting In: A security checkpoint causes lines, but there may be a shorter
   security line for Museum Pass holders.
Tours: €6 guided tours in English are offered a few times a week; ask for
   the current program. The €5 audioguide adds nothing beyond what’s in
   this book on the Water Lilies, but it provides good detail about
   individual canvases in the Walter-Guillaume Collection.
Length of This Tour: Allow one hour. Temporary exhibitions often merit
   extra time. With less time, you could see (if not “experience”) the two
   rooms of Water Lilies in a glance.
Starring: Claude Monet’s Water Lilies and select works by the pioneers of
   modern painting.
Cuisine Art: Between the two floors, a cheery café with reasonable prices
   offers a welcome pause.



                        The Tour Begins
MONET’S WATER LILIES
• Monet’s Water Lilies float serenely in two pond-shaped rooms, straight
ahead past the ticket takers. Examine them up close to see Monet’s
technique; stand back to take in the whole picture.

Salle I
Like Beethoven going deaf, a nearly blind Claude Monet (1840-1926)
wrote his final symphonies on a monumental scale. Even as he struggled
with cataracts, he planned a series of huge six-foot-tall canvases of water
lilies to hang in special rooms at the Orangerie.




    These eight mammoth, curved panels immerse you in Monet’s garden.
We’re looking at the pond in his garden at Giverny—dotted with water
lilies, surrounded by foliage, and dappled by the reflections of the sky,
clouds, and trees on the surface. The water lilies (nymphéas in French)
range from plain green lily pads to flowers of red, white, yellow, lavender,
and various combos.
    The effect is intentionally disorienting; the different canvases feature
different parts of the pond from different angles, at different times of day,
with no obvious chronological order. Monet mingles the pond’s many
elements and lets us sort it out.
• Start with the long wall on your right (as you enter) and work
counterclockwise.
    It’s Morning on the pond at Giverny. The blue pond is the center of the
composition, framed by the green, foliage-covered banks at either end.
Lilies float in the foreground, and the pond stretches into the distance.
    The sheer scale of the Orangerie project was daunting for an artist in his
twilight years. This vast painting is made from four separate canvases
stitched together and spans 6 feet 6 inches by 55 feet. Altogether, Monet
painted 1,950 square feet of canvas to complete the Water Lilies series.
Working at his home in Giverny, Monet built a special studio with skylights
and wheeled easels to accommodate the canvases.




   The panel at the far end, called Green Reflections, looks deep into the
dark water. Green willow branches are reflected on the water in a vertical
pattern; lily pads stretch horizontally.
   Along the other long wall (Clouds), green lilies float among lavender
clouds reflected in blue water. Staring into Monet’s pond, we see the
intermingling of the four classical elements—earth (foliage), air (the sky),
fire (sunlight), and water—the primordial soup of life.
    The true subject of these works is the play of reflected light off the
surface of the pond. Monet would work on several canvases at once, each
dedicated to a different time of day. He’d move with the sun from one
canvas to the next. Pan slowly around this hall. Watch the pond turn from
predawn darkness (far end) to clear morning light (Morning) to lavender
late afternoon (Clouds) to glorious sunset—in the west, where the sun
actually does set.
    In Sunset (near end), the surface of the pond is stained a bright yellow.
Get close and see how Monet worked. Starting from the gray of the blank
canvas (lower right), he’d lay down big, thick brushstrokes of a single
color, weaving them in a (mostly) horizontal and vertical pattern to create a
dense mesh of foliage. Over this, he’d add more color for the dramatic
highlights, until (in the center of the yellow) he got a dense paste of piled-
up paint. Up close, it’s a mess—but back up, and the colors begin to resolve
into a luminous scene. There are no clearly identifiable objects in this
canvas—no lilies, no trees, no clouds, no actual sun—just pure reflected
color.
• Continue into Salle II, starting with the long wall on your right and
working counterclockwise.
Salle II
In this room, Monet frames the pond with pillar-like tree trunks and
overhanging foliage. The compositions are a bit more symmetrical and the
color schemes more muted, with blue and lavender and green-brown.
Monet’s paintings almost always deal with the foundation of life and
unspoiled nature. This room begs you to stroll its banks, slowly ambling
with the artist in a complete loop—perhaps while listening to Debussy.
    In Willows on a Clear Morning (on the long wall to the right), we seem
to be standing on the bank of the pond, looking out through overhanging
trees at the water. The swirling branches and horizontal ripples on the pond
suggest a gentle breeze.
    The Two Willows (far end) frame a wide expanse of water dotted with
lilies and the reflection of gray-pink clouds.
    Stand close in front of Morning Willows (long left wall). Notice how a
“brown” tree is a tangled Impressionist beard of purple, green, blue, and
red. Each leaf is a long brushstroke, each lily pad a dozen smudges.
    At the near end, Reflections of Trees is a dark mess of blue-purple paint
brightened only by the lone rose lilies in the center. Each lily is made of
many Impressionist brushstrokes—each brushstroke is itself a mix of red,
white, and pink paints. Put a mental frame around a single lily, and it looks
like an abstract canvas. Monet demonstrates both his mastery of color and
his ability to render it with paint, applied generously and deftly. He wanted
the vibrant colors to keep firing your synapses.
    With this last canvas, darkness descends on the pond. The room’s large,
moody canvases, painted by an 80-year-old man in the twilight of his life,
invite meditation.
    For 12 years (1914-1926), Monet worked on these paintings obsessively.
A successful eye operation in 1923 gave him new energy. Monet completed
all the planned canvases, but he didn’t live to see them installed here. In
1927, the year after his death, these rooms were completed and the canvases
put in place. Some call this the first “art installation”—art displayed in a
space specially designed for it in order to enhance the viewer’s experience.
    Monet’s final work was more “modern” than Impressionist. Each canvas
is fully saturated with color, the distant objects as bright as the close ones.
Monet’s mosaic of brushstrokes forms a colorful design that’s beautiful
even if you just look “at” the canvas, like wallpaper. He wanted his
paintings to be realistic and three-dimensional, but with a pleasant, two-
dimensional pattern. As the subjects become fuzzier, the colors and patterns
predominate. Monet builds a bridge between Impressionism and modern,
abstract art.
    To see more of Monet’s work, visit the Marmottan Museum, and to
experience the place that inspired these water lilies, take a day trip to
Giverny (see the Giverny & Auvers-sur-Oise chapter).
• Descend the stairs to the lower floor. At the bottom of the stairs is a small
room with information about the pioneering art collector Paul Guillaume,
who funded and inspired many artists. This is a good place to read the
sidebar about him and prepare to tour the...


WALTER-GUILLAUME COLLECTION
These paintings—Impressionist, Fauvist, and Cubist—were amassed by the
art dealer Paul Guillaume and inherited by his wife, Domenica Guillaume
Walter. (You might see portraits of them as you tour their collection.) This
power couple’s collection is a snapshot of what was hot in the world of art,
circa 1920. The once-revolutionary Impressionists had become completely
old-school, though their paintings—now classics—commanded a fortune.
The bohemian Fauvists and Cubists, who invented modern art atop Butte
Montmartre (c. 1900-1915), had suddenly become the darlings of the art
world. But they refused to be categorized, and their work in the 1920s
branched out in dozens of new directions. Browse the rooms and watch the
various “isms” unfold. (Note that though the displays change often, the
place is small and you can easily find the artists covered in this tour, usually
in the order I’ve listed them.)
• Start with the long hallway.




Introduction to the Collection
This hallway features a smattering of paintings by some of the era’s greatest
pioneers. You’ll get a taste of Picasso’s many styles, Modigliani’s primitive
heads, Derain’s quirky still lifes, Matisse’s “flatness,” and Rousseau’s
charming childlike world. • You may see more of these artists later, but for
now focus on the hallway’s fine selection of work by two contrasting artists.

Pablo Picasso (1881-1973)
Picasso is a shopping mall of 20th-century artistic styles. The Orangerie’s
collection alone traces his life through several periods: Rose (red-toned
nudes with timeless, masklike faces), Blue (sad and tragic), Cubist (flat
planes of interwoven perspectives), and Classical (massive, sculptural
nudes—warm blow-up dolls with substance). If all roads lead to Paris, all
art styles flowed through Picasso.
Amedeo Modigliani (1884-1920)
In his short, poverty-stricken, drug-addled life, Modigliani produced
timeless-looking portraits of modern people. Born in Italy, Modigliani
moved to Paris, where he hung around the fringes of the avant-garde crowd
in the Montmartre. He gained a reputation for his alcoholic excesses and
outrageous behavior.
    Turning his back on the prevailing Fauvist/Cubist ambience of the times,
Modigliani developed a unique style, influenced by primitive tribal masks.
Modigliani died young, just as his work was gaining recognition.
• At the end of the hall, turn left toward Room 1, with works by Renoir. As
you enter each room you’ll find a brief description of the artists whose
works are shown there.



                  Paul Guillaume (1891-1934)
  For the first three decades of the 20th century, Paris was the center of
  the art world and the cradle of Modernism. At the center of Paris’ art
  scene was Paul Guillaume. An art dealer, promoter of “modern” art,
  and friend of out-there artists, Guillaume rose from humble beginnings
  to become wealthy and famous.
     In his early days, this self-made businessman struggled alongside
struggling painters in Montmartre—Picasso, Modigliani, Derain,
Laurencin, and many others. When the art market boomed in the
1920s (along with the stock market), he and his fellow bohemians
became the toasts of high society. With his flamboyant wife,
Domenica (also called Juliette), Guillaume hosted exotic parties
featuring what we would now call “performance art” to shock and
titillate the buying public.
     Many of their artist friends honored Paul and Domenica by
painting their portraits. In Modigliani’s Novo Pilota (pictured above),
young Paul strikes a pose as the dapper man-of-the-world he was soon
to become. The title of the painting is Italian for “new helmsman,”
reflecting Paul’s growing status as a champion of Modernism. Marie
  Laurencin’s portrait captures the winsome beauty of Domenica, whose
  charm helped establish the nouveau riche couple in social circles.
  André Derain’s and Kees van Dongen’s portraits feature Paul and
  Domenica when they are older, more confident, and sophisticated.
     The Orangerie displays Guillaume’s personal collection of favorite
  paintings. After Paul’s death, Domenica married Jean Walter and took
  her new husband’s last name, which is why it’s officially called the
  “Walter-Guillaume” collection.


Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841-1919)
These pleasant works by Renoir provide a smooth transition from 19th-
century Impressionism to 20th-century Modernism.
    Renoir loved to paint les femmes—women and girls—nude and
innocent, taking a bath or practicing the piano, all with rosy-red cheeks and
a relaxed grace. We get a feel for the happy family life of middle-class
Parisians (including Renoir’s own family) during the belle époque—the
beautiful age of the late 19th century. Renoir’s warm, sunny colors (mostly
red) are Impressionist, but he adds a classical touch with his clearer lines
and, in the later nudes, the voluptuousness of classical statues and paintings.
He seems to enjoy capturing the bourgeoisie, soft and elegant, enjoying
their leisure pursuits.
• The next artists may be featured in a different order, but in this small
museum, they’re not hard to find.

Paul Cézanne (1839-1906)
These small canvases of simple subjects pushed modern artists to reinvent
the rules of painting. The fruit of Cézanne’s still lifes has an underlying
geometry “built” from patches of color. In the shapes of nature, Cézanne
saw spheres, cylinders, and cones. He was fond of saying, “First you must
learn to paint these simple shapes. Then you will be able to do whatever
you want.”
   There’s no traditional shading to create the illusion of three dimensions,
but this fruit bulges out like a cameo from the canvas. The fruit is clearly at
eye level, yet it’s also clearly placed on a table seen from above. Cézanne
broke the rules, showing multiple perspectives at once. Picasso was
fascinated with Cézanne’s strange new world—which seems to give us a
peek into the secret lives of fruits.
    In his landscapes, Cézanne the Impressionist creates “brown” rocks out
of red, orange, and purple, and “green” trees out of green, lime, and purple.
Cézanne the proto-Cubist builds the rocks and trees with blocks of thick
brushstrokes.

Henri Matisse (1869-1954)
After World War I, Matisse moved to the south of France. He abandoned his
fierce Fauvist style and painted languid women in angular rooms with
arabesque wallpaper. These paler tones evoke the sunny luxury of the
Riviera. Traditional perspective is thrown out the occasional hotel window
as the women and furnishings in the “foreground” blend with the wallpaper
“background” to become part of the decor.




Marie Laurencin (1883-1956)
As the girlfriend of the poet and art critic Guillaume Apollinaire, Laurencin
was right at the heart of the Montmartre circle when modern art was born.
Her work—featuring women and cuddly animals intertwined in pink, blue,
and gray tones—spreads a pastel sheen over this tumultuous time.

André Derain (1880-1954)
Along with his friend Matisse, Derain helped invent Fauvism. Then, in
Montmartre, along with his friend Picasso, he helped forge Cubism. In the
1920s, this former wild beast (fauve) tamed his colors. He and Picasso rode
the rising wave of Classicism that surfaced after the chaos of the war years.
With sharp outlines and studied realism, Derain’s still lifes portray nudes,
harlequins, portraits, and landscapes—all in odd, angular poses.




Henri Rousseau (1844-1910)
Rousseau, a simple government worker, never traveled outside France. But
in his artwork he created an exotic, dreamlike, completely unique world. A
good example is his painting of a Parisian wedding set amid tropical trees
(you might find this painting in the main hall). Figures are placed in a 3-D
world, but the lines of perspective recede so steeply into the distance that
everyone is in danger of sliding down the canvas. Without any feet, the
subjects seem barely tethered to the earth. The way Rousseau put familiar
images in bizarre settings influenced the Surrealists. The Orangerie has
France’s biggest collection of Rousseaus.




Maurice Utrillo (1883-1955)
The hard-drinking, streetwise, bohemian artist is known for his postcard
views of Montmartre—whitewashed buildings under perennially cloudy
skies. For more on Utrillo, see here.
• Room 7 is often dedicated to the African sculpture Paul Guillaume
brought to Paris. This “primitive” style—of stylized features, elongated
heads and necks, and almond eyes—inspired painters of the period,
including Picasso, Derain, and Modigliani.




Chaim Soutine (1893-1943)
When his friend Modigliani died (and Modigliani’s widow committed
suicide), Soutine went into a tailspin of depression that drove him to paint.
The subjects are ordinary—landscapes, portraits, and a fine selection of
your favorite cuts of meat—but the style is deformed and Expressionistic. It
shows a warped world in a funhouse mirror, smeared onto the canvas with
thick, lurid colors. The never-cheerful Soutine was known to destroy work
that did not satisfy him. Stand and ponder why these made the cut.
