Sights: Left Bank

LEFT BANK
▲Latin Quarter (Quartier Latin)
This Left Bank neighborhood, immediately across the river from Notre-
Dame, was the center of Roman Paris. But the Latin Quarter’s touristy fame
relates to its intriguing, artsy, bohemian character. This was perhaps
Europe’s leading university district in the Middle Ages, when Latin was the
language of higher education. The neighborhood’s main boulevards (St.
Michel and St. Germain) are lined with cafés—once the haunts of great
poets and philosophers, now the hangouts of tired tourists. Though still
youthful and artsy, much of this area is touristy and filled with cheap North
African eateries. Exploring a few blocks up or downriver reveals the pulse
of what survives of Paris’ classic Left Bank.
     See the Left Bank Walk chapter.

▲▲Cluny Museum (Musée National du Moyen Age)
This treasure trove of Middle Ages (Moyen Age) art fills old Roman baths,
offering close-up looks at stained glass, Notre-Dame carvings, fine
goldsmithing and jewelry, and rooms of tapestries. The star here is the
exquisite series of six Lady and the Unicorn tapestries: A delicate, as-
medieval-as-can-be noble lady introduces a delighted unicorn to the senses
of taste, hearing, sight, smell, and touch.




  Cost and Hours: €12, free on first Sun of the month, covered by
Museum Pass; Tue-Sun 9:30-18:15, closed Mon, last entry 45 minutes
before closing; near corner of Boulevards St. Michel and St. Germain at 6
Place Paul Painlevé; Mo: Cluny La Sorbonne, St-Michel, or Odéon; +33 1
53 73 78 10, www.musee-moyenage.fr.
      See the Cluny Museum Tour chapter.

St. Germain-des-Prés Church
A church was first built on this site in AD 558. The church you see today
was constructed in 1163 and is all that’s left of a once sprawling and
influential monastery. The colorful interior reminds us that medieval
churches were originally painted in bright colors. The surrounding area
hops at night with venerable cafés, fire-eaters, mimes, and scads of artists.
    Cost and Hours: Free, daily 8:00-19:45, Mo: St-Germain-des-Prés.
    For more on St. Germain-des-Prés, see here.

▲St. Sulpice Church
For pipe-organ enthusiasts, a visit here is one of Europe’s great musical
treats. The Grand Orgue at St. Sulpice Church has a rich history, with a
succession of 12 world-class organists—including Charles-Marie Widor
and Marcel Dupré—that goes back 300 years.
    Cost and Hours: Free, daily 7:30-19:30, Mo: St-Sulpice or Mabillon.
See www.aross.fr/en for info on special concerts.
    Sunday Organ Recitals: You can hear the organ played before and after
Sunday Mass (10:45-11:00, 12:00-12:30, and 18:35; come appropriately
dressed). The post-Mass offering is a high-powered 25-minute recital,
usually performed by talented organist Daniel Roth.
    Visiting the Church: Patterned after St. Paul’s Cathedral in London, the
church has a Neoclassical arcaded facade and two round towers. Inside, in
the first chapel on the right, are three murals of fighting angels by
Delacroix: Jacob Wrestling the Angel, Heliodorus Chased from the Temple,
and The Archangel Michael (on the ceiling). The fourth chapel on the right
has a statue of Joan of Arc and wall plaques listing hundreds from St.
Sulpice’s congregation who died during World War I. The north transept
wall features an Egyptian-style obelisk used as a gnomon on a sundial. The
last chapel before the exit has a display on the Shroud of Turin.
    For more on St. Sulpice, see here.
    Nearby: Tempting boutiques surround the church (see the Shopping in
Paris chapter), and Luxembourg Garden is nearby.

Delacroix Museum (Musée National Eugène Delacroix)
This quaint and quiet museum celebrating the Romantic artist Eugène
Delacroix (1798-1863) was once his home and studio. A friend of bohemian
artistic greats—including George Sand and Frédéric Chopin—Delacroix is
most famous for his monumental painting of flag-waving Liberty Leading
the People (displayed at the Louvre). He moved to this studio in 1857 to be
within walking distance of St. Sulpice Church (described earlier), where he
was furiously working on its chapel of St. Agnes.
    Cost and Hours: €7, free on first Sun of the month, covered by
Museum Pass; Wed-Mon 9:30-17:30, first Thu of the month until 21:00,
closed Tue; 6 Rue de Furstenberg, Mo: St-Germain-des-Prés, +33 1 44 41
86 50, www.musee-delacroix.fr.
    Visiting the Museum: The tiny museum—with a few of Delacroix’s
paintings and a smattering of memorabilia—is three rooms on one floor in
the main building, the artist’s studio in back, and his oasis-like garden. Most
rooms have good posted explanations in English.
    Delacroix’s living room is decorated with original furniture and
paintings. The bedroom (with fireplace) is where Delacroix died in 1863,
nursed by his longtime servant, Lucile Virginie “Jenny” Le Guillou (her
portrait may be on display). Look for Delacroix’s small worktable (where
he kept his paints). Outside is his small-but-peaceful walled garden where
you can visit his studio (atelier).
    Delacroix built the studio to his own specifications, with high ceilings,
big windows, and a skylight, ideal for an artist working prior to electric
lights. It’s easy to imagine him working at his easel. While there are a few
“permanent” paintings here, the collection is shuffled annually. Still, you’ll
always find good examples of his dramatic style in paintings and sketches.
Some of Delacroix’s most popular works were book illustrations
(lithographs for Goethe’s Faust, Revolutionary history, and Shakespeare).
Admire Delacroix’s artistic range—from messy, colorful oils to
meticulously detailed lithographs.
    For more on Delacroix’s life, see here.

▲Luxembourg Garden (Jardin du Luxembourg)
This lovely 60-acre garden is an Impressionist painting brought to life. Slip
into a green chair pondside, enjoy the radiant flower beds, go jogging, play
tennis or basketball, sail a toy sailboat, or take in a chess game or puppet
show. Some of the park’s prettiest (and quietest) sections lie around its
perimeter. Notice any pigeons? The story goes that a very poor Ernest
Hemingway used to hand-hunt (read: strangle) them here.




    Cost and Hours: Free, daily dawn until dusk, Mo: Odéon, RER/Train-
B: Luxembourg.
    For more on the garden and nearby sights, see here. Also see the Paris
with Children chapter for kid-friendly activities in the garden and the Left
Bank Walk chapter for café recommendations.
    Other Parks: If you enjoy Luxembourg Garden and want to see more
green spaces, you could visit the more elegant Parc Monceau (Mo:
Monceau), the colorful Jardin des Plantes (Mo: Jussieu or Gare
d’Austerlitz, RER/Train-C: Gare d’Austerlitz), the Tuileries Garden
(between the Louvre and Place de la Concorde, Mo: Concorde or Tuileries),
or the hilly and bigger Parc des Buttes-Chaumont (Mo: Buttes-
Chaumont).

▲Panthéon
This state-capitol-style Neoclassical monument celebrates France’s
illustrious history and people, balances a Foucault pendulum, and is the
final resting place of many French VIPs.
    In 1744, an ailing King Louis XV was miraculously healed by St.
Geneviève, the city’s patron saint, and he thanked her by replacing her
ruined church with a more fitting tribute. By the time the church was
completed (1791), however, the secular-minded Revolution was in full
swing, and the church was converted into a nonreligious mausoleum
honoring the “Champions of French liberty”: Voltaire, Rousseau, and
others. On the entrance pediment (inspired by the ancient Pantheon in
Rome), the Revolutionaries carved the inscription, “To the great men of the
Fatherland.” The audioguide is worthwhile for a longer description of the
many painted scenes.
    Cost and Hours: €11.50, free for those under age 18, covered by
Museum Pass, €3.50 for “panorama” dome climb (not covered by Museum
Pass); daily 10:00-18:30, Oct-March until 18:00, last entry 45 minutes
before closing; audioguide-€3, Mo: Cardinal Lemoine, +33 1 44 32 18 00,
http://pantheon.monuments-nationaux.fr.
    Dome Climb: From April through October you can climb 206 steps to
the colonnade at the base of the dome for views of the interior and a 360-
degree view of the city. You’re not so much high above Paris—it feels like
you’re in the middle of it. Buy your dome-climb ticket as you enter the
sight, then join the queue at the meeting spot near the nave. An escort takes
groups of about 50 at a time. Visits leave about every hour until 17:30 (or
earlier—confirm the schedule as you go in) and take 40 minutes.
       Self-Guided Tour: Stand on the white-and-gray star bust at the head
of the 1 nave and take in the vast, evenly lit space—360 feet long, 280
feet wide, and 270 feet high. Most of the paintings and statues you see date
from the 19th century. On the left wall, find the mural of St. Geneviève
dressed in white, saving the fledgling city from Attila the Hun, the event
that marks the birth of an independent Paris. When Geneviève died (AD
512), she was buried here atop what was at the time the city’s highest hill
(elevation 200 feet). When Louis XV rebuilt her church to make the domed
structure we see today (1791), her relics were placed directly beneath the
dome. Even when Revolutionaries stripped the church of Christian elements
and publicly burned Geneviève’s relics, the French still honored Geneviève
as their champion. You can see Geneviève immortalized in the frescoed
dome and in the mosaic over the altar wall—always depicted as the lady in
white.
    The Panthéon’s murals also honor 2 other French heroes. In the right
transept (left wall) is Clovis, the father of the Franks and contemporary of
Geneviève. He’s the guy in winged helmet and Asterix-style mustache amid
the chaos of battle, having a vision of Christ that leads him to victory. In the
far right panel, he prepares to be baptized a Christian (and was subsequently
buried here on Geneviève’s hill).
    On the opposite wall is Charlemagne being crowned Emperor of the
Franks (c. 800), marking the symbolic birth of France.
   In the left transept (right wall) are scenes of Joan of Arc, who rallied the
French in the 1420s to rid the country of the English, and was then burnt at
the stake (far left).
   Return to the nave. The 15,000-ton 3 dome is made of a core of iron
ribs covered with stone. Under the dome stand four statue groups that
mark the next phase of French history, the Revolution. Check them out
counterclockwise: Denis Diderot created the Encyclopédie that
championed secular knowledge. Jean-Jacques Rousseau promoted the
idea of a social contract between government and the people. Napoleon (on
horseback) is surrounded by his generals. The Restoration is a statue of
orators and bureaucrats who served the state as it sorted through the tumult
of the Revolution and Napoleonic era and finally restored the monarchy—
but this time kings were somewhat limited by a constitution.




    A Foucault pendulum swings gracefully at the end of a cable
suspended from the towering dome. It was here in 1851 that the scientist
Léon Foucault first demonstrated the rotation of the earth. The great length
of the cable (220 feet) produces a slow enough oscillation to make the
rotation more obvious. Stand a few minutes and watch the pendulum’s arc
appear to shift as you and the earth rotate beneath it. It’s easier to visualize
if you picture the pendulum suspended directly above the North Pole, with
the earth spinning beneath it. Every time the pendulum swings back to the
same spot, the earth will have shifted. The pendulum can also be used to tell
time: Check your watch against the 24-hour dial that surrounds the
pendulum.




    At the altar end of the church stands the massive 4 Convention
Nationale Monument. “Marianne,” the fictional woman who symbolized
the Revolution, stands in the center, flanked by soldiers who fight for her
and citizens who pledge allegiance to her. The inscription below reads
“Live free or die.” Marianne embodies liberty, reason, and the nation of
France. Above her is a mosaic in which Christ (accompanied by Geneviève
and Joan of Arc) seems to give his blessing. From Geneviève to Joan of Arc
to Marianne, France has always incarnated its national spirit in the female
form.
    To the right of the monument, 5 French writers have their names
inscribed onto the walls.
    To the far left of the monument is a room displaying a 6 model of the
Panthéon. This cross-section model allows you to look inside and see the
structural elements. The dome is actually made of three domes-within-a-
dome, and it’s supported by flying buttresses. Also, notice that there’s no
patriotic inscription over the entrance, as the model was built before the
Revolution.
   A staircase behind the monument leads down to the 7 crypt, where a
panoply of greats is buried. Rousseau is along the right wall as you enter,
while Voltaire faces him impishly from across the hall. Behind Voltaire is
Soufflot (the architect who built the Panthéon). Straight ahead up a few
steps and through the small central rotunda are more greats (all to the left):
Victor Hugo (Les Misérables, The Hunchback of Notre-Dame), Alexandre
Dumas (The Three Musketeers, The Count of Monte Cristo), and Louis
Braille (who invented the script for the blind). Double back to the central
rotunda and turn left to find scientist Marie Curie (follow the glow), and
various WWII dead (from Holocaust victims to the hero of the Resistance,
Jean Moulin). This building is a fitting monument to those who’ve forged
France’s freedom and defended freedom of thought.

Montparnasse Tower
This sadly out-of-place 59-story superscraper has one virtue: If you can’t
make it up the Eiffel Tower, the sensational views from this tower are
cheaper, far easier to access (a 40-second elevator ride), and make for a fair
consolation prize. Come early in the day for clearest skies and shortest lines
and be treated to views from a comfortable interior and from up on the
rooftop (consider their breakfast with a view). Sunset is great but views are
disappointing after dark. Some say it’s the very best view in Paris, as you
can see the Eiffel Tower clearly...and you can’t see the Montparnasse Tower
at all.
    Cost and Hours: €20, RS%—30 percent discount (2 people per book),
not covered by Museum Pass; daily 10:00-23:30, Oct-March 11:00-22:30;
entrance on Rue de l’Arrivée, Mo: Montparnasse-Bienvenüe—from the
Métro, stay inside the station and follow signs to exit #1, +33 1 45 38 52 56,
www.tourmontparnasse56.com.
    Visiting the Tower: Find the elevator entrance near the skyscraper’s
main entry on the northwest side of the tower (with the train station to your
back, it’s around to the left side of the building; look for orange signs). Exit
the elevator at the 56th floor to buy your ticket. Here you can marvel at the
views of tout Paris (good even if cloudy), have a drink or a light lunch
(reasonable prices), and peruse the gift shop. Exhibits identify highlights of
the star-studded vista.




    Next, climb three flights of steps to the open terrace on the 59th floor to
enjoy magnificent views in all directions (good English information posted
and a surprise bar in summer). Here, 690 feet above Paris, you can scan the
city through glass panels that limit wind. The view over Luxembourg
Garden is terrific, as is the view up the Champ de Mars to the Eiffel Tower.
Montparnasse Cemetery is right below, and the high-rise suburbs lie
immediately to the west. From this vantage, it’s easy to admire Baron
Georges-Eugène Haussmann’s grand-boulevard scheme (see sidebar later in
this chapter). Notice the lush courtyards hiding behind grand street fronts.
    Sightseeing Tip: The tower is an efficient stop when combined with a
day trip to Chartres, which begins at the Montparnasse train station (see the
Chartres chapter).

▲Catacombs
Spiral down 60 feet below the street and walk a one-mile route through
tunnels containing the anonymous bones of six million permanent Parisians.
Once inside, allow an hour if you dawdle.
    Cost and Hours: €29 for timed-entry ticket, book online in advance,
includes audioguide, not covered by Museum Pass; open Tue-Sun 10:00-
20:30, closed Mon; €15 same-day tickets sometimes available online and at
the door (limited availability; ticket booth closes at 19:30), otherwise
consider Fat Tire Tours’ “Skip the Line” tour (see here); +33 1 43 22 47 63,
www.catacombes.paris.fr.
    Getting There: It’s at 1 Place Denfert-Rochereau. Take the Métro to
Denfert-Rochereau and follow Sortie 1, then find the lion in the big traffic
circle; if he looked left rather than right, he’d stare right at the green
entrance to the Catacombs.
    Background: In 1785, health-conscious Parisians looking to relieve
congestion and improve the city’s sanitary conditions emptied the church
cemeteries and moved the bones here, to former limestone quarries, where
incidentally, plaster of Paris was made. Then, in the mid-19th century,
Baron Haussmann’s many urban projects required the relocation of
cemeteries, and these ancient, hand-dug quarries fit the bill. For decades,
priests led ceremonial processions of black-veiled, bone-laden carts into the
quarries, where the bones were stacked in piles five feet high and as much
as 80 feet deep.
    Visiting the Catacombs: You’ll descend 130 steps and land in a room
with English posters describing 45 million years of ancient geology, then
walk for 10 minutes through tunnels to reach the bones. Appreciate that
some of these tunnels were originally built sans mortar. The sign, “Halt, this
is the empire of the dead,” announces your arrival at the bones. From here,
shuffle along passageways of artfully arranged, skull-studded tibiae; admire
300-year-old sculptures cut into the walls of the catacombs; and see more
cheery signs: “Happy is he who is forever faced with the hour of his death
and prepares himself for the end every day.” The highlight for me is the
Crypt of the Passion (a.k.a. “the Barrel”), where bones are meticulously
packed in a barrel shape hiding a support pillar.
    Climb many steps to emerge far from where you entered and find a good
WC and a ghoulish gift shop selling skulls and more. Note to wannabe
Hamlets: An attendant checks your bag at the exit for stolen souvenirs.
    After Your Visit: You’ll exit 10 minutes from where you started on
Avenue René Coty (see the “Left Bank” map, earlier). From the exit, turn
right and walk to the Denfert-Rochereau Métro station. Traffic-free Rue
Daguerre, a pleasing pedestrian street (see the Shopping in Paris chapter), is
a block from the Denfert-Rochereau Métro off Avenue du Général Leclerc
(a block from where you entered the Catacombs).

Jardins des Plantes
For a review of sights within this kid-friendly gardener’s mecca, see the
Paris with Children chapter.

Muslim Paris
The Paris region is home to 1.7 million Muslims, many from France’s
former North African colonies (Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia)—though
most live in vast suburbs where tourists rarely venture. But just next to the
Latin Quarter, a handy and inviting bit of Muslim Paris offers an intriguing
glimpse at that world, with a mosque, a cultural center, and a popular
teahouse.

Grande Mosquée de Paris
This mosque was founded in 1926 in gratitude for the sacrifices made by
Muslims from France’s colonial empire, who fought the Germans alongside
the French in World War I (100,000 Muslims died in this effort). During
World War II, the mosque provided refuge for Algerian and European Jews.
Today’s mosque is busy with worshippers, yet still welcomes non-Muslim
visitors (be considerate and dress modestly; women don’t need head
scarves).
    Cost and Hours: €3, Sat-Thu 9:00-12:00 & 14:00-18:00, closed to
visitors Fri and on Muslim holidays, 2 bis Place du Puits de l’Ermite, Mo:
Censier-Daubenton, Jussieu, or Place Monge, www.mosqueedeparis.net
[URL inactive].
    Eating at the Mosque: The Restaurant La Mosquée hides at the back of
the mosque with wonderful Arabic ambience, a tea room with tasty baked
goods and teas, and delicious meals (see listing on here).
    Visiting the Mosque: The entrance is next to the tall minaret. Loop
through its rooms and appreciate intricate wood-carved arches over
whitewashed walls and elaborate tile work, with no images of humans
anywhere. You’ll start in the main courtyard (called a sahn) with a central
fountain (for ablutions before prayer, which now take place below), and
tour the mosque counterclockwise. Admire the exquisite detail in the
capitals and wall sculptures. Peer into the large prayer hall (which non-
Muslims and all women are prohibited from entering—Muslim women
worship in a basement room). Exit the courtyard through the doorway at the
far-right corner and find a sumptuous library and meeting rooms, all
surrounding a peaceful garden patio.
