Eiffel Tower Tour

EIFFEL TOWER TOUR
La Tour Eiffel
Orientation
Map: Eiffel Tower Area
Map: Eiffel Tower
  OVERVIEW
 The Tour Begins
   Exterior
   History
   Third Level (Le Sommet)
   Second Level
   First Level
   Back on the Ground
It’s crowded, expensive, and there are probably better views in Paris, but
visiting this 1,000-foot-tall ornament is unforgettable—and well worth the
trouble. Visitors to Paris may find Mona Lisa to be less than expected, but
the Eiffel Tower rarely disappoints, even in an era of skyscrapers. This is a
once-in-a-lifetime, I’ve-been-there experience. Making the eye-popping
ascent and ear-popping descent gives you membership into the exclusive
society of the quarter of a billion other humans who have made the Eiffel
Tower the most visited monument in the modern world.



                            Orientation
Cost: €27 to ride two elevators all the way to the top (third) level, €17.50 to
   ride to the first or second level, €11 to climb the stairs to the first or
   second level, €21 to take the stairs and then elevator to the summit—
   must purchase summit elevator before entering tower, 50 percent
   cheaper for those under 25, 75 percent cheaper for those under 12, not
   covered by Museum Pass.
Hours: Daily mid-June-Aug 9:00-24:45, Sept-mid-June 9:30-23:45, last
   ascent to top by elevator at 22:30 and to lower levels at 23:00 all year
   (stairs same except Sept-mid-June last ascent 18:30). The top level can
   close temporarily in windy weather or, more commonly, when it reaches
   capacity. If you’ve purchased a ticket to the top, you will be allowed to
   go unless the weather is dangerous.
Information: www.toureiffel.paris.
Advance Tickets Recommended: If you plan to ascend by elevator, it’s
   strongly advised to book a reservation online (any ticket that includes
   the stairs can only be purchased on-site). Booking online allows you to
   reserve an entry time and skip the (usually long) ticket-buying line at no
   extra cost (though all must wait in line at security check).
   Online ticket sales open up 60 days before any given date (at 8:30
Paris time)—and can quickly sell out (especially for April-Sept). Be
sure of your date and time, as reservations are nonrefundable. If no slots
are available, try buying a “Lift entrance ticket with access to 2nd
floor”—the view from the second floor is arguably better anyway. Or,
try the website again about a week before your visit—last-minute spots
  sometimes open up. To go all the way to the top, select “Lift entrance
  ticket with access to the summit.”
     You can print your tickets (follow the specifications carefully) or
  download e-tickets to your phone. Note that email or text confirmations
  alone will not get you in; you must have the printed or electronic ticket
  showing the bar code.
Buying Tickets On-Site: On occasion it’s possible to just drop by, buy a
  ticket, and go directly up the tower. But you’re much more likely to find
  yourself in horrible lines. Crowds overwhelm this place much of the
  year, with one- to two-hour waits (unless it’s rainy, when lines
  evaporate). Weekends and holidays are worst.
     If you don’t have a reservation, arrive at least 30 minutes before the
  tower opens to pass security (security opens 30 minutes before the
  tower), then immediately get in line to buy a ticket. Going much later in
  the day is the next-best bet (after 19:00 May-Aug, after 17:00 off-
  season, after 16:00 in winter as it gets dark by 17:00). Once in line,
  estimate about 20 minutes for every 100 yards.
      When you buy tickets on-site, all members of your party must be
   with you. To get reduced fares for kids, bring ID.
More Options for Avoiding Lines: You can bypass some lines with a
   reservation at either of the tower’s view restaurants or for a concert (see
   below for details). Or you can buy a “Skip the Line” tour (almost right
   up to the last minute) through Fat Tire Tours (see here).
When to Go: For the best of all worlds, arrive with enough light to see the
   views, then stay as it gets dark to see the lights. At the top of the hour, a
   five-minute display features thousands of sparkling lights (best viewed
   from Place du Trocadéro or the grassy park below).
Concerts on the Eiffel Tower: Concerts (mostly classical) take place
   throughout the year on the Eiffel Tower’s first floor in the Salon
   Gustave Eiffel (about €75, includes priority access ticket to first floor,
   www.classictic.com/en/special/eiffel-tower [URL inactive]).
Getting There: The tower is about a 10-minute walk from the Métro (Bir-
   Hakeim or Trocadéro stops) or suburban train (RER/Train-C Champ de
   Mars-Tour Eiffel stop). The Ecole Militaire Métro stop in the Rue Cler
   area is 20 minutes away. Buses #42, #69, and #86 stop nearby on
   Avenue Joseph Bouvard in the Champ de Mars park.
Getting In: For security, the perimeter of the tower is surrounded by glass
   walls. So, while it’s free to enter the area directly under the tower, to do
   so you must pass through an airport-like security check (allow 30
   minutes or more at busy times). Entry points are at the southeast and
   southwest corners of the tower, just off Avenue Gustave-Eiffel; see the
   map on here.
      Once through security, you enter the vast area under the tower (where
   the view straight up the underbelly of the tower is very cool). This is
   where you’ll line up for an elevator (or buy tickets if you haven’t
   already).


             Eating at or near the Eiffel Tower
  The tower has two classy restaurants that offer great views: 58 Tour
  Eiffel (on the first level) and Le Jules Verne (on the second level).
Making a reservation at either one lets you skip the initial elevator line
—your reservation includes a ride to the restaurant level. But you can’t
skip security lines and you can’t ascend more than 15-30 minutes prior
to your reservation time (though you can linger afterward). Get details
online when you book. Last-minute reservations for both restaurants
may be available from their info kiosk at the tower’s base, between the
north and east pillars.
    $$$$ 58 Tour Eiffel, reopening in 2022 after a renovation, offers
breakfast, lunch, dinner, and a lounge bar for drinks and a light menu.
The dining room is reserved for more serious eating (though lunches
are more casual). Reserve long in advance, especially if you want a
view (+33 1 72 76 18 46, www.restaurants-toureiffel.com). No jeans
or tennis shoes, please, at dinner.
    The more expensive $$$$ Le Jules Verne restaurant has one
Michelin star and a higher viewpoint from its second-level perch
(lunch menus start at about €150, dinner menus start at about €200,
daily 12:00-13:00 & 19:00-21:00). In summer, reserve weeks in
advance for dinner; off-season or lunch anytime is easier. This is a
dressy place—no shorts or overly casual sportswear (+33 1 45 55 61
44, www.lejulesverne-paris.com).

Other Options
The tower’s base offers not much more than sandwich stands. The first
and second levels have small sandwich-and-pizza cafés. The first floor
occasionally has temporary “pop-up” restaurants—open only for a
season—that enliven the cuisine scene. At the very top of the tower, a
champagne bar serves glasses of bubbly.
   Rue Cler, with many options, is a 20-minute walk away (see the
Eating in Paris chapter). Avenue de la Bourdonnais, a block east of the
tower, has a few eateries and sandwich shops. Snack shops and cafés
on the river by the cruise boats offer cheap sandwiches and full meals
with tower views. Moored to the embankment, Le Bal de la Marine is
an old-fashioned boat with great seating in and out and reasonably
priced drinks (daily, Port de Suffren, www.baldelamarine.com). $$
  Café Jacques, in the garden at the nearby Quai Branly Museum, is a
  good but relatively pricey choice (see here).
      Your tastiest option may be to assemble a picnic beforehand from
  any of several handy shops near Métro stop Ecole Militaire and picnic
  in the Champ de Mars park (on the side grassy areas or on benches
  along the central grass; the middle stretch may be off-limits).


      If you have a reservation, arrive at the tower at least 30 minutes
   before your entry time to pass security. Once you’re through, elevator
   entrances are at three of the tower’s four pillars (though not all may be
   open for your visit). Look for an entrance with green signs showing
   Visiteurs avec Reservation (Visitors with Reservation), where attendants
   scan your ticket and put you on the first available elevator.
      Without an elevator reservation, after passing security, go directly
   to the yellow-bannered ticket booth (follow signs for Individuels or
   Visiteurs sans Tickets). Avoid lines selling tickets only for Groupes. If
   two entrances are marked Visiteurs sans Tickets, pick the shortest line.
   Once you get your ticket, find the line with your time slot indicated. For
   more tips, see “Buying Tickets On-Site,” earlier.
      Stair walkers buy their tickets directly at the south pillar, which is
   for stair access only.
Length of This Tour: If you have reservations and crowds are light, the
   quickest you could get to the top and back (with minimal sightseeing)
   would be 90 minutes. Otherwise, budget three to four hours to wait in
   line, get to the top, and sightsee your way back down. With limited time
   or money, skip “the summit” (the views from the second level are
   actually better).
Pickpockets: Beware. Street thieves plunder awestruck visitors gawking
   below the tower. And tourists in crowded elevators are like fish in a
   barrel for predatory pickpockets. En garde. A police station is at the
   Jules Verne pillar.
Security Check: Bags larger than 19” × 8” × 12” are not allowed, but there
   is no baggage check. All bags are subject to a security search. No
   knives, glass bottles, or cans are permitted.
Services: The Eiffel Tower information office is at the west pillar. Free
   WCs are at the base of the tower, behind the east pillar. Inside the tower
   itself, WCs are on all levels, but they’re small, with long lines.
Best Views of the Tower: The best place to view the tower is from Place
   du Trocadéro to the north. It’s a 15-minute walk across the river to the
   top of the viewpoint; it’s a happening scene at night, and especially fun
   for kids. Consider arriving at the Trocadéro Métro stop for the view,
   then walking toward the tower. Another delightful viewpoint is from the
   Champ de Mars park to the south. The pedestrian bridge a few blocks
   upriver near the Quai Branly Museum also offers terrific tower views.
Starring: All of Paris...and beyond.
OVERVIEW
There are three observation platforms, at roughly 200, 400, and 900 feet.
Although being on the windy top of the Eiffel Tower is a thrill you’ll never
forget, the view is better from the second level, where you can actually see
Paris’ monuments. The first level also has nice views, plus more tourist-
oriented sights and a concert hall. All three levels have some displays, WCs,
souvenir stores, and a few other services.




   For the hardy, stairs lead from the ground level up to the first and second
levels—and rarely have a long line. It’s 360 stairs to the first level and
another 360 to the second. The staircase is enclosed with a wire cage, so
you can’t fall, but those with vertigo issues may still find them dizzying.
   If you want to see the entire tower, from top to bottom, then see it...from
top to bottom. There isn’t a single elevator straight to the top (le sommet).
To get there, you’ll first ride an elevator (or hike up the stairs) to the second
level. (Some elevators stop on the first level, but don’t get off—it’s more
efficient to see the first level on the way down). Once on the second level,
immediately line up for the next elevator, to the top. (Look for the shortest
line; there are several elevators and feeder queues.) Enjoy the views from
the “summit,” then ride back down to the second level. Frolic there for a
while, and when you’re ready, head to the first level via the stairs (no line
and can take as little as five minutes) or take the elevator down. Explore the
shops and exhibits on the first level. To leave, you can line up for the
elevator, but it’s quickest and most memorable to take the stairs back down
to earth.


                         The Tour Begins
Gaze up at the tower towering above you, and don’t even think about what
would happen if someone dropped a coin from the top.

Exterior
Delicate and graceful when seen from afar, the Eiffel Tower is massive—
even a bit scary—close up. You don’t appreciate its size until you walk
toward it; like a mountain, it seems so close but takes forever to reach.
    The tower, including its antenna, stands 1,063 feet tall, or slightly higher
than the 77-story Chrysler Building in New York. Its four support pillars
straddle an area of 3.5 acres. Despite the tower’s 7,300 tons of metal and 60
tons of paint, it is so well engineered that it weighs no more per square inch
at its base than a linebacker on tiptoes.
    Once the world’s tallest structure, it’s now eclipsed by a number of
towers (Tokyo Skytree, 2,080 feet, for one), radio antennae (KVLY-TV
mast, North Dakota, 2,063 feet), and skyscrapers (Burj Khalifa in Dubai,
UAE, 2,717 feet). France’s sleek Le Viaduc de Millau, a 1.5-mile-long
suspension bridge completed in late 2004, also has a taller tower (1,125
feet). The consortium that built the bridge included the same company that
erected the Eiffel Tower.
    The long green lawn stretching south of the tower is the Champ de Mars,
originally the training ground for troops and students of the nearby military
school (Ecole Militaire) and now a park. On the north side, across the
Seine, is the curved palace colonnade framing a square called the
Trocadéro.


                       Building the Tower
  As you ascend through the metal beams, imagine being a worker,
  perched high above nothing, riveting this thing together. It was a
  massive project, and it took all the ingenuity of the Industrial Age—
  including mass production, cutting-edge technology, and capitalist
  funding.
      The foundation was the biggest obstacle. The soil, especially along
  the river, was too muddy to support big pillars. Gustave Eiffel drew on
  his bridge-building experience, where support piers needed to be
  constructed underwater. He sank heavy, bottomless compartments
  (caissons) into the wet soil. These were watertight and injected with
  breathable air, so workers could dig out the mud beneath them,
  allowing the caisson to sink farther. When the workers were done, the
  hole was filled in with cement 20 feet thick and capped with stone.
  The massive iron pillars were sunk into the ground at an angle,
  anchored in the subterranean stone.
    The tower went up like an 18,000-piece erector set, made of 15-
foot iron beams held together with 2.5 million rivets. The pieces were
mass-produced in factories in the suburbs and brought in on wagons.
For two years, 300 workers assembled the pieces, the tower rising as
they went. First, they used wooden scaffolding to support the lower
(angled) sections, until the pillars came together and the tower could
support itself. Then the iron beams were lifted up with steam-powered
cranes, including some on tracks (creeper cranes) that inched up the
pillars as the tower progressed. There, daring workers dangled from
rope ladders, balanced on beams, and tightrope-walked their way
across them as they put the pieces in place. The workers then
hammered in red-hot rivets made on-site by blacksmiths. As the rivets
cooled, they solidified the structure.
    After a mere year and a half, the tower surpassed what had been the
tallest structure in the world—the Washington Monument (555 feet),
which had taken 36 years to build.
    The tower was painted a rusty red. Since then, it’s sported several
colors, including mustard and the current brown-gray. It is repainted
every seven years (it takes 25 full-time painters 18 months to apply 60
tons of paint by hand—no spraying allowed).
    Two years, two months, and five days after construction began, the
tower was done. On May 15, 1889, a red, white, and blue beacon was
lit on the top, the World’s Fair began, and the tower carried its first
astounded visitor to the top.
History
The first visitor to the Paris World’s Fair in 1889 walked beneath the “arch”
formed by the newly built Eiffel Tower and entered the fairgrounds. This
event celebrated both the centennial of the French Revolution and France’s
position as a global superpower. Bridge builder Gustave Eiffel (1832-1923)
won the contest to build the fair’s centerpiece by beating out rival proposals
such as a giant guillotine.




   Eiffel deserved to have the tower named for him. He did much more
than design it. He oversaw its entire construction, personally financed it,
and was legally on the hook if the project floundered. His factory produced
the iron beams, and his workers built it, using cranes and apparatus
designed by Eiffel. Facing a deadline for the exposition, he brought in the
project on time and under budget.
   The tower was nothing but a showpiece, with no functional purpose
except to demonstrate to the world that France had the wealth, knowledge,
and can-do spirit to erect a structure far taller than anything the world had
ever seen. The original plan was to dismantle the tower as quickly as it was
built after the celebration ended, but it was kept by popular demand.




    To a generation hooked on technology, the tower was the marvel of the
age, a symbol of progress and human ingenuity. Not all were so impressed,
however; many found it a monstrosity. The writer Guy de Maupassant
(1850-1893) routinely ate lunch in the tower just so he wouldn’t have to
look at it.
    In subsequent years, the tower has come to serve many functions: as a
radio transmitter (1909-present), a cosmic-ray observatory (1910), a
billboard (spelling “Citroën” in lights, 1925-1934), a broadcaster of Nazi
TV programs (1940-1944), a fireworks launch pad (numerous times), and a
framework for dazzling lighting displays, including the current
arrangement, designed in 2000 for the celebration of the millennium.
• To reach the top, ride the elevator or walk (720 stairs) to the second level.
From there, get in line for the next elevator and continue to the top. Pop out
900 feet above the ground. (Note: You’ll likely hear noisy alarms jolting the
atmosphere. These go off when too many crowd into the elevator.)

Third Level (Le Sommet)
You’ll find wind and grand, sweeping views on the tiny top level. The city
lies before you (pick out sights with the help of the panoramic maps). On a
good day, you can see for 40 miles. Do a 360-degree tour of Paris.
    Looking west (ouest): The Seine runs east to west (though at this point
it’s flowing more southwest). At the far end of the skinny “island” in the
river, find the tiny copy of the Statue of Liberty, looking 3,633 miles away
to her big sister in New York. Gustave Eiffel, a man of many talents, also
designed the internal supports of New York’s Statue of Liberty, which was
cast in copper by fellow Frenchman Frederic Bartholdi (1886).
    Looking north (nord): At your feet is the curved arcade of the
Trocadéro, itself the site of a World’s Fair in 1878. Beyond that is the vast,
forested expanse of the Bois de Boulogne, the three-square-mile park that
hosts joggers and boules players by day and prostitutes by night. That
angular glassy structure rising from the center of the green expanse is the
Louis Vuitton Foundation modern art museum and cultural center, designed
by Frank Gehry and opened in 2014.
   The track with bleachers (on the left end of the park) is Paris’
horseracing track, the Hippodrome de Longchamp. In the far distance are
the skyscrapers of La Défense. Find the Arc de Triomphe to the right of the
Trocadéro. The lone skyscraper between the Arc and the Trocadéro is the
Palais des Congrès, a complex that hosts international conferences, trade
shows, and major concerts.
   Looking east (est): At your feet are the Seine and its many bridges,
including the Pont Alexandre, with its four golden statues. Looking farther
upstream, find the Orsay Museum, the Louvre, Pont Neuf, and the twin
towers of Notre-Dame. On the Right Bank (which is to your left), find the
Grand Palais (with its huge iron-and-glass roof), next to the Pont Alexandre.
Beyond the Grand Palais is the bullet-shaped dome of Sacré-Cœur, atop
Butte Montmartre.
    Looking south (sud): In a line, find the Champ de Mars, the Ecole
Militaire, the Y-shaped UNESCO building, and the 689-foot Montparnasse
Tower skyscraper. To the left is the golden dome of Les Invalides marking
Napoleon’s tomb, and beyond that, just past the green Luxembourg Garden,
is the state-capitol-shaped dome of the Panthéon.
   The tippy top: Ascend another short staircase to the open-air top. Look
up at all the satellite dishes and communications equipment (and around to
find the tiny WC). You’ll see the small apartment given to Gustave Eiffel,
who’s now represented by a mannequin (he’s the one with the beard).
   The mannequins re-create the moment during the 1889 World’s Fair
when the American Thomas Edison paid a visit to his fellow techie,
Gustave (and Gustave’s daughter Claire), presenting them with his new
invention, a phonograph. (Then they cranked it up and blasted The Who’s “I
Can See for Miles.”) Feeling proud you made it this high? You can
celebrate your accomplishment with a glass of champagne from the bar.
• Ride the elevator down to the...
Second Level
The second level (400 feet) has the best views because you’re closer to the
sights, and the monuments are more recognizable. (For a review of this
view, refer to the descriptions given above.) The second level has souvenir
shops, WCs, and a small stand-up café.
   The world-class Le Jules Verne restaurant is on this level, but you won’t
see it; access is by a private elevator. The head chef is currently Frédéric
Anton, one of the most revered chefs in France today. One would hope his
brand of haute cuisine matches the 400-foot haute of the restaurant.


                            Up and Down
  The tower—which was designed from the start to accommodate
  hordes of visitors—has always had elevators. Today’s elevators are
  modern replacements. Back in the late 19th century, elevator
  technology was so new that this was the one job that Gustave Eiffel
  subcontracted to other experts (including an American company).
  They needed a special design to accommodate the angle of the tower’s
  pillars. Today’s elevators make about 100 round-trip journeys a day.
     There are 1,665 stairs to the top level, though tourists can only
  climb 720 of them, up as far as the second level. During a race in
  1905, a gentleman climbed from the ground to the second level—
  elevation gain nearly 400 feet—in 3 minutes, 12 seconds.


• Catch the elevator. (There are two different departure lines, so choose the
one with the shorter wait.) Or take 360 steps down to the...

First Level
The first level (200 feet) has more great views, all well described by the
tower’s panoramic displays. There’s really not much here: a small concert
hall, a restaurant, and a public hall with a café, shop, and little theater. Pop-
up restaurants and kiosks appear with every season—even a little
playground for kids. In winter, part of the first level is often set up to host
an ice-skating rink.




   The highlight is the breathtaking, vertigo-inducing, selfie-inspiring glass
floor. Venture onto it and experience what it’s like to stand atop an 18-story
building and look straight down. Then look up at the massive structure
around you. Check out your fellow visitors—the crowds may make the
place a total zoo, but everyone’s still thrilled.
   The Salon Gustave Eiffel is a private reception hall that hosts occasional
concerts.
   Explore the various exhibits (which change often). A continuously
running film (in the glass-walled Ferrié Pavilion) shows a montage of the
tower’s construction, paint job, place in pop culture, and guts and glory. As
you wander the first floor, you may find exhibits on the tower’s past, jobs
there, other creations by Monsieur Eiffel, or the tower’s famous visitors—
from Adolph Hitler to Katy Perry. You might learn how the sun warms the
tower’s metal, causing the top to expand and lean about five inches away
from the sun, or how the tower oscillates slightly in the wind. Because of its
lacy design, even the strongest of winds can’t blow the tower down, but
only cause it to sway a few inches. In fact, Eiffel designed the tower
primarily with wind resistance in mind, wanting a structure seemingly
“molded by the action of the wind itself.”




• To return to the bottom, take either the elevator or the stairs (five minutes,
360 steps). The stairs are generally much quicker.

Back on the Ground
Welcome back to earth. After you’ve climbed the tower, you come to
appreciate it even more from a distance. For a final look, stroll across the
river to Place du Trocadéro or to the end of the Champ de Mars and look
back for great views. However impressive it may be by day, the tower is an
awesome thing to behold at twilight, when it becomes engorged with light,
and virile Paris lies back and lets night be on top. When darkness fully
envelops the city, the tower seems to climax with a spectacular light show
at the top of each hour...for five glorious minutes.
• Near the tower, you can catch a boat for a Seine cruise (see here), start my
Bus #69 Sightseeing Tour, or rent a bike and cruise the car-free riverside
promenade, which starts on the south side of the river near here and
stretches all the way to Place de la Bastille (see map on here). The
Trocadéro viewpoint, which looks “right there,” is a good 15-minute walk
away. Also nearby are the Quai Branly Museum and the Rue Cler area. The
Army Museum/Napoleon’s Tomb and the Rodin Museum are each about a
25-minute walk from here.
