Sights: Eiffel Tower and Nearby

EIFFEL TOWER AND NEARBY
▲▲▲Eiffel Tower (La Tour Eiffel)
Built on the 100th anniversary of the French Revolution (and in the spirit of
the Industrial Revolution), the tower was the centerpiece of a World Expo
designed simply to show off what people could build in 1889. For decades
it was the tallest structure the world had ever known, and though it’s since
been eclipsed, it’s still the most visited monument. Ride the elevators to the
top of its 1,063 feet for expansive views that stretch 40 miles. Then descend
to the two lower levels, where the views are arguably even better, since the
monuments are more recognizable.




    Cost and Hours: €27 to ride all the way to the top, €17.50 for just the
two lower levels, €11 to climb the stairs to the first or second level, €21 to
climb the stairs to the second level and take the elevator to the summit, 50
percent cheaper for those under 25, 75 percent cheaper for those under 12,
book online in advance (see below), not covered by Museum Pass; open
daily mid-June-Aug 9:00-24:45, Sept-mid-June 9:30-23:45, last ascent to
top by elevator at 22:30 and to lower levels at 23:00 all year (stairs same
except Sept-mid-June last ascent 18:30); cafés and great view restaurants,
Mo: Bir-Hakeim or Trocadéro, RER/Train-C: Champ de Mars-Tour Eiffel
(all a 10-minute walk away). Recorded information +33 8 92 70 12 39,
www.toureiffel.paris.
    Reservations Smart: Make a reservation well in advance of your visit
—or be ready to wait in long lines. At www.toureiffel.paris, you can book a
time slot for your ascent; this allows you to skip the long initial entry line.
Tickets go on sale about 60 days in advance and sell out quickly for visits
from April through September, so don’t dally.
      See the Eiffel Tower Tour chapter (which includes more tips on
getting in).

▲Place du Trocadéro
This fountain-fronted square just across the river and uphill from the Eiffel
Tower delivers the greatest views of that landmark. Trocadéro’s view plaza
is a circus of tourists from early to late (watch for pickpockets). The
construction you see is the beginnings of a new pedestrian-friendly garden
connecting the Place du Trocadéro with the Ecole Militaire across the
Seine. The busy Pont d’Iéna bridge will be made traffic-free, and a series of
mini-parks will delight walkers as they explore this area.
    Place du Trocadéro is named for a 19th-century battle victory by Les
French over Spain and is overseen by a statue of WWI Supreme Allied
Commander Ferdinand Foch on his horse. Two interesting museums,
described next, flank the plaza as wings of the curved Palais de Chaillot,
built for the 1937 World’s Fair.

National Maritime Museum (Musée National de la Marine)
This kid-friendly museum, closed until at least 2023, anchors a dazzling
collection of ship and submarine models, torpedoes, cannonballs, beaucoup
bowsprits, and naval you-name-it. Enjoy the full-sized party barge made for
Napoleon in 1810 and look up at the elaborate stern of the 1694 Réale de
France royal galley (don’t miss the scale model). Exhibits describe ship
construction, from Roman vessels to modern cruise ships to aircraft
carriers. Few English explanations make the free audioguide essential.
   Cost and Hours: Likely €8.50, includes audioguide, free for those age
26 and under, covered by Museum Pass; Mon and Wed-Fri 11:00-18:00,
Sat-Sun until 19:00, closed Tue; on left side of Place du Trocadéro with
your back to Eiffel Tower, tel. +33 1 53 65 69 69, www.musee-marine.fr.

Architecture and Monuments Museum (Cité de l’Architecture
et du Patrimoine)
This museum, on the east side of Place du Trocadéro, takes you through
1,000 years of French architecture, starring some of France’s greatest
Gothic churches—all brought to life through full-sized casts and scale
models.
   Cost and Hours: €9, covered by Museum Pass, free on first Sun of the
month; open Wed-Mon 11:00-19:00, Thu until 21:00, closed Tue; helpful
audioguide-€5, 1 Place du Trocadéro, Mo: Trocadéro, RER/Train-C: Champ
de Mars-Tour Eiffel, +33 1 58 51 52 00, www.citechaillot.fr.
   Visiting the Museum: Pick up the museum plan, augment it with the
English info posted in many rooms, and focus most of your time on the
ground floor. Walk the length of the floor, passing under tympanum arches
and pondering how many ways you can envision the Last Judgment. Gaze
into the eyes of medieval statues from Cluny Abbey, Chartres Cathedral,
Château de Chambord, and much more. You’ll find an exhibit on Notre-
Dame and its fire, along with some original statues (removed from the
cathedral for cleaning just before the fire), a worthwhile exhibit on the
destroyed spire, and models of the timber-frame roof support that burned. A
U-turn at the end of the hall leads to the Renaissance and the screaming
passion of the Revolution.
    Take the elevator up a floor (level N-2) to see thought-provoking designs
for modern projects, including sports arenas, suspension bridges, and low-
income housing. You can walk into a room from Le Corbusier’s 1952
Habitation Unit from Marseille and appreciate what a forward thinker he
was. Farther along, you’ll see how colorfully painted the chapels were in
medieval churches. The views to the Eiffel Tower are sensational. The
attached café makes for a classy break in your sightseeing, with more views
of the Eiffel Tower.



                     Affording Paris’ Sights
  Paris is an expensive city for tourists, with lots of pricey sights, but—
  fortunately—lots of freebies, too. Smart, budget-minded travelers
  begin by buying and getting the most out of a Paris Museum Pass
  (described at the beginning of this chapter), then considering these
  frugal sightseeing options.
  Free (or Almost Free) Museums: Many of Paris’ museums offer free
  entry on the first Sunday of the month, including the Orsay, Orangerie,
  Picasso, Cluny, Pompidou Center, Quai Branly, Architecture and
  Monuments, and Delacroix museums. These sights are free on the first
  Sunday of off-season months: Rodin Museum (Oct-March), plus Arc
  de Triomphe and Versailles (Nov-March). Expect big crowds on free
  days. The Jewish Art and History Museum is free the first Saturday of
  the month (Oct-June). Some museums are always free (though special
  exhibits may cost extra), including the Carnavalet Museum, Petit
  Palais, Victor Hugo’s House, and Fragonard Perfume Museum.
  Other Freebies: Many other sights are free to visit, including the Père
  Lachaise Cemetery, Deportation Memorial, Holocaust Memorial, Paris
  Plages (summers only), Sacré-Cœur Basilica, St. Sulpice Church (with
  organ recital), and La Défense mall. Stroll the Left Bank riverside
  promenade from the Orsay to Pont de l’Alma, and the Right Bank
  from the Louvre to near Place de la Bastille. The neighborhood walks
  described in this book don’t cost a dime unless you enter a sight
  (Historic Paris, Rue Cler, Left Bank, Champs-Elysées, Marais, and
  Montmartre).
      Paris’ glorious, entertaining parks are free, bien sûr. These include
  Luxembourg Garden, Champ de Mars (under the Eiffel Tower),
  Tuileries Garden (between the Louvre and Place de la Concorde),
  Palais Royal Courtyards, Jardin des Plantes, Parc Monceau, and La
  Coulée Verte. Versailles’ gardens are free most weekdays in peak
  season and daily in winter (Nov-March).
  Reduced Prices: The Eiffel Tower costs less if you restrict your visit
  to the two lower levels—and even less if you use the stairs.
  Free Concerts: Venues offering free or cheap (€10-20) concerts
  include the American Church, Army Museum, St. Sulpice Church,
  Quai Branly Museum, and La Madeleine Church. For a listing of free
  concerts, check L’Officiel des Spectacles magazine (under the
  Concerts section) and look for events marked entrée libre.
  Good-Value Tours: At €15-25, Paris Walks’ tours are a good value.
  The Seine River cruises (allow €15), best after dark, are also
  worthwhile. My Bus #69 Sightseeing Tour, which costs only the price
  of a transit fare (€2), could be the best deal of all. The Paris audio
  tours covered on the Rick Steves Audio Europe app are all free (see
  here).
  Pricey...But Worth It? Certain big-ticket items—primarily the top of
  the Eiffel Tower, the Louvre, and Versailles—are expensive and
  crowded, but offer once-in-a-lifetime experiences. All together they
  amount to less than the cost of a ticket to Disneyland—only these are
  real.


▲Quai Branly Museum (Musée du Quai Branly)
This is the best collection I’ve seen anywhere of non-Western art from
Africa, Oceania, Asia, and the Americas. Because art illustrates the ways in
which a people organizes and delineates its culture and beliefs, viewing this
collection offers a richer appreciation of traditions from around the world.
The exhibits are presented in a wild, organic, and strikingly modern
building. It’s well worth a look if you have a Museum Pass and are near the
Eiffel Tower.
    Cost and Hours: €12, free on first Sun of the month, covered by
Museum Pass; museum—Tue-Wed and Sun 10:30-19:00, Thu-Sat until
22:00, closed Mon, ticket office closes one hour before closing; gardens—
Tue-Wed and Sun 9:15-19:30, Thu-Sat until 21:15, closed Mon;
audioguide-€5, 37 Quai Branly, 10-minute walk east (upriver) of Eiffel
Tower, along the river, RER/Train-C: Champ de Mars-Tour Eiffel or Pont
de l’Alma, +33 1 56 61 70 00, www.quaibranly.fr.
    Visiting the Museum: After passing the security check and the ticket
taker, pick up the museum map, then follow a ramp upstream along a
projected river of the 1,657 names of the peoples covered in the museum.
The permanent collection occupies the first floor up. Masks, statuettes,
musical instruments, textiles, clothes, voodoo dolls, and a variety of
temporary exhibitions and activities are artfully presented and exquisitely lit
(the dim lighting also helps to preserve the fragile works). There’s no need
to follow a route: Wander at whim. Helpful English explanations are posted
in most rooms and provide sufficient description for most visitors, though
serious students will want to rent the audioguide.
    Eiffel Tower Views: Even if you skip the museum, drop by its peaceful
garden Café Jacques for fine Eiffel Tower views and enjoy the intriguing
gardens. The pedestrian bridge that crosses the river and runs up to the
museum also has sensational tower views.

▲Paris Sewer Museum (Les Egouts de Paris)
Discover what happens after you flush. This quick, interesting, and slightly
stinky visit (a perfumed hanky helps) takes you along a few hundred yards
of water tunnels in the world’s first underground sewer system.
    Cost and Hours: €9, covered by Museum Pass, ask about free entry for
those under 26; Tue-Sun 10:00-17:00, closed Mon, last entry one hour
before closing; audioguide may be available-€3, located where Pont de
l’Alma greets the Left Bank—on the right side of the bridge as you face the
river, Mo: Alma-Marceau, RER/Train-C: Pont de l’Alma, +33 1 53 68 27
81.
    Visiting the Sewer: With nary a word in English throughout the
museum, the loaner booklet, map, and audioguide (if available) are
essential. Grab these as you enter, then drop down into Jean Valjean’s world
of tunnels, rats, and manhole covers. (Victor Hugo was friends with the
sewer inspector when he wrote Les Misérables.) Well-organized displays
explain the history of water distribution and collection in Paris, from
Roman times to the present.
    Sens de la Visite (“direction of visit”) signs and numbered stops guide
you along open sewers and through exhibits that explain the evolution of
this amazing network of sewers. More than 1,500 miles of tunnels carry 317
million gallons of water daily through this underworld. It’s the world’s
longest sewer system—so long, they say, that if it were laid out straight, it
would stretch from Paris all the way to Istanbul.
    It’s enlightening to see how much work goes into something we take for
granted. Sewage didn’t always disappear so readily. In the Middle Ages,
wastewater was tossed from windows to a center street gutter, then washed
into the river (which also supplied locals’ drinking water). In castles,
sewage ended up in the moat (enhancing the moat’s defensive role). In the
1500s, French Renaissance King François I moved from château to château
(he had several) when the moat-muck became too much. The museum
illustrates how, over time, sewage became separated from drinking water
and explains the intricate systems in place today that sustain that separation.

▲▲Rue Cler
Paris is always changing, but a stroll down this market street introduces you
to a thriving, traditional Parisian neighborhood and offers insights into the
local culture. Although this is a wealthy district, Rue Cler retains the
workaday charm still found in most neighborhoods throughout Paris. The
shops lining the street are filled with the freshest produce, the stinkiest
cheese, the tastiest chocolate, and the finest wines (markets generally open
Tue-Sat 8:30-13:00 & 15:00-19:30, Sun 8:30-12:00, dead Sun afternoon
and Mon). I’m still far from a gourmet eater, but my time spent tasting my
way along Rue Cler has heightened my appreciation of good cuisine (as
well as the French knack for good living).
     See the Rue Cler Walk chapter or     download my free audio tour.

▲▲Army Museum and Napoleon’s Tomb (Musée de l’Armée)
Europe’s greatest military museum, in the Hôtel des Invalides, provides
interesting coverage of several wars, particularly World Wars I and II. At
the center of the complex, Napoleon lies majestically dead inside several
coffins under a grand dome—a goose-bump inducing pilgrimage for
historians. The dome overhead glitters with 26 pounds of thinly pounded
gold leaf.
   Cost and Hours: €14, free for military personnel in uniform, free for
kids but they must wait in line for ticket, covered by Museum Pass; daily
10:00-18:00, Napoleon’s Tomb until 21:00 on Tue; multimedia guide-€5,
cafeteria, +33 1 44 42 38 77, www.musee-armee.fr.
   Getting There: The Hôtel des Invalides is at 129 Rue de Grenelle, a 10-
minute walk from Rue Cler (Mo: La Tour Maubourg, Varenne, or
Invalides). You can take bus #69 (from the Marais and Rue Cler) or bus #6
from the St. Germain-des-Prés area. Buses #82 or #92 also take you there.
      See the Army Museum & Napoleon’s Tomb Tour chapter.

▲▲Rodin Museum (Musée Rodin)
This user-friendly museum with gardens is filled with passionate works by
Auguste Rodin (1840-1917), the greatest sculptor since Michelangelo.
You’ll see The Kiss, The Thinker, The Gates of Hell, and many more, well
displayed in the mansion where the sculptor lived and worked. Exhibits
trace Rodin’s artistic development, explain how his bronze statues were
cast, and show some of the studies he created to work up to his masterpiece,
the unfinished Gates of Hell. Learn about Rodin’s tumultuous relationship
with his apprentice and lover, Camille Claudel. Mull over what makes his
sculptures some of the most evocative since the Renaissance. And stroll the
beautiful gardens, packed with many of his greatest works (including The
Thinker) and ideal for artistic reflection.




          Paris for Early Birds and Night Owls
  Most major sights in Paris are open between 9:00 and 18:00, but some
  open even earlier and/or stay open late. Parks such as Luxembourg
  Garden are a good option for early or late sightseeing (open from
  dawn to dusk). The Champs-Elysées is best at night.
Sights Open Early
Sacré-Cœur: Basilica daily at 6:30 (dome sleeps in until 10:00)
St. Sulpice Church: Daily at 7:30
Paris Plages (Paris Beaches): Mid-July-mid-Aug daily (24/7)
Père Lachaise Cemetery: Mon-Fri at 8:00, Sat at 8:30, Sun at 9:00
Gardens at Versailles: Daily at 8:00

Sights Open Late
Every night in Paris, at least one sight is open late. Keep in mind that
sights may stop admitting visitors well before posted closing times.
Jacquemart-André Museum: Mon until 20:30 during special
exhibits
Gardens at Versailles: April-Oct daily until 20:30 (may close earlier
for special events)
Marmottan Museum: Thu until 21:00
Napoleon’s Tomb: Tue until 21:00
  Pompidou Center: Wed-Mon until 21:00, special exhibits until 22:00
  and Thu until 23:00
  Architecture and Monuments Museum: Thu until 21:00
  Jewish Art and History Museum: Wed until 21:00 during special
  exhibits
  Delacroix Museum: First Thu of the month until 21:00
  Holocaust Memorial: Thu until 22:00
  Cluny Museum: First and third Thu of the month until 21:00
  Quai Branly: Thu-Sat until 22:00 (gardens until 21:15)
  Louvre: Possibly Wed and Fri until 21:45; check online
  Orsay Museum: Thu until 21:45
  Sacré-Cœur: Basilica daily until 22:30
  Arc de Triomphe: Daily until 23:00, Oct-March until 22:30
  Paris Plages (Paris Beaches): Mid-July-mid-Aug daily (24/7)
  Eiffel Tower: Daily mid-June-Aug until 24:45, Sept-mid-June until
  23:45


   Cost and Hours: €13, free for those under age 18, free on first Sun of
the month Oct-March, €24 combo-ticket with Orsay Museum, both museum
and garden covered by Museum Pass; Tue-Sun 10:00-18:30, closed Mon,
Oct-March garden closes at dusk; audioguide-€6, mandatory baggage
check, self-service café in garden, 77 Rue de Varenne, Mo: Varenne, +33 1
44 18 61 10, www.musee-rodin.fr.
     See the Rodin Museum Tour chapter.

▲▲Marmottan Museum (Musée Marmottan Monet)
In this private, intimate, and untouristy museum, you’ll find the best
collection anywhere of works by Impressionist headliner Claude Monet.
Follow Monet’s life through more than a hundred works, from simple
sketches to the Impression: Sunrise painting that gave his artistic movement
its start—and a name. The museum also displays some of the enjoyable
large-scale canvases featuring the water lilies from his garden at Giverny.
