Rodin Museum Tour

RODIN MUSEUM TOUR
Musée Rodin
Orientation
Map: Rodin Museum Overview
The Tour Begins
  Early Work
   Rodin the Employee
   First Success
   Rodin’s Prime Working Years
   Rodin’s Women
   Map: Rodin Museum—First Floor
   Rodin’s Friends
   Camille Claudel
   Final Years: Looking Back, Looking Forward
 THE GARDENS
   Gallery of Marbles
Auguste Rodin (1840-1917) was a modern Michelangelo, sculpting human
figures on an epic scale, revealing through their bodies his deepest thoughts
and feelings. Like many of Michelangelo’s unfinished works, Rodin’s
statues rise from the raw stone around them, driven by the life force. With
missing limbs and scarred skin, these are prefab classics, making ugliness
noble. Rodin’s people are always moving restlessly. Even the famous
Thinker is moving; while he’s plopped down solidly, his mind is a million
miles away.
    The museum presents a full range of Rodin’s work, housed in a historic
mansion and its gardens where the artist once lived and worked.



                            Orientation
Cost: €13, free for those under 18, free on the first Sun of the month Oct-
   March, €24 combo-ticket with Orsay Museum, both museum and
   gardens covered by Museum Pass. Your ticket or Museum Pass also
   covers any special exhibits.
     Lines are rarely a problem here, but if you have a Museum Pass or a
  ticket purchased online (€1 fee), you can bypass both the line for buying
  tickets and the one for entering the museum building. Everyone must
  pass through a (sometimes slow) security check.
Hours: Tue-Sun 10:00-18:30, closed Mon; Oct-March garden closes at
  dusk.
Information: +33 1 44 18 61 10, www.musee-rodin.fr.
When to Go: The museum is busiest 11:00-13:00, on weekends, and on
   rainy days (when the building is packed and the gardens are
   unpleasant). Note that if you are tight on time and money, several good
   statues by Rodin can be seen at the Orsay.
Getting There: It’s at 77 Rue de Varenne, near the Army Museum and
   Napoleon’s Tomb (Mo: Varenne). Bus #69 stops nearby on Rue de
   Grenelle or Rue St. Dominique (depending on direction). Buses #82 and
   #92 get you within a 10-minute walk.
Tours: A €6 audioguide covers the museum and gardens and is helpful to
   fully appreciate the art.
Length of This Tour: Allow one hour.
Baggage Check: Even a fairly small bag must be checked, unless you tuck
   it under your arm like a purse.
Cuisine Art: A peaceful $ self-service cafeteria is in the gardens behind
   the museum. Picnics are not allowed in the gardens. For better options,
   you’ll find many recommended cafés and restaurants in the Rue Cler
   area (a 15-minute walk; see the Eating in Paris chapter).



                       The Tour Begins
• Enter and buy tickets in the modern entrance hall. There’s a bookstore, a
gallery for temporary exhibits, and WCs. Pick up the museum map (and
audioguide, if interested).
    Exit the ticket hall, walk across the courtyard of the gardens, and enter
the mansion (where you’ll check your bag). You’ll follow a one-way route
over two floors (elevator available), circling each clockwise, ground floor
first and then upstairs. My tour can help guide you through the museum’s
general layout, but be aware that the collection changes frequently—just go
with the flow.
• Now enter Room 1, which generally displays...

Early Work
Rodin’s early works match the belle époque style of the time—noble busts
of bourgeois citizens, pretty portraits of their daughters, and classical
themes. Born of working-class roots, Rodin taught himself art by sketching
statues at the Louvre and then sculpting copies.
    The Man with the Broken Nose (L’Homme au Nez Cassé, 1865)—a
deliberately ugly work—was 23-year-old Rodin’s first break from the norm.
He meticulously sculpted this deformed man (one of the few models the
struggling sculptor could afford), but then the clay statue froze in his
unheated studio, and the back of the head fell off. Rodin loved it! Art critics
hated it. Rodin persevered. (Note: The museum rotates the display of two
different versions—the broken-headed one and a repaired version that
Rodin made later and critics accepted.)




   You may also see portraits and busts of Rodin’s future wife, Rose
Beuret, the woman who would suffer with him through obscurity and
celebrity.
• Continue to Room 2.

Rodin the Employee
To feed his family, Rodin cranked out small-scale works—portraits,
ornamental vases, nymphs, and knickknacks to decorate buildings—with
his boss’ name on them (the more established sculptor Albert Carrier-
Belleuse). Still, the series of mother-and-childs he was hired to do (perhaps
depicting Rose and baby Auguste?) allowed him to experiment on a small
scale with the intertwined twosomes he’d perfect later in his career.
    Rodin’s work brought in enough money for him to visit Italy, where he
was inspired by the boldness, monumental scale, restless figures, and
“unfinished” look of Michelangelo’s sculptures. Rapidly approaching
middle age, Rodin was ready to rock.
• In Room 3, Rodin finds his...

First Success
Rodin moved to Brussels, where his first major work, The Age of Bronze
(L’Âge d’Airain, 1877), brought controversy and the fame that surrounds it.
This nude youth, perhaps inspired by Michelangelo’s Dying Slave (in the
Louvre—see here), awakens to a new world. It was so lifelike that Rodin
was accused of not sculpting it himself but simply casting it directly from a
live body. The boy’s raised left arm looks like it should be leaning on a
spear, but it’s just that missing element that makes the pose more tenuous
and interesting.
    The art establishment still snubbed Rodin as an outsider, and no wonder.
Saint John the Baptist (1878)—though now acknowledged as a classic—
was savaged by the critics for its awkward, flat-footed pose. His ultra-
intense The Call of Arms (La Défense, 1912-1918) screams, “Off with their
heads!” at the top of her lungs. Rodin loved twisted poses, fragmented
figures, and weird juxtapositions. He was forging a style that was unique.
He was a slave to his muses, and some of them inspired monsters.
    Little by little, Rodin gathered an entourage around him of like-minded
souls: wealthy patrons, fellow artists who understood his vision, and
students who adored him...including one he’d later become involved with,
Camille Claudel.
• Rooms 4-8 generally display a variety of statues from...
Rodin’s Prime Working Years
Rodin and his stable of talented artists began cranking out works that have
become classics. As you’ll see throughout the museum, Rodin often started
with small-scale versions of works that were later executed on a grand
scale. (This process is explained in the sidebars.) He tinkered with The
Thinker (Room 5) for years before creating the massive bronze version in
the gardens (which we’ll see later).
    In the center of Room 5, a passionate woman twines around a solid man
for their first, spontaneous kiss. Looking at their bodies, we can almost read
the thoughts, words, and movements that led up to this meeting of lips. The
Kiss (Le Baiser, 1888-1889) was the first Rodin work the public loved.
Rodin came to despise it, thinking it simple and sentimental.
    Find the opening in Room 5 to the museum’s entrance area and peer left
to find The Hand of God (La Main de Dieu, 1896). This work shapes Adam
and Eve from the mud of the earth to which they will return. Rodin worked
in “mud,” using his hands to model clay figures, which were then
reproduced in marble or bronze, usually by his assistants. You’ll be able to
inspect this masterpiece from every angle when you pass by it as you
approach the stairs to the second floor. Rodin first worked on the front view,
then checked the back and side profiles, then filled in the in-between.
• Now enter Room 6.
   Rodin excelled in creating ensembles. As he worked on small-scale
studies for the grim execution scene known as The Burghers of Calais (a
small white plaster model in a glass case is on display here, the full-sized
bronze version stands in the gardens), he needed to capture not only each
man’s individual expression but also how his body language conversed with
the other members of the group.



                   Rodin’s Creative Process
The beauty of the Rodin Museum is that it shows so many works in
progress. Rodin loved the creative process and the unfinished look.
   Rodin worked with many materials—he chiseled marble (though
not often), modeled clay, cast bronze, worked plaster, painted on
canvas, and sketched on paper. He often created different versions of
the same subject in different media.




   The first flash of inspiration for a huge statue might be a single line
sketched on notepaper. Rodin wanted nude models in his studio at all
times—walking, dancing, squatting—in case they struck an interesting
pose. Rodin thought of sculpture as simply “drawing in all
dimensions.”
   Next, he might re-create a figure as a small-scale statue in plaster.
The museum displays a number of these plaster “sketches,” which you
can compare with the final large-scale versions. Rodin employed and
mentored many artists who executed these designs on a larger scale.
  Rodin rarely worked on marble statues (though the museum often
  displays newsreel footage of him doing exactly that). For that robust
  work, he hired others.
      Rodin’s figures struggle to come into existence. They are dancers
  stretching, posing, and leaping. Legendary lovers kiss and intertwine
  in yin-yang bliss. Embracing couples seem to emerge from the stone
  just long enough to love.
      Rodin was fascinated by the theory of evolution—not Darwin’s
  version of the survival of the fittest, but the ideas of Frenchman Jean-
  Baptiste Lamarck. Rodin’s figures survive not by the good fortune of
  random mutation (Darwin) but by virtue of their own striving
  (Lamarck). They are driven by the life force, a restless energy that
  animates and shapes dead matter. Rodin must have felt that force even
  as a child, when he first squeezed soft clay and saw a worm emerge.
      Rodin left many works “unfinished,” reminding us that all creation
  is a difficult process of dragging a form out of chaos.


• Move on to Room 7.

Rodin’s Women
What did Rodin think of women? There are many different images from
which you can draw your own conclusions.
    He loved sculpting women, either alone or as part of an intertwined
couple. Danaïd (1889) buries her head in the marble over her meaningless
fate. Eve (1881) buries her head in shame, hiding her nakedness. But she
can’t hide the consequences—she’s pregnant.
   As Rodin became famous, wealthy, and respected, society ladies all
wanted him to do their portraits. You may see a sculpture of his last mistress
(La Duchesse de Choiseul, usually in Room 7 or 8), an American who lived
with him here in this mansion. Rodin purposely left in the metal base points
(used in the sculpting process), placing them suggestively.
   Throughout the museum are studies of the female body in its different
forms—crouching, soaring, dying, open, closed, wrinkled, intertwined.
• Continue your visit upstairs in Room 9. You’ll browse through a series of
rooms with works that give a glimpse into...

Rodin’s Friends
Rodin started hanging out with Paris’ intellectuals, artists, and glitterati as
one of their own. As you explore these upstairs rooms, you may see statues
and portrait busts of celebrities he knew personally. Remember, Rodin lived
and worked in this mansion, renting rooms alongside Henri Matisse, the
poet Rainer Maria Rilke (Rodin’s secretary), and the dancer Isadora
Duncan.
    Rodin was especially fascinated with trying to capture the perfect
portraits of his two famous writer friends, Victor Hugo and the controversial
French novelist Honoré de Balzac (Room 9). With Balzac, Rodin’s feverish
attempts ranged from a pot-bellied Bacchus to a headless nude cradling an
erection. In a moment of inspiration, Rodin threw a plaster-soaked robe
over a nude form and watched it dry. This became the inspiration for the
definitive version—proud and turning his nose up at his critics. (This
version is displayed in the gardens, near The Thinker; other casts stand in
the Orsay Museum and on a street median in Montparnasse.) When the
Balzac statue was unveiled, the crowd booed, a fitting tribute to both the
defiant novelist and the bold man who sculpted him.
• As you survey these rooms, notice the sculptures of clasping and tilting
hands (possibly the hands of Rodin and Rose Beuret, Room 10), and a
series of busts of Rose (Room 11). Then, enter Room 12.
   The paintings in this gallery are by fellow artists Rodin either knew or
admired, such as Vincent van Gogh, Claude Monet, and Pierre-Auguste
Renoir. Rodin enjoyed discussions with Monet and other artists and
incorporated their ideas into his work. Rodin is often considered an
Impressionist because he captured spontaneous “impressions” of figures
and created rough surfaces that catch reflected light.
• When you reach Room #15 (on the mansion’s back side), enjoy the nice
views overlooking the gardens. On the back wall is a large painting of
Rodin in his studio. The next room (#16) is dedicated to...
Camille Claudel
You’ll find several works by Camille Claudel, mostly in the style of her
master. The 44-year-old Rodin, inspired by 18-year-old Camille’s beauty
and spirit, took her as his pupil, muse, colleague, and lover, and often used
her as a model. (See several versions of her head.) We can follow the arc of
their relationship in the exhibits.
   As his student, “Mademoiselle C” learned from Rodin, doing portrait
busts in his lumpy, molded-clay style. Her bronze bust of Rodin shows the
steely-eyed sculptor with strong frontal and side profiles, barely emerging
from the materials they both worked with.
   Soon they were lovers. The Waltz (La Valse) captures the spinning
exuberance the two must have felt as they embarked together on a new life.
The couple twirls in a delicate balance.
   But Rodin was devoted as well to his lifelong companion, Rose.
Claudel’s Maturity (L’Age Mûr, 1895-1907, also in Orsay Museum) shows
the breakup. A young woman on her knees begs the man not to leave her, as
he’s reluctantly led away by an older woman. The statue may literally
depict a scene from real life, in which a naked, fragile Claudel begged
Rodin not to return to his wife. In the larger sense, it may also be a
metaphor for the cruel passage of time, as Youth tries to save Maturity from
the clutches of Old Age.



                 The Bronze Casting Process
  Rodin made his bronze statues not by hammering sheets of metal but
  by using the classic “lost wax” technique. He’d start by shaping the
  figure from wet plaster. This sculptural model was covered with a
  form-fitting mold. By pouring molten bronze into the narrow space
  between the model and the mold around it, letting it cool, and
  removing the mold—voilà!—Rodin had a hollow bronze statue ready
  to be polished and varnished.
      There were actually a number of additional steps (involving two
  different molds) before the bronze was poured. Rodin was intimately
  involved in every step—sanding down the clay model, coating it with
  wax, and touching up the waxy skin to add crucial surface details.
  Once the final mold was ready, Rodin’s employees fitted it with
  ventilation tubes and poured in the molten bronze. The wax melted
  away—the “lost wax” technique—and the bronze cooled and hardened
  in its place, thus forming the final bronze statue.
      Using a mold, Rodin could produce multiple copies, which is why
  there are many authorized bronze versions of Rodin’s masterpieces all
  over the world.


   Rodin did leave Claudel. Talented in her own right but tormented by
grief and jealousy, she became increasingly unstable and spent her final
years in an institution. Claudel’s The Wave (La Vague, 1900), carved in
green onyx in a very un-Rodin style, shows tiny, helpless women huddling
together as a tsunami is about to engulf them.
• Finally, step into the last few rooms.
Final Years: Looking Back, Looking Forward
By the end of Rodin’s long and productive life, he had become as famous as
his works. He was viewed as a modern master of the most classic of art
forms—sculpture, a tradition that stretched back to ancient times. At the
same time, he was always looking ahead, restlessly forging new forms of
expression.
    Rodin took classical Greek motifs—myths and nymphs—and used them
to create something completely new. He loved the broken look of Greek
ruins and created his own ready-made fragments. He expanded the age-old
repertoire of “acceptable” poses by studying the fluid movements of
dancers. He loved the off-balance, unposed pose (which the invention of the
camera also helped to capture).
    The tall bronze Walking Man (L’Homme Qui Marche, 1900-1907), in
Room 17, depicts the bold spirit of the turn-of-the-last-century era. Armless
and headless, he plants his back foot forcefully, as though he’s about to
stride, while his front foot has already stepped. Rodin captures two poses at
once—of a man who has one foot in the classical past, one in the modernist
future.
• The visit continues outside in the gardens. There you can see the finished,
large-scale versions of many small-scale “studies” you may have seen
inside the museum.




THE GARDENS
Rodin loved the overgrown gardens that surrounded his home, and he loved
placing his creations amid the flourishing greenery. These, his greatest
works, show Rodin at his most expansive. The epic human figures are
enhanced, not dwarfed, by the nature surrounding them.
• Leaving the house, you’ve got four more stops: one to the left and three on
the right. Beyond these stops is a big, breezy garden ornamented with many
more statues, a cafeteria, and a WC. First head left to...

The Thinker (Le Penseur), 1906
Leaning slightly forward, tense and compact, every muscle working toward
producing that one great thought, Man contemplates his fate. No
constipation jokes, please.
    This is not an intellectual but a linebacker who’s realizing there’s more
to life than frat parties. It’s the first man evolving beyond his animal nature
to think the first thought. It’s anyone who’s ever worked hard to reinvent
himself or to make something new or better. Said Rodin: “It is a statue of
myself.”
   There are 29 other authorized copies of this statue, one of the most
famous in the world. The Thinker was to have been the centerpiece of a
massive project that Rodin wrestled with for decades—a doorway encrusted
with characters from Dante’s Inferno. It’s our next stop, The Gates of Hell.
• Follow The Thinker’s gaze across the gardens. Standing before a tall,
white backdrop is a big, dark door...

The Gates of Hell (La Porte de l’Enfer), 1880-1917
These doors (never meant to actually open) were never finished for a
museum that was never built. But the vision of Dante’s trip into hell gave
Rodin a chance to explore the dark side of human experience. “Abandon all
hope ye who enter here,” was hell’s motto. The three Shades at the top of
the door point down—that’s where we’re going. Beneath the Shades,
pondering the whole scene from above, is Dante as the Thinker. Below him,
the figures emerge from the darkness just long enough to tell their sad tale
of depravity. There are Paolo and Francesca (in the center of the right door),
who were driven into the illicit love affair that brought them here. Ugolino
(left door, just below center) crouches in prison over his kids. This poor
soul was so driven by hunger that he ate the corpses of his own children. On
all fours like an animal, he is the dark side of natural selection. Finally, find
what some say is Rodin himself (at the very bottom, inside the right
doorjamb, where it just starts to jut out), crouching humbly.
   You’ll find some of these figures writ large in the gardens. The Thinker
and The Shades (c. 1889) are behind you, and Ugolino (1901-1904) dines in
the fountain at the far end.
   It’s appropriate that The Gates—Rodin’s “cathedral”—remained
unfinished. He was always a restless artist for whom the process of
discovery was as important as the finished product. Studies for The Gates
are scattered throughout the museum, and they constitute some of Rodin’s
masterpieces.
• To the left of The Gates of Hell, along the street near where you entered,
are...

The Burghers of Calais (Bourgeois de Calais), 1889
The six city fathers trudge to their execution, and we can read in their faces
and poses what their last thoughts are. They mill about, dazed, as each one
deals with the decision he’s made to sacrifice himself for his city.
   Rodin depicts the actual event from 1347, when, in order to save their
people, Calais’ city fathers surrendered the keys of the city—and their lives
—to the king of England. Rodin portrays them, not in some glorious pose
drenched in pomp and allegory, but as a simple example of men sacrificing
their lives together. As the men head to the gallows, with ropes already
around their necks, each body shows a distinct emotion, ranging from
courage to despair.
    Circle the work counterclockwise. The man carrying the key to the city
tightens his lips in determination. The bearded man is weighed down with
grief. Another buries his head in his hands. One turns, seeking reassurance
from his friend, who turns away and gestures helplessly. The final key-
bearer (in back) raises his hand to his head.
    Each is alone in his thoughts, but they’re united by their mutual
sacrifice, by the base they stand on, and by their weighty robes—gravity is
already dragging them down to their graves.




   Pity the poor souls; view the statue from various angles (you can’t ever
see all the faces at once); then thank King Edward III, who, at the last
second, pardoned them.
• To the right of The Gates of Hell is a glassed-in building, the...

Gallery of Marbles
Unfinished, these statues show human features emerging from the rough
stone. Imagine Rodin in his studio, working to give them life.
   Victor Hugo (at the far-right end of the gallery), the great champion of
progress and author of Les Misérables and The Hunchback of Notre-Dame,
leans back like Michelangelo’s nude Adam, waiting for the spark of
creation. He tenses his face and cups his ear, straining to hear the call from
the blurry Muse above him. Once inspired, he can bring the idea to life (just
as Rodin did) with the strength of his powerful arms. It’s been said that all
of Rodin’s work shows the struggle of mind over matter, of brute creatures
emerging from the mud and evolving into a species of thinkers.
