Marais Walk

MARAIS WALK
From Place Bastille to the Pompidou Center
Orientation
The Walk Begins
   1 Place de la Bastille


  Map: Marais Walk
     2  Rue St. Antoine
     3 Hôtel de Sully

     4 Place des Vosges

     5 Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

     6 Carnavalet Museum

     7 Rue Pavée

     8 Rue des Rosiers: Jewish Quarter

     9 Rue Ste. Croix de la Bretonnerie

     10 Pompidou Center

     11 Hôtel de Ville


This walk introduces you to one of Paris’ most intriguing quarters, the
Marais. Naturally, when in Paris you want to see the big sights—but to
experience the city, you also need to visit a vital neighborhood. The Marais
fits the bill, with trendy boutiques and art galleries, with-it cafés, narrow
streets, leafy squares, Jewish bakeries, aristocratic mansions, and fun
nightlife—and it’s filled with real Parisians. It’s the perfect setting to
appreciate the flair of this great city.
    The walk mixes history with glimpses of daily life in the Marais. Follow
this suggested route for a start, then explore. If at any point you want to
wander into a store or savor a café crème, by all means, you have
permission to press pause.



                           Orientation
Length of This Walk: Allow about 2 hours for this level, two-mile walk.
   Add an additional hour for each museum you decide to visit along the
   way.
When to Go: The Marais is liveliest on Sundays when many streets are off
   limits to cars (and shops are open, unlike in other neighborhoods).
   Monday mornings are sleepy. On Saturdays, Jewish businesses may
   close, but the area still hops.
Victor Hugo’s House: Free, fee for optional special exhibits, Tue-Sun
   10:00-18:00, closed Mon, 6 Place des Vosges.
Carnavalet Museum: Free, Tue-Sun 10:00-18:00, closed Mon, 16 Rue des
   Francs Bourgeois.
Jewish Art and History Museum: €10, covered by Museum Pass, free on
   first Sat of month Oct-June; Tue-Fri 11:00-18:00, Sat-Sun from 10:00,
   open later during special exhibits—Wed until 21:00 and Sat-Sun until
   19:00, closed Mon year-round, last entry 45 minutes before closing, 71
   Rue du Temple.
Holocaust Memorial: Free, Sun-Fri 10:00-18:00, Thu until 22:00, closed
   Sat and certain Jewish holidays.
Pompidou Center: €14, free on first Sun of month; Museum Pass covers
   permanent collection, sixth-floor view, and occasional special exhibits;
   permanent collection open Wed-Mon 11:00-21:00, closed Tue.
Tours: Paris Walks offers excellent guided tours of this area (see here).
Starring: The grand Place des Vosges, the Jewish Quarter, several
   museums, and the boutiques and trendy lifestyle of today’s Marais.



                        The Walk Begins
• Start at the west end of Place de la Bastille. Bus #69 stops on Rue St.
Antoine, a half-block to the west. From the Bastille Métro, exit following
signs to Place de la Bastille/Place des Vosges. Ascend onto a vast, noisy
traffic circle dominated by the bronze Colonne de Juillet (July Column).
The figure atop the column is, like you, headed west. Lean against the
Métro railing in front of the Banque de France.
 1   Place de la Bastille
The famous Bastille fortress once stood on this square. All that remains
today is a faint cobblestone outline of the fortress’ round turrets traced in
the pavement on Rue St. Antoine (30 yards before it hits the square).
Though virtually nothing remains, it was on this spot that history turned.




    It’s July 1789, and the spirit of revolution is stirring in the streets of
Paris. The king’s troops have evacuated the city center, withdrawing to their
sole stronghold, a castle-like structure guarding the east edge of the city—
the Bastille. The Bastille was also a prison (which even held the infamous
Marquis de Sade in 1789) and was seen as the very symbol of royal
oppression. On July 14, the people of Paris gathered here at the Bastille’s
main gate and demanded the troops surrender. When negotiations failed,
they stormed the prison and released its seven prisoners. For good measure,
they decorated their pikes with the heads of a few bigwigs. This triumph of
citizens over royalty ignited all of France and inspired the Revolution. Over
the next few months, the Parisians demolished the stone prison brick by
brick.



                     Bastille Day in France
  Bastille Day—July 14, the symbolic kickoff date of the French
  Revolution—became the French national holiday in 1880.
  Traditionally, Parisians celebrate at Place de la Bastille starting at
  20:00 on July 13, but the best parties are on the numerous smaller
  squares, where firefighter units sponsor dances. At 10:00 on the
  morning of the 14th, a grand military parade fills the Champs-Elysées.
  Then, at 22:30, there’s a fireworks display at the Eiffel Tower (arrive
  at Champ de Mars park by 20:00 to get a seat on the grass). Vive la
  France!


   Though the fortress is long gone, Place de la Bastille has remained a
sacred spot for freedom lovers ever since. The July Column—with its
gilded statue of Liberty elegantly carrying the torch of freedom into the
future—is a symbol of France’s long struggle to establish democracy. It was
built to commemorate the revolution of 1830, when the conservative King
Charles X—who forgot all about the Revolution of the previous generation
—needed to be tossed out. The mid-19th century was a time of social unrest
throughout Europe; the square drew worker rallies, and at times, the streets
of Paris were barricaded by the working class, as dramatized in Les
Misérables.
   Today the square remains a popular spot for demonstrations, and the
Bastille is remembered every July 14 on France’s independence day—
Bastille Day (see sidebar).
   Across the square, the southeast corner is dominated (some say
overwhelmed) by the flashy, curved, glassy gray facade of the Opéra
Bastille. In a symbolic attempt to bring high culture to the masses, former
French president François Mitterrand chose this location for the building
that would become Paris’ main opera venue, edging out the city’s earlier
“palace of the rich,” the Garnier-designed opera house. Designed by
Uruguayan-Canadian architect Carlos Ott, the grand Opéra Bastille—one of
the largest theaters in the world, with nine stages—was opened with fanfare
by Mitterrand on the 200th Bastille Day, July 14, 1989. Tickets are
subsidized to encourage the unwashed masses to attend, though how much
high culture they have actually enjoyed here is a subject of debate. (For
opera ticket info, see here.)
• Now turn your back on Place de la Bastille and head west down Rue St.
Antoine about four blocks into the Marais.
 2   Rue St. Antoine
From Paris’ earliest days, this has been one of its grandest boulevards, part
of the east-west axis from Place de la Concorde to the eastern gate, Porte St.
Antoine. The street was broadened in the mid-1800s as part of the civic
renovation plan by Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann (see sidebar on
here). Today, it’s an ordinary street with a typical mix of workaday shops:
banks, clothing stores, produce stands, restaurants.
    Just past the first block, a statue of Beaumarchais (1732-1799)
introduces you to the aristocratic-but-bohemian spirit of the Marais.
Beaumarchais, who lived near here, made watches for Louis XV, wrote the
bawdy Marriage of Figaro (which Mozart turned into an opera), and
smuggled guns to freedom fighters in both the American and French
Revolutions.
    On the next block, across the street to the left, is a stately pre-
Revolutionary mansion with a fine red carriage gate. It became a school
after the Revolution. Look ahead, along the roofline of this street of 19th-
century facades with stout walls holding ranks of chimneys—one chimney
for each fireplace, because back then any room that had heat had its own
hearth.
    Continuing on, at the intersection with Rue de Birague, music fans may
wish to make a 100-yard detour to the left, down Rue Beautreillis to #17,
the nondescript apartment where rock star Jim Morrison died. (For more
on Morrison in Paris, see here.)
    If you cross over here or elsewhere along Rue St. Antoine, pay attention
to the busy two-way bike “freeway” on the south side of the street. Paris’
pro-bike and pro-pedestrian mayor, Anne Hidalgo, has replaced many car
lanes with bike lanes like these. The bike lanes often seem busier than the
parallel car lanes.
• Continue down Rue St. Antoine to #62 and enter the grand courtyard of
Hôtel de Sully (daily 10:00-19:00). If the building is closed, you’ll need to
backtrack one block to Rue de Birague to reach the next stop, Place des
Vosges.
 3   Hôtel de Sully
During the reign of Henry IV (r. 1589-1610), this area—originally a swamp
(marais)—became the hometown of the French aristocracy. Big shots built
their private mansions (hôtels), like this one, close to Henry’s stylish Place
des Vosges. Hôtels that survived the Revolution now house museums,
libraries, and national institutions.




    Nobles entered the courtyard by horse-drawn carriage, then parked
under the four arches to the right. The elegant courtyard separated the
mansion from the noisy and very public street. Look up at statues of
Autumn (carrying grapes from the harvest), Winter (a feeble old man), and
the four elements.
    Enter the building between the sphinxes into a passageway and admire
the sumptuous ceiling in the bookstore. Continue into the back courtyard,
where noisy Paris takes a back seat. Enjoy the oak tree, manicured hedges,
vine-covered walls, birdsong, and the back side of the mansion with its
warm stone and statues. Use the bit of Gothic window tracery (on the right)
for a fun framed photo of your travel partner as a haloed Madonna. At the
far end, the French doors are part of a former orangerie, or greenhouse, for
homegrown fruits and vegetables throughout winter; these days it warms
office workers. Ostentatious as mansions like this might seem, they were
often the second residences of a fabulously wealthy noble. Owners of such
mansions were members of pre-Revolutionary France’s one percent, whose
primary residences were much grander châteaux in the countryside.
• Continue through the small door at the far-right corner of the back
courtyard, and pop out into one of Paris’ finest squares.
 4   Place des Vosges
Walk to the center, where Louis XIII, on horseback, gestures, “Look at this
wonderful square my dad built.” He’s surrounded by locals enjoying their
community park. You’ll see children frolicking in the sandbox, lovers
warming benches, and pigeons guarding their fountains while trees shade
this escape from the glare of the big city (you can refill your water bottle in
the center of the square, behind Louis).




   Study the architecture: nine pavilions (houses) per side. The two highest
—at the front and back—were for the king and queen (but were never
used). Warm red brickwork—some real, some fake—is topped with sloped
slate roofs, chimneys, and another quaint relic of a bygone era: TV
antennas. Beneath the arcades are cafés, art galleries, and restaurants—it’s
an atmospheric place for lunch or dinner (for recommendations, see the
Marais section of the Eating chapter).
    Henry IV built this centerpiece of the Marais in 1605 and called it “Place
Royale.” As he’d hoped, it turned the Marais into Paris’ most exclusive
neighborhood. Just like Versailles 80 years later, this was a magnet for the
rich and powerful of France. The square served as a model for civic
planners across Europe. With the Revolution, the aristocratic splendor of
this quarter passed. To encourage the country to pay its taxes, Napoleon
promised naming rights to the district that paid first—the Vosges region
(near Germany).
    The insightful writer Victor Hugo lived at #6 from 1832 to 1848. (It’s at
the southeast corner of the square, marked by the French flag.) This was
when he wrote much of his most important work, including his biggest hit,
Les Misérables. Inside this free museum you can wander through eight
plush rooms, take in a fine view of the square, and enjoy a charming garden
café and good WCs (see “Victor Hugo’s House” on here).
    Sample the flashy art galleries ringing the square (the best ones are
behind Louis). Ponder a daring new piece for that blank wall at home and
take a peek into the courtyard of the Hôtel le Pavillon de la Reine (#28) for
a glimpse into refined living—my hotel doesn’t look like this. Or consider a
pleasant break at one of the recommended eateries on the square.
• Exit the square at the northwest (far left) corner. Head west on...
 5   Rue des Francs-Bourgeois
From the Marais of yesteryear, immediately enter the lively neighborhood
of today. Stroll down a block full of cafés and eclectic clothing boutiques
with the latest fashions. A few doorways (including #8 and #13) lead into
courtyards with more shops. Even this “main” street through the
neighborhood is narrow and more fit for pedestrians than cars.
    In the 19th century, the aristocrats moved elsewhere. The Marais became
a working-class quarter, filled with gritty shops, artisans, immigrants, and a
Jewish community. Haussmann’s modernization plan put the Marais in line
for the wrecking ball. But then the march of “progress” was halted by one
tiny little event—World War I—and the Marais was spared. It limped along
as a dirty, working-class zone until the 1960s, when it was transformed and
gentrified.
    Across the street from the Carnavalet Museum (described next), on the
corner, is the storefront of a long-gone boulangerie-pâtisserie. Its facade is
protected and so it survives, even though baked goods are no longer sold
here.
• The entrance to the museum is at the intersection of Rue des Francs-
Bourgeois and Rue de Sevigné.
 6   Carnavalet Museum
Housed inside a Marais mansion, this museum features the history of Paris,
particularly the Revolution years. The bloody events of July 14, 1789, come
to life in paintings and displays, including a model of the Bastille carved
out of one of its bricks. The mansion itself provides the best possible look at
the elegance of the neighborhood back when Place des Vosges was Place
Royale. Walking past the mansion, notice the original Carnavalet entrance
and the elaborate iron gate through which carriages would enter. For more
on the museum, see here.
• Continue west a half-block down Rue des Francs-Bourgeois to the post
office. Modern-art fans can check out the nearby Picasso Museum, with
temporary exhibits featuring a range of styles and media from the artist’s
long life (see here).
Turn left onto...
 7   Rue Pavée
In a few steps, at #24, you’ll pass the 16th-century Paris Historical Library
(Bibliothèque Historique de la Ville de Paris). Step into the courtyard of this
rare Renaissance mansion to see its unstained-glass windows and clean
classical motifs. From the street, notice the corner lookout—designed so
guards could see from which direction angry peasants were coming.
    Continue down Rue Pavée, keeping to the right, until you come to the
intersection with Rue des Rosiers. Before we turn right on Rue des Rosiers,
consider two little side-trips: A half-block straight ahead leads to the
Agoudas Hakehilos synagogue (at #10) with its striking (and filthy) Art
Nouveau facade (c. 1913, closed to public). It was designed by Hector
Guimard, the same architect who designed Paris’ Art Nouveau Métro
stations. A half-block to the left, along Rue des Rosiers, is the
recommended Le Loir dans la Théière (at #3). With tasty baked goods and
hot drinks, this place provides the perfect excuse for a break.
• From Rue Pavée, turn right onto Rue des Rosiers, which runs straight for
three blocks through Paris’ Jewish Quarter.
 8    Rue des Rosiers: Jewish Quarter
This street—the heart of the Jewish Quarter (and named for the roses that
once lined the city wall)—has become the epicenter of Marais trendiness
and fashion, with chic clothing boutiques and stylish cafés.
   Once the largest in Western Europe, Paris’ Jewish Quarter, while greatly
reduced in size, still reflects its colorful past. Notice the sign above #4,
which says Hamam (Turkish bath). Although still bearing the sign of an old
public bath, it now showcases trendy clothing. Next door, at #4 bis, the
Ecole de Travail (trade school) has a plaque on the wall (left of the door)
remembering the headmaster, staff, and students who were arrested here
during World War II and killed at Auschwitz.



                     Eateries Along This Walk
     Bring your appetite along, because I’ve peppered this walk with
     pleasant places to stop for a break. Some are best for a sit-down meal,
     and others for a quick coffee, crêpe, or snack. Find these spots on the
     map in this chapter. Many are described in more detail in the Eating in
     Paris chapter, where you’ll find still more options.
     $$$ La Place Royale: Traditional, well-priced cuisine on Place des
     Vosges, with outdoor seating (see here).
     $ Café Hugo: Great for drinks or standard café fare on Place des
     Vosges (see here).
     $$ Le Loir dans la Théière: A cozy, welcoming teahouse for lunch or
     dessert on Rue des Rosiers (see here).
     $ Falafel Row: Eat in or take away from several joints serving good
     falafel along Rue des Rosiers between Rue des Ecouffes and Rue
     Vieille du Temple (see here).
     $ Florence Kahn Yiddish bakery: Tiny takeaway shop for boutique
     baked goods and sandwiches (Wed-Sun 10:00-19:00, closed Mon-Tue,
     24 Rue des Ecouffes, +33 6 09 66 52).
     $ Sacha Finkelsztajn: Another Yiddish bakery/deli with Polish and
     Russian cuisine, same price to sit or take away (Wed-Sun 10:00-19:00,
     closed Mon-Tue, 27 Rue des Rosiers, +33 1 42 72 78 91).
$$ Chez Marianne: Neighborhood fixture for inexpensive Jewish
cuisine (at the corner of Rue des Rosiers and Rue des Hospitalières-
St.-Gervais; see here).
$$$ Mariage Frères: Luxurious tea extravaganza just off Rue Ste.
Croix de la Bretonnerie (daily 10:30-19:30, serving tea from 12:00, 30
Rue du Bourg Tibourg, +33 1 42 72 28 11).
$ Dame Tartine and $ Crêperie Beaubourg: Two casual, inexpensive
joints for salads, toasted sandwiches, and crêpes alongside Pompidou
Center’s Stravinsky fountain. Beaubourg offers a good €10 lunch
special (Tartine daily 9:00-23:30, +33 1 77 18 88 59; Beaubourg daily
11:30-23:00, +33 1 42 77 63 62).
$ BHV Department Store fifth-floor cafeteria: Nice views and
good-value cafeteria food (by Hôtel de Ville at the corner of Rue du
Temple and Rue de la Verrerie; see here).
    The size of the Jewish population here has fluctuated. It expanded in the
19th century when Jews arrived from Eastern Europe, escaping pogroms
(surprise attacks on villages). The numbers swelled during the 1930s as
Jews fled Nazi Germany. After France came under Nazi control, 75 percent
of the Jews here were forcibly deported to concentration camps, where
many were killed (for more information, visit the nearby Holocaust
Memorial—see below). Most recently, Algerian exiles, both Jewish and
Muslim, have settled in—living together peacefully here in Paris.
(Nevertheless, much of the street has granite blocks on the sidewalk—an
attempt to keep out any terrorists’ cars.)
    The district’s traditional stores are being squeezed out by the upscale
needs of modern Paris. Case in point: The yellow-tiled shop at the
intersection of Rue des Rosiers and Rue Ferdinand Duval once thrived as
the venerable Jewish deli Jo Goldenberg. A plaque marks a 1982 terrorist
bombing that occurred at this spot.
    The intersection of Rue des Rosiers and Rue des Ecouffes marks the
heart of the small neighborhood that Jews call the Pletzl (“little square”).
Lively Rue des Ecouffes, named for a bird of prey, is a derogatory nod to
the moneychangers’ shops that once lined this lane. The next two blocks
along Rue des Rosiers feature kosher (cascher) restaurants and fast-food
places selling falafel, shawarma, kefta, and other Mediterranean dishes. Art
galleries exhibit Jewish-themed works, and store windows post flyers for
community events. You’ll likely see Jewish men in yarmulkes, a few
bearded Orthodox Jews, and Hasidic Jews with black coats and hats,
beards, and sidelocks.
    Lunch Break: This is a good place to stop. You’ll be tempted by kosher
pizza and plenty of cheap fast-food joints selling falafel “to go” (emporter).
Choose from any of the many joints that line the street (for suggestions, see
the sidebar). For a breath of fresh air, step into the very Parisian Jardin des
Rosiers, a half-block before the L’As du Falafel eatery, at 10 Rue des
Rosiers.
• Rue des Rosiers dead-ends at Rue Vieille du Temple. Turn left on Rue
Vieille du Temple, then take your first right onto Rue Ste. Croix de la
Bretonnerie and prepare for a little cultural whiplash (from Jewish culture
to gay culture).
    Side Trip to the Holocaust Memorial: Consider a five-block detour to
visit the memorial (for details, see the listing on here). To get there, head
south on Rue Vieille du Temple, cross Rue de Rivoli, and make your second
left onto the traffic-free passageway named Allée des Justes. It’s at 17 Rue
Geoffroy l’Asnier.
 9   Rue Ste. Croix de la Bretonnerie
Gay Paree’s openly gay main drag is lined with cafés, lively shops, and
crowded bars at night. Check out Le Point Virgule theater to see what form
of edgy musical comedy is showing tonight (the name means “The
Semicolon”; most productions of up-and-coming humorists are in French).
A short detour left on Rue du Bourg Tibourg leads to the luxurious tea
extravaganza of Mariage Frères (#30).
   Farther ahead at Rue du Temple, consider detouring a few blocks to the
right to the Jewish Art and History Museum (see listing on here). On the
way, you’ll pass a dance school wonderfully situated in a 17th-century
courtyard above the Café de la Gare theater (41 Rue du Temple).
• Continue west on Rue Ste. Croix (which turns into Rue St. Merri). Up
ahead you’ll see the colorful pipes of the Pompidou Center. Cross Rue du
Renard and enter the Pompidou’s colorful world of fountains, restaurants,
and street performers.
10   Pompidou Center
Survey this popular spot from the top of the sloping square. Tubular
escalators lead to the museum and a great view.
    The Pompidou Center subscribes with gusto to the 20th-century
architectural axiom “form follows function.” To get a more spacious and
functional interior, the guts of this exoskeletal building are draped on the
outside and color-coded: vibrant red for people lifts, cool blue for air ducts,
eco-green for plumbing, don’t-touch-it yellow for electrical stuff, and white
for the structure’s bones. (Compare the Pompidou Center to another
exoskeletal building, Notre-Dame.) See the Pompidou Center Tour
chapter for details on visiting the museum.




   Enjoy the adjacent fountain, an homage to Igor Stravinsky. Jean
Tinguely and Niki de Saint-Phalle designed it as a tribute to the composer:
Every sculpture within the fountain represents one of his hard-to-hum
scores. For low-stress meals or an atmospheric spot for a drink, try the
lighthearted Dame Tartine (or the crêperie next door), which overlooks the
fountains and serves good, inexpensive food.
• Double back to Rue du Renard, turn right, and stroll past Paris’ ugliest
(modern) building on the left. Walk toward the river until you find...

11   Hôtel de Ville
Looking more like a grand château than a public building, Paris’ City Hall
stands proud. This spot has been the center of city government since 1357.
Each of Paris’ 20 arrondissements has its own City Hall and mayor, but this
one is the big daddy of them all.
    The Renaissance-style building (built 1533-1628 and reconstructed after
a 19th-century fire) displays hundreds of statues of famous Parisians on its
facade. Peek from behind the iron fences through the doorways to see
elaborate spiral stairways, which are reminiscent of Château de Chambord
in the Loire. Playful fountains energize the big, lively square in front.
    This spacious stage has seen much of Paris’ history. On July 14, 1789,
Revolutionaries rallied here on their way to the Bastille. In 1870, it was
home to the radical Paris Commune. During World War II, General Charles
de Gaulle appeared at the windows to proclaim Paris’ liberation from the
Nazis. And in 1950, Robert Doisneau snapped a famous black-and-white
photo of a kissing couple, with Hôtel de Ville as a romantic backdrop.
    Today, it’s the seat of the mayor of Paris, who has one of the most
powerful positions in France. In the 1990s, Jacques Chirac used the
mayoralty as a stepping stone to another powerful position—president of
France.
    The square in front is a gathering place for Parisians. Demonstrators
assemble here to speak their minds. Crowds cheer during big soccer games
shown on huge TV screens. In summer, the square hosts sand volleyball
courts; in winter, a big ice-skating rink. There’s often a children’s carousel,
or manège. Now a Paris institution, carousels were first introduced by Henri
IV in 1605—the same year Place des Vosges was built. Year-round, the
place is always beautifully lit after dark.
