Parc Monceau, northern Paris
                         PARC MONCEAU




    entrances: boulevard de Courcelles and avenue Hoche;

        avenue Velasquez; avenue Van Dyck; avenue Ruysdael
    metro: Monceau; Courcelles

    hours: daily, 7—8



N      o matter which of the wildly ornate gates you enter
       through, Parc Monceau strikes you right off as sign ex¬
traordinaire of Paris as a culture of elegance. Andre Maurois
finds the context of the city’s high-toned character in the
“tradition of taste inherited from centuries of cultivation,” her
“atmosphere of beauty” so radiantly manifest in “the gra¬
ciousness of her cities.” The collective reverence for beauty—
the expectation of it—is the offspring of the artists, writers,
architects, painters, and artisans, who are, for the most part,
residents of Paris.* Wandering through Monceau, past the
classical colonnade, the oval lake, lily ponds, rock gardens,
the statues of Chopin, Musset, and Maupassant set into lovely
flower beds and sloping lawns, you feel part of this legacy.
In June, the roses and gardenia trees in blossom, the air car¬
ries the memory of Manet, Gounod, Debussy, Faure, Dumas
fils, and Rostand, who all worked or lived in the Monceau
neighborhood. Today, the streets and mansions of the eighth
arrondissement that border the park cast a spell of a certain
Parisian past, exclusive, privileged. Marcel Proust (1871—1922),
who lived nearby, played here as a child; the park is said not


* Andre Maurois, A History of France.
142                            THE RIGHT BANK



to have changed much since then, more than a century later
still showing off Paris on her most refined behavior.
      A few facts of origin, however, fit neither this “French”
nor “privileged” profile. The land started out as the twelfth-
century village of Monceau. Joan of Arc made her camp here
in the fifteenth century. The park itself was designed as an
English garden in the eighteenth century; then it acquired a
Scottish gardener; the omnipresent Alphand continued the
Anglicization in the nineteenth century.
      In fiction, Monceau loses its civilized veneer, at times be¬
coming a menacing backdrop. In her novel Claudine in Paris
(1901), Colette plays with the contradiction between the
neighborhood’s reputation of good taste and the brutal reality:


      The green Parc Monceau, with its soft lawns veiled in misty
      curtains ofspray from the sprinkler, attracted me, like some¬
      thing good to eat. There were fewer children there than
      in the Luxembourg. It was better altogether. But those lawns
      that are swept like floors! Never mind, the trees enchanted
      me and the warm dampness I breathed in relaxed me . . .
      that sound of leaves, how sweet it was/*



But the next moment she spots Luce, her best friend from
childhood, strolling through the park. An innocent country
girl when she ran away to Paris, Luce is now a kept woman,
a prostitute, who lives nearby in opulence and servitude in
the rue de Courcelles. Revolted by the love of money and the
fake respectability that the Monceau quartier exhales, Colette
(Claudine) realizes her old friend is now a spiritual ruin, her
luxurious clothes a sad disguise.


’Colette, Claudine in Paris.
                  Northern Paris and Montmartre                M3



   In the movie Ne le dit a personne (Tell No One, 2006),
an anguished and desperate Francis Cluzet sits on a bench
just inside the wrought-iron and golden Courcelles entrance,
next to the children’s play area and kiosk, waiting for his
wife, who may or may not have been brutally murdered. The
denouement of this thriller implicates the powerful class at
home in this quartier, their politesse masking a ruthless cor¬
ruption.
   Jean-Pierre Melville’s masterpiece, L’armee des ombres
(Army of Shadows, 1969), based on his own years in the Resis¬
tance and on the novel of the same name by Joseph Kessel,
ends with the tragic murder of the Resistante Mathilde (Si¬
mone Signoret) against the background of the high iron gates
of the Courcelles entrance to Parc Monceau. The Champs-
Elysees and the quartiers north of it—Monceau, for one—were
well known during and after World War II as collaborationist
territory, dangerous ground for Resistants such as Melville,
who, in the movie, was captured by the SS near the Arc de
Triomphe.




MUSEE JACQUEM ART-ANDRE             i58, boulevard Haussmann,
daily, 10—6metro, Miromesnil. The collection of this grand
mansion includes Italian Renaissance masters and Rembrandt,
Tiepolo, Mantegna. The cafe is, understandably, a Parisian fa¬

vorite.


LA SALLE PLEYEL          252, rue du Faubourg Saint-Honore;
metro, Ternes. One of the most famous and handsome concert
halls in the world, The cafe at intermission is delightful, crowded

with the mostly Parisian concertgoers.
144                     THE RIGHT BANK



CATHEDRALE SAINT-ALEXANDRE NEVSKY                    IJ, rue Daru;

Tues, Fri, Sun, 3—5. The Russian Orthodox church in the heart

of Paris’s Little Russia.

23, AVENUE DE MESSINE            Follow rue de Monceau to place
de Rio de Janeiro, then turn left into avenue de Messine. In Louts
Malle’s movie Belle de Jour, Catherine Deneuve, who lives here
with her husband in well-heeled propriety, walks from this address
to her secret afternoon job at a nearby brothel. *




                                                           j




Michael Schurmann, Paris Movie Walks.
min




      Musee de la Vie Romantique, the garden a
      beloved haunt of Chopin and George Sand
         MUSEE DE LA VIE ROMANTIQUE




   entrance: 16, rue Chaptal

   metro: Saint-Georges; Blanche; Pigalle

   hours: Tues—Sun, io—6



     t the top of the lane leading to the house, you see on
.xJLyour right the garden, in the shade of huge old chestnut
trees, bordered with bushes of bright flowers. Sometimes
there’s the sound of quiet conversation among the visitors
seated at small tables, enjoying the fare of the cafe. It’s not as
loud as the singing of the birds nesting in the magisterial
chestnuts. The city feels far away, this hidden corner of the
ninth arrondissement feels out of time, bringing to mind the
less cacophonous era of the people who made this place fa¬
mous. Sitting here, away from the noise of the streets, you
find yourself imagining the nineteenth century, the years
1838—1847, say, when the lovers Frederic Chopin and George
Sand (the pen name of Aurore Dupin Dudevant) and their
friend Eugene Delacroix used to visit their friend and neigh¬
bor Ary Scheffer, the painter who lived here and worked in
the upstairs studio of this house.
   The tranquillity of the scene is only a partial evocation of
la vie romantique, which this garden and house commemorate.
Its natural beauty and calm make the perfect backdrop for
the story of happy lovers, one a prolific and bold novelist—
Sand wrote about the sexual desires and pleasure of women,
denounced marriage as “one of the most barbaric institutions
society has engendered”—the other a genius, a “divine”
                               147
148                    THE RIGHT BANK



pianist and composer who came from Poland. Sand called
Chopin her “angel” and nicknamed him “Chip Chip.” His
music brought her to ecstasy. Passionately devoted to the
woman he knew as lover, friend, mother, muse, nurse, man¬
ager, and fellow artist, Chopin called her YnsAurore, his dawn.
Delacroix, often accompanied by his cat who was named
Cupid, painted a double portrait of them. But after their mu¬
tual disenchantment in 1847, the former lovers moved away
from this neighborhood. With the failure of romantic love—
the loss of trust, the suspicions and resentments—Sand and
Chopin became estranged. Alone, sick, and heartbroken,
Chopin died two years later, in 1849. Although this tragic
end hardly resonates in Scheffer’s garden, the dynamic duo
of love and death, joy and pain, that figure in Sand and Cho¬
pin’s story do correspond to the pattern of its seasons: the
heat of summer becoming—inevitably—the ice of winter.
Such a radical change in temperature brings to mind the
emotionally volatile range of nineteenth-century romanti¬
cism embodied in the love affair of the great Slavic musician
and the French writer.
      Inside the museum are cases of memorabilia, mostly of
George Sand and her children. Along with jewelry, drawings,
letters, and locks of her hair, there is a cast of Chopin’s hand.




PLACE SAINT-GEORGES           As you leave the metro and come
into Place Saint- Georges, you see two gorgeous mansions on either
side of the square and its storied old fountain. Both are attended
by dense and unmanicured greenery: trees, hedges, flowers. Walk

down rue Saint-Georges, turn right into rue Saint-Laqare, then,
at the post office, take another right to 80, rue Taitbout. Here is
                      Northern Paris and Montmartre               149



the entrance to Square d’Orleans (open weekdays). A “bright
and music-filled utopia of artists, ” in the words of Benita Eisler, *
where Chopin and Sand lived together from 1842 to 184J, though
for the sake of appearance Chopin leased the groundfloor ofnum¬
ber 9, Sand and her children number 5 near the cobblestoned car¬
riage entrance. Built in 182c), the gracious complex, modeled on
the architecture of Regency London, was the residential center of
La Nouvelle Athenes, the expensive district that was home to
many romantic artists. Here the lovers entertained Bafac; the
singer Pauline Viardot, lover of Turgenevy the Polish poet Adam
Mickiewic$ as well as Delacroix, Dumas fils, and Heinrich Heine.
Today, the courtyard s large fountain, between Chopin and Sand s
apartments, waters the magnolia tree ofthe square’s private gardens.

LE dit-VIN         68, rue Blanche. A new and good neighborhood
wine bar, with a varied menu of bar food and an imaginative

wine list.




* Benita Eisler, Chopins Funeral.
Chestnut tree, Square des Batignolles
               SQUARE DES BATIGNOLLES




    entrances: place Charles-Fillion; rue Cardinet

    METRO: Brochant

    hours: weekdays, 8—7; weekends, 9:30



      he square is especially appealing in bad weather, “bad”
 X    as in light misting rain, low clouds of bright silver-gray.
The melancholy of Paris and of this quartier is palpable. People
sit on benches, a few chatting, others fixed in solitary si¬
lence, not an umbrella or a smile in sight. The stately chest¬
nut trees, old beautiful presences, like kings and queens of
a world of green, breathe in, breathe out, a generous high
ceiling of shelter and shade. Baudelaire made poetry out of
his hometown’s moody “great gray sky,” its “mists and rains.”
“On the other hand,” as Caroline Weber puts it, “the city’s
mists and rains can clear at the drop of a chapeau.”*
    A pale sun breaks through. More people saunter in, nan¬
nies and strollers cross the charming canal bridge and head
for a small playground. (Few tourists make it up to Batignolles
from the city center; many tourist street maps don’t extend
north of Parc Monceau.) At each of the square’s entrances
you find a large plaque—Deco Flo—detailing the new (2010)
floral decor, the names and colors of the plantings. Their
unusually asymmetrical design is intended to create une bonne
promenade along the winding pathways, past the borders of

* Caroline Weber, review of Robert Stevens, Yvons Paris'm The New York Times
Book Review.




                                    15
                       THE RIGHT BANK
i52



salvia, verbena, petunias, dianthus, ageratum, and heliotrope
in pretty shades of plumbago blue, rose, red, and white, each
flower bed backed by tall healthy ferns, grasses, palms. You
pass sculpted ducks and geese (and real ones) in the middle
of two elliptical small lakes, and up a hill—hidden within a
small clearing like an exquisite captive princess—you come
upon an orangerie near an overview of the train tracks out of
Gare Saint-Laqare.
      Like so many Parisian squares, Batignolles has known
many incarnations. Originally the site of a warehouse of
demolition materials when the hamlet of Batignolles was
outside the city limits, it became a public space in 1835—La
Place de la Promenade—where village festivals and holidays
were celebrated. After i860, when the village became part
of the city, Napoleon III, as part of his project to make such
spaces into English-style squares—with grottoes and cascades
and miniature lakes—gave the job of transforming Bati¬
gnolles to his genius landscape architect, Jean-Charles
Adolphe Alphand. Over the next ten years, Alphand would
redesign—Anglicize—twenty-four gardens and parks in all.
(See Square du Temple, Parc Montsouris, Parc Monceau, Parc
des Buttes- Chaumont, Bois de Boulogne, Bois de Vincennes,
and La Vallee Suisse.)
      Near the grotto, the sculpted bust of nineteenth-century
poet Leon Dierx commemorates the associations of this
quartier with the many artists—poets and impressionist
painters—who lived and worked in the surrounding streets
and boulevards. Manet, Courbet, and Degas, well-known
to one another and sometime members of the groupe des
Batignolles, painted scenes of cafe and opera house night¬
life; Manet captured the poetry of the new nearby railroad
station in La Gare Saint-Lahore. Mallarme, Leconte de
                   Northern Paris and Montmartre                   H3



Lisle, and Paul Verlaine (1844—1896) attended the same
literary salons, de Lisle and Verlaine coming to detest each
other.
   Verlaine, who moved with his parents to the Batignolles
village as a child, grew up to be considered the “prince of po¬
ets” by his peers and an immoral social outcast by bourgeois
society. He took part in the Paris Commune, abandoned his
wife and child for the poet Arthur Rimbaud, did time in prison
for attempting to murder same, converted to Catholicism,
and killed himself with a steady diet of absinthe and beer.
He is buried in the nearby Batignolles Cemetery, and a piece
of his writing—Christ en Croix—is affixed to a wall in the
Eglise Sainte-Marie des Batignolles, just across the tree-lined
Place du Docteur Felix Lobligeois (with a Wallace fountain
in good working order). A statue of Verlaine—a “ragamuffin
angel” and “an inspired derelict”—stands in the Luxembourg,
in tribute to his poetry—“grey and sad and cool and deep and
unlike anything else in the world”* It would remind you on
a moody wet November day of the village Square des Bati¬
gnolles. In the soundless stir of the chestnuts, you hear Ver¬
laine’s music, “the silence of eternity.”


                  “//pleure dans mon coeur
                  Comme ilpleut sur la ville. ...”




SQUARE SAINTE-MARIE DES BATIGNOLLES                     Bordered by
some pleasant cafes and bistros, an antique shop, and an excellent



*John Cowper Powys, “Paul Verlaine,” in Suspended Judgments: Essays on
 Books and Sensations, www.gutenberg.org/ebooks.
154                    THE RIGHT BANK



bakery with table service. The church itself, which hosts concerts,
has a warm feeling.

LA GIOCONDA        A friendly Italian restaurant—the large house
salad is very good—on the corner of rue Brochant and place
Charles Fillion, facing the square.




                                                            j
                                  3011111
                                        Iff
                                       ■ -’v




                           ■ £.                \ J     pT'         " H
             woM
             ; ■: x"' *1 |sv< 0^;  llll> ... .
             ...V- .
                       - -K ." "■ -v- *
                                       \ ■ ' ■> Hfe                 ^
               «i          ?i * » .... pfi# I
i     -*-■       *          ^                   M 1                & ^-sm
                                                                   ii»2 .

^wSmSS^imSSr'; iMWr^mm£ -i
                       •   •      ,.              ■         .       * «. . a f

Wgi                               Salll
                                                        ■'■ ■' m
                                                        :       ;:■ ':t T^'
                                               ■ ' ^ **^F                     ^issiISP