             SQUARE MAURICE-GARDETTE




     entrances: rue Lacharriere; rue Rochebrune; rue du

           General Guilham; 2, rue du General Blaise
     metro: Saint-Maur; Saint-Ambroise

     HOURS: daily, 8—dusk



P     aris is criticized sometimes for its “distinctly sinister
       side,” something that “makes you feel the blood that has
run in the streets,”* as if knowing the complex history of
Paris spoils the sweet-dream “City of Light, City of Romance.”
One ex-pat critic suggests a connection between the metal¬
lic sky—“Paris is grayness”—and a residue of humiliation
left over from the city’s compromises during the German
Occupation^
     Parisians, however, enjoy a more nuanced range of per¬
ception. It’s partly a matter of a bred-in-the-bone intimacy
with their city’s psyche and history. They know firsthand so
many local settings of that history. Places inscribe them¬
selves on memory, deepening understanding and affection.
     Some Parisians have referred to SquareMaurice-Gardette
in the eleventh arrondissement of northeastern Paris—
historically, the poorest, the most populated, and the most in¬
surrectionary area of the city—as the loveliest neighborhood
park in town. Blood did flow here: the square is built on the
former abattoir of Menilmontant, in its surrounding streets—
rue Saint-Maur, avenue Parmentier—barricades defended

* Brigid Dorsey and Alicia Drake, in Paris IVas Ours, ed. Penelope Rowlands,
■f Ibid.

                                    179
i8o                    THE RIGHT BANK



by Communards, eventually slaughtered in 1871, held piles
of corpses; during the Occupation, the Gestapo and the gen¬
darmes were a brutal force in this quartier.
      Today, it’s the Resistance and survival of that force that
fertilizes the memory of the neighborhood. On October 20,
2010, for instance, the mairie of the eleventh paid homage to
Maurice Gardette and his twenty-six comrades of the Resis¬
tance who were shot at Chateaubriant on October 22, 1941.
Local people and politicians crowded into the square to com¬
memorate the sixty-ninth anniversary of the heroism of the
square’s namesake, Maurice Gardette (1895—1941), a;metal-
worker, born and raised in poverty, who lived with his wife
and children in nearby rue Chemin Vert. A member of the
French Communist Party, elected to the city council, he was
arrested for his antifascist activism. On October 22, 1941, he
wrote on a plank in the barracks of the prison camp: “Je
meurs courageux, plein de foi revolutionnaire”—“I die coura¬
geously, full of revolutionary faith.” The citizens of 2010—
among them a few elderly Resistants—listened to speeches,
sang songs popular during World War II, then marched to
Pere-Lachaise, where the bodies and ashes of Maurice Gardette
and the other Fusilles de Chateaubriant (including Jean-Pierre
Timbaud and seventeen-year-old Guy Moquet) are buried,
across from the Mur des Federes.
      Though the eleventh arrondissement is now a “happening”
area according to many journalists, the neighborhood around
the square remains unpretentious. Weekends, local families
gather around the square’s music kiosk, playground, and Ping-
Pong tables, filling the benches, strolling the gravel paths, no
doubt taking for granted the over two thousand varieties of
plantings, the tall healthy trees—sycamores, magnolias, or¬
ange trees, black pine, palms, catalpa, and chestnuts—all a
                 Around Bastille and Northeastern Paris               181



graceful massive canopy rising above the flower beds of lil¬
ies, irises, roses, and asters decorating the grass. Beautifully
placed within this thick and colorful greenery is a bronze
sculpture by Jacques Perrin: Le Botteleur, an arresting repre¬
sentation of a worker bending over in a field to tie the work of
his hands into bunches.
    The memory honored in Square Maurice-Gardette in
October 2010 fertilizes the green heart of Paris, saves it from
historical amnesia. (As Milan Kundera has said, “The strug¬
gle against power is the struggle of memory against forget¬
ting.”) Historian Alan Riding notes that during the war
years that followed Maurice Gardette’s murder, 75 percent of
French Jews were saved from deportation and death (despite
the longtime anti-Semitism of the French right wing), “ow¬
ing to the courage of countless French men and women—
teachers, priests, nuns, resistance fighters, doctors, farmers,
and others.”*
    Inspired by this annual fall ritual of patriotic observance,
the historical memory of the eleventh pulses strong, its body’s
blood a river of gratitude.




RUE JEAN-PIERRE TIMBAUD                  The street is named for another
Resistant shot at Chdteaubriant.Jean-Pier re Timhaud, the sec¬
retary of the steelworkers' union and a strike organiser during
the 1930s, faced the firing squad singing the “Marseillaise. ” La
Maison des Metallos (number 94), a community center with a
cafe, studios, and space for workers in the metal trades, is at
Esplanade Roger-Linet—the triangle formed by rue Jean-Pierre

*Ian Buruma, review of Alan Riding, And the Show Went On: Cultural Life in
 Nan- Occupied Paris, in The New York Review of Books.
182                    THE RIGHT BANK



Timbaud, rue des Trois-Couronnes, and rue Morand, where there’s
also a mosque, children playing under the catalpa trees, and a

version of Rodins Thinker.

LES BELLES MIETTES         96, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud. A quiet
attractive bistro just next door to La Maison des Metallos.

LE CANNIBALE        93, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud; metro Belle¬
ville, Couronnes. An art deco cafe, with music. A nice place to
celebrate La Fete de la Musique on Midsummer Night.

l’autre CAFE       62, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud and rue Edouard
Lockroy; metro, Parmentier, Oberkampf www.lautrecafe.com. A
low-key simpatico cafe-restaurant, with good food—especially the
entrecote grillee—and dining rooms on two floors. Exhibitions
of local photography, sculpture, painting.

ASTIER     44, rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud. www.bestrestaurants
paris.com, with one of “the best cheese trays in the city ” (Mark
Bittman). Open seven nights a week.

BOULEVARD RICHARD-LENOIR                From Bastille to Repub-
lique, this is a long tree-lined walk, the scene of food and clothing
markets every Tues, Thurs, and Fri, j—2.

CANAL    SAINT-MARTIN          Follow boulevard Richard-Lenoir
and the tree-lined canal walk straight to Square Jules-Ferry, by
turns idyllic and scruffy, never synthetic. The canal has nine

locks, two swing bridges, and several arched footbridges. To the
right, avenue Richerand leads to l’Hopital Saint-Louis, the
seventeenth-century public hospital for plague victims built by

order of Henri IV, its inner red brick and stone quadrangle and
garden courtyard the twin of Place des Vosges, a quiet retreat
on a weekday morning.
                  !




uare de la'Rofi
    entrances: 147, rue de la Roquette; rue Servan; rue

         Merlan
    metro: Pere-Lachaise; Voltaire; Philippe Auguste

    hours: daily, 7—dusk, according to the season



W         alking up to Roquette from nearby Maurice-Gardette,
          or, better, from the other side of the city, from Square
du Vert Galant, say, in the first arrondissement, or, best, from
Passy in the sixteenth, you experience Paris in a way that only
walking makes possible. “Walkers are practitioners of the
city,” as one theorist puts it: the “city is a language . . . and
walking is the act of speaking that language.” Only by using
one’s leg power to see one arrondissement after another can
you get inside that language. Moving on foot from central
or western Paris into the northeast enables the physical and
emotional reverberations of “psychogeography,” the sense of
“the sudden change of ambience in a street within the space
of a few meters, the evident division of the city into zones of
distinct psychic atmospheres.”* As you walk, it becomes ob¬
vious: the City of Light speaks many languages.
    Since the revolution of 1968 (euphemistically referred to
as les evenements, or “the events” of 1968) this old area of
insurrection—the plebeian northeast of the eleventh, twelfth,
nineteenth, and twentieth arrondissements, which did not take
much part in 1968—has been reconstituted. After years of

* Rebecca Solnit, “Paris, or Botanizing on the Asphalt,” in Wanderlust-. A History
 of Walking.

                                       185
186                        THE RIGHT BANK



demolition and gentrification under former president Georges
Pompidou (1969—1974), the mixed population has returned.
In the streets around rue de la Roquette, the Paris proletariat
has reestablished itself, marked by the return of immigrants,
working families, artists, and “an intellectual but nonuniver¬
sity youth.”*
      Square de la Roquette mirrors the neighborhood, espe¬
cially in the well-designed children’s playground. The interplay
of cultures among the kids, their parents, and caregivers make
for delightful people-watching and eavesdropping. Above the
playground—Roquette is built on a kind of butte—are wind¬
ing paths, bench-lined of course, skirting flower beds that
are glorious in spring: hyacinth, pansies, daisies, snowdrops,
wildflowers, tulips all bloom beneath magnolias, palm trees,
and eucalyptus. Never would you imagine the sinister history
of these few acres as you sit enjoying the exuberance of the
children at your back, the boys playing soccer below in the
basketball court, the serenity of the people reading and talk¬
ing on the benches.
      At the square’s entrance, there’s a “History of Paris”
plaque at the windows of the still-standing guardhouse. After
its convent of nuns was closed after 1789, Roquette became
for centuries a site of incarceration: of women, of incorri¬
gible children ages six to twenty, and finally of four thou¬
sand Resistantes during the Occupation. The men’s prison
for murderers and death-row inmates was across rue de la
Roquette in rue de la Croix Faubin, where the guillotine—

“that shameful machine of human butchery,” in the words
of Louise Michel—operated until it was demolished in 1974.
      Just inside the entrance to Roquette you face a high cas-


* Eric Hazan, “Red Paris,” in The Invention of Paris: A History in Footsteps.
                 Around Bastille and Northeastern Paris             187


cading fountain that waters the palm trees and the flower
gardens. Local people—there are few strangers here—sit
in the companionable shade. Like so many calm green sanc¬
tuaries in Paris, this landscape bears a legacy of pain and
injustice from the old world; stories of suffering are part of
its buried landscape. But Roquette has been made over and
made new in the image of a more generous and more fertile
polity, a kind of urban oasis of comfort replacing an archi¬
tecture of tyranny, prisons that looked like towering grim
castles.




restaurant la boulangerie                       i5, rue des Panoyaux;
metro, Menilmontant, a bit to the east, along boulevard Menil-
montant, heading away from rue de Menilmontant. Information:
01.43.58.45.45. Open every day except Saturday lunch, Sunday,
and Monday. Excellent food in a lovely first-floor interior, with
an upstairs dining room. At the top of a narrow lane on a square
resembling a movie set of old Paris.

EGLISE NOTRE-DAME DE LA CROIX                        3, place de Menil¬
montant, on Square Maurice Chevalier, at the head of rue Etienne
Dolet, with stunning wooden sculptures of Christian icons by Joseph
Pyrp Kids kick a soccer ball atop the high front steps with a view, a
setting in Brian De Palmas Femme Fatale. The sound ofthe church
bells— “Christian beauty ”*-—fills the surrounding streets.

LEMONTE-EN - l’a IR           2, rue de la Mare, just behind the church.
A good book-and-music store, an art gallery, and a terrace with

chairs.


* Leon Wieseltier, “Ring the Bells,” The New Republic.
188                       THE RIGHT BANK



bistro melac         42, rue Leon Frot (the extension of rue
Saint-Maur, beyond Roquette); metro, Charonne. Closed Sundays
and August. A first-rate family-run, friendly bistro, serving the
famous and much-loved red meat from the Auvergne and, on
Thursdays, the “Mac Melac, ” a burger-like sandwich with melted
cantal on good bread. A relief statue, Bacchus of Charonne, is
set into the wall above the entrance, and in the windows are quotes
from satisfied writers.




                                                           t