            JAIl 1)1 NS DU MUSEE DE CLUNY




    entrance: corner of boulevard Saint-Michel and

        boulevard Saint-Germain-des-Pres
    metro.-S aint-Michel

    hours: daily, 9:15—5:45



      hese small enclosed gardens feel undiscovered and pri-
 -L   vate, the traffic beyond the boulevard’s high hedges just
a murmur. Inspired by medieval models, they are arranged
thematically. “The Love Garden,” in season fragrant with
roses, symbolizes the object of the heart’s desire: “The rose
is Beauty and Love.” In the Middle Ages it was Mary’s flower,
the central stained-glass image on the fa5ade of Notre-Dame,
Chartres, and other Gothic cathedrals.* Plantings of hazel,
elder, quince, and holly fill “The Forest of the Unicorn.”
“The Children’s Glade” imitates a medieval bestiary: rab¬
bits, foxes, and a unicorn play and hide. “The Heavenly
Garden,” beneath the shadows of a stately tree of flamboy¬
antly wide branches, signifies the garden as a figure of the
soul, a private sanctuary, attached to the cloister—hortus
conclusus—an image found in the biblical Song of Songs and
the writings of medieval women mysticsfl The thirteenth-
century Hadewijch saw the garden of the Song of Songs as
an emblem of a mystical relationship between the soul—
personified as female—and the God of Love:

* Allan Temko, Notre-Dame of Paris.
f Susan Cahill, Wise Women.



                                      x9
20                           THE LEFT BANK*



     You ravish my heart, my sister, my promised bride, . . .
      How delicious is your love, more delicious than wine!
How fragrant your perfumes, more fragrant than all spices! . . .
     She is a garden enclosed, my sister, my promised bride;
                 a garden enclosed, a sealed fountain.


     “The Heavenly Garden” is also a metaphor for the Blessed
Virgin Mary, the bride of the Song of Songs according to
Christian interpretation, her love for humanity manifested
in lily of the valley, violets, daisies, roses, and strawberries.
As in all monastic cloister gardens, the intimacy between the
soul’s interiority and a sensory embrace of life is palpable,
expressive of a time that “had little difficulty in squaring love
of God with love of worldly beauty and of the sensuous
world.”* In the High Middle Ages and especially in Paris,
amor mundi was a state of beatitude.




THE LADY WITH THE UNICORN TAPESTRIES                     Located in
room 13 on the first floor of the Musee du Moyen Age (Hotel de
Cluny); open daily except Tues, c>;i5—5:45. The path from the
gardens leads around the corner to 6, place Paul-Painleve, the
entrance to the museum. The scarlet red background of the six tap¬

estries, woven in wool and silk in the mille-fleurs, or thousand
flowers, design, are strewn with tiny flowers, plants, and birds,
each one an exquisite garden world of allegorical mystery, beau¬
tifully lit and displayed. Five of the tapestries symbolize the five
senses. In the fourth, the Lady weaves a wreath of carnations and

a monkey inhales the perfume of a rose, evoking the sense of smell.


* Alistair Horne, Seven Ages of Paris.
                         The Latin Quarter                        21



Following the medieval taste for multiple symbolism, the unicorn
can be seen as both a religious and a profane image, both a Christ
figure and a lover.

librairie compagnie            58, rue des Ecoles, across from Bal¬
kar, next to Square Paul-Painleve, this librairie has a complete
inventory of French literature, reviews, andjournals.

MICHEL DE MONTAIGNE              The bronqe statue of the great
philosopher-essayist ('5jj—i5()2J on rue des Ecoles, on the south
side of Square Paul-Painleve, is a favorite icon of the Latin
Quarter, regularly touched and caressed by passing students. “I
have seen the leaves, the flowers, and the fruit, ” he wrote in old
age. “Now I see the withering—happily, since it is natural. ”

brasserie BALZAR           49, rue des Ecoles, diagonally across
from Square Paul-Painleve. A longtime fixture on the itinerary
of Left Bank intelligentsia and artists, done up with mirrors, paint¬
ings, plants, and windows facing rue des Ecoles.

CHAMPO        The legendary movie theater is located on the corner
of rue Champollion at 5i, rue des Ecoles. Walk up Champollion,
past more theaters, to Place de la Sorbonne.
                                               V"-
                       ' fed
                        * "Xw. 'A."*''A A-vA



Square Paul-Langevin, beneath la Montagne Sainte-Genevieve
   entrance: corner of rue Monge and rue des Ecoles

   metro: Cardinal Lemoine; Maubert-Mutualite

   hours: 8—dusk, according to the season



B   ordered with flowers into late autumn, this square draws
    attention to the Montague Sainte-Genevieve, which rises
behind it. As a site of memory it bears witness to the Latin
Quarter’s tradition of intellectual and artistic brilliance that
first flourished in the Parisian Middle Ages. It’s named for
physicist Paul Langevin (1872—1946), renowned for his discov¬
ery of ultrasound, the process of echolocation, used to detect
the presence of German submarines. Acclaimed throughout
the European scientific community, Langevin, a fierce op¬
ponent of Nazism (whose daughter, une Resistante, survived
imprisonment in several concentration camps), was removed
from his position at the Ecole de Physique et Chimie by the
Vichy government. He outlived the Occupation and is bur¬
ied over the hill in the Pantheon (climb the serpentine rue de
la Montague Sainte-Genevieve to the Place du Pantheon), the
monumental tomb of France’s great men and women. Buried
near Langevin are the remains of his mentors Pierre and Marie
Curie. After Pierre Curie’s death, Marie Curie and Langevin
had an affair; Langevin was still married and had four children.
Marie Curie, who was born in Poland, was ostracized as a
foreigner and condemned in the right-wing press—they ac¬
cused her of being a Jew—and her home was attacked by a


                               23
24                           THE LEFT BANK*



mob while she was in Stockholm picking up her second Nobel
Prize.
     The Square also commemorates, in a statue of Francois
Villon (1431—1472), the first modern poet of France as well as
the last great poet of the Middle Ages. In a time of violent
death, famine, and invasion, Villon lived the lawless life of a
perpetual student in the lawless Latin Quarter, this Left Bank
student neighborhood where, from the beginning, Latin was
the language of the schools. Villon, fighting over a girl, killed
a priest in self-defense, thieved, womanized, and was jailed
regularly, almost executed, finally exiled * The songs he wrote
are boisterous, the poems lyrical evocations of the era’s mel¬
ancholy and nostalgia for the optimism of the High Middle
Ages: the refrain “Mais ou sont les neiges d’antan?” (Where
are the snows of yesteryear?) is from the poem “Ballade des
Dames du Temps Jadis” (“The Ballad of the Women of Yore”).
The prayers and songs he wrote to Mary—his “Dame des
del” (Lady of heaven)—are as sweetly passionate as his love
poems. Published posthumously in Paris in 1489, Villon as
poet and bohemian would later appeal to such poets as Ver¬
laine, Pound, and Huysmans.
     The south side of the square fits into the high rear wall of
what was formerly the Ecole Polytechnique (since moved to
the suburbs) and is now the Research Ministry. A charming
old moss-covered fountain is embedded in the wall, which is
covered with ivy and flowers and sculpted angels by Ingres;
behind it, a staircase overflowing with viburnum plants looks
like a green mossy sculpture. The children’s playground, filled
with fathers and kids on a Sunday afternoon, is wonderful to


* Colin Jones, Paris: The Biography of a City.
                         The Latin Quarter


behold while you sit waiting for the movie to start a few doors
west dX Action Ecole Cinema, 23, rue des Ecoles.




l’harmattan         25, rue des Ecoles. An academic bookstore
chain; the DVD store stocks classics of French cinema. Helpful
service.

jardin CARRE         Enter at 11, rue Descartes, to the left as you
ascend from rue des Ecoles (bearing left at the square). A serene
and sprawling green space of topiary with a square pool in the cen¬
ter, it’s a public hideaway for academic families of the Sorbonne.
On the grounds ofsome ofthe original fourteenth-century colleges,
it was created in the courtyard of the original building of the Ecole
Polytechnique (1J94). You see its rear ivy-covered wall from
Square Paul-Langevin.

MONTAGNE SAINTE-GENEVIEVE                 Continue up rue Descartes
from Jardin Carre, and turn right into rue Clovis, which leads
past Lycee Henri IV to Place Sainte-Genevieve.
The Students Garden: L’Ecole Nqrnraie’Superieure
    entrance: 45, rue d’Ulm
    metro: Censier Daubenton; Place Monge
    hours: weekdays during school hours; some weekends


T     he students’ garden opens into a circular retreat around
       a splashing fountain under tall trees, boughs spread wide
and low over benches and flower beds. It’s an idyllic place, the
undertone of conversation, serious and animated, an on¬
going background thrum. The branches of a robust holly tree
reach toward the sky. Above the graceful windows recessed
under the roof of the school’s surrounding walls are the
stone heads of French genius: Foucault, Aragon, Lavoisier,
Descartes, Pascal, Corneille, Moliere, Racine, La Fontaine,
Bossuet, Voltaire, Rousseau, Chateaubriand—a pantheon of
secular gods high in the serious air.
    The historian Tony Judt visited here in 1970 when he
was an undergraduate at Cambridge. Probing “the mystery
of French intellectuality” in his memoir Paris Was Yester¬
day, he asserts that to achieve clarity one must begin here, at

the Ecole Nor male-.


    Founded in iJS)4 to train secondary school teachers, it became
    the forcing house of the republican elite. Between i85o and
    ic>yo, virtually every Frenchman of intellectual distinction
    (women were not admitted until recently) graduated from it. *

*Tony Judt, “Historian’s Progress,” New York Review of Books, March 11, 2010.
28                         THE LEFT BAN^



     Sartre, Pasteur, Durkheim, Pompidou, Peguy, Derrida,
Bergson, Rolland, Althusser, Debray, Paul Langevin—each
man started out as a normalien. (Samuel Beckett taught here
when he first came to Paris in 1928.) Neither Judt nor the guide¬
books mention the brilliant women such as Simone de Beau¬
voir who passed through the Ecole Normale (women were
admitted to ENS long before Judt’s visit, but their campus
was separate from rue d’Ulm’s; it was eventually joined with it).
     One of the most intriguing of the female normaliens was the
philosopher, political activist, and mystic Simone Weil (lyot)—
1943). Though plagued by a feeling of intellectual inferiority
throughout her privileged childhood (she would later revile
the secular Jewish ethos of her family), Weil achieved aca¬
demic success at the Ecole Normale, graduating agrege de
philosophic—a degree reserved for the top few graduates. For
her moral intensity and activism in leftist causes her fel¬
low students nicknamed her “The Red Virgin” and “The
Categorical Imperative in Skirts.”* Later on, her writings—
the posthumously published Waiting for God (1951), Gravity
and Grace (1947), The Need for Roots (1943), and many other
volumes—would be important to Albert Camus, who called
her “the only great spirit of our time,” and to Andre Gide, who
considered her “the best spiritual writer of this century,” as
well as to Flannery O’Connor, Kenneth Rexroth, Susan Son-
tag, Anne Carson, Elaine Scarry, and Edward Hirsch. (In his
poem “Simone Weil: Lecture on Love,” Hirsch emphasizes
perhaps her most constant insight: “Affliction is our warrant,
the deepest truth / of human existence.”) Weil became a be¬
liever under the influence of the mystic light of Assisi and
the seventeenth-century metaphysical poetry of George


*Eric O. Springsted, ed., Simone Weil.
                            The Latin Quarter                    29



Herbert, in particular the poem “Love Bade Me Welcome.”
A perceptive critic of institutional Christianity, she refused
baptism. Earlier she had rejected membership in the French
Communist Party, though for many years she thought of her¬
self as a communist. She had no use, she said, for authoritar¬
ian organizations that practiced anathema sit (“let him be
anathema”).* In 2009, La Passion de Simone by Finnish com¬
poser Kaija Saariaho was produced to critical acclaim in
Europe and New York, an oratorio based on Weil’s difficult
ascetic philosophy and her austere, eccentric life (some say
she starved herself to death out of sympathy for the poor
people of France who were starving under the Nazi Occu¬
pation).




MONTAGNE SAINTE-GENEVIEVE                   A very ancient quarter.
Follow rue d’Ulm north to Place du Pantheon, then bear right to
Place Sainte-Genevieve, an open space in front of the Eglise
Saint-Etienne du Mont. Here on the (not very high) Montagne
are the academic institutions—the Sorbonne and the grandes
ecoles—where most of France’s political leaders, philosophers,
artists, and scientists got their start. (John Calvin and Ignatius
Loyola attended at the same time.) The Montagne s intellectual
lineage goes back to Peter Abelard, the famous teacher, philoso¬
pher, and lover of Heloise, who in about 1100 moved here to the
Left Bank to escape the conservative cathedral school of Notre-
Dame on the lie de la Cite. Away from the strictures ofthe hierar¬
chy, he and his fellow scholars could teach with more independence.
The Paris schools, chartered in 1215 as the Universite de Paris,


* Simone Petrement, Simone Weil: A Life.
3°                       THE LEFT BANK



attracted students and hell-raisers such as Francois Villon from
all over Europe. Though much transformed, the Latin Quarter
remains the heart of the students’ neighborhood, its old cafes (mostly
gone) once the hangouts of poets (Baudelaire, Huysmans, Mal-
larme, Verlaine) and the insurgents of 1848, i8ji, and 1968.

PLACE DE LA SORBONNE              The university’s busy courtyard,
presided over by a statue ofAuguste Comte and a long fountain
bordered by lime trees, cafe terraces, and shops.




                                                               s