Parc de Bagatelle, Bois de Boulogne
                                      aAscd-



                  BOIS DE BOULOGNE:
                  PARC        B         ELL E




    entrances: allee de Longchamp; route de Sevres-a-

        Neuilly
    metro: Porte Maillot, then bus 244; Pont de Neuilly,

       then bus 43
    hours: 10—6; winter, 10—5



I n late May over a thousand varieties of roses bloom in the
    Rose Garden of the Parc de Bagatelle, creating a vast can¬
vas of pastels and bold reds between the Seine and a small
hill topped by a pagoda. As you walk the perfumed paths of
the rosaires and read the poetic names affixed to each bush—
“Daydream,” a hot pink—you may enjoy the cultural asso¬
ciations of the garden. Among the famous women of Paris
who reveled in roses were the legendary mistresses of Louis
XV, Madame de Pompadour (flowers—specifically, roses—
were one of the passions of her life), and her successor, Ma¬
dame du Barry—“the only woman in France who can make
me forget that I am in my sixties,” said the king. Empress Jo¬
sephine, the wife of Napoleon, and later the chaste Empress
Eugenie, wife of Napoleon’s nephew, Napoleon III, who, like
his uncle, reigned as self-declared emperor, also preferred
roses to all other flowers: both cherished them as emblems of
romantic love. (Paris, the city of romance, is rich in rose gar¬
dens. They include Square Georges-Cain, Parc de Belleville,
and Clinique Saint-Jean de Dieu. Madame de Pompadour’s
rose mania shows up as a riot of floral jouissance in the room

                                95
96                           THE LEFT BANf



by Boucher, her protege, in The Frick Collection in New
York City.
     The Bois—or woodlands—that surround the Bagatelle
originally served as a royal hunting ground and a “discreetly
leafy” romantic hideout, to quote Alistair Horne.* The 2,200
acres of beech, linden, cedar, chestnuts, elm, and fifteen thou¬
sand mulberry trees include remnants of the ancient Foret de
Rouvray, to which Haussmann and Alphand gave a more
designed landscape in the nineteenth century. But always
this bucolic getaway on the western edge of Paris—where
fashionable people, women in their carriages and men on
horseback, went to see and to be seen—offered opportunities
for hedonistic orgies and secret sexual encounters. Gustave
Flaubert and his lover, the poet Louise Colet, one of the
models for Emma Bovary, took long hansom cab rides in
the Bois. In 1846, according to Colet’s biographer, during
the fireworks of the sixteenth anniversary of the 1830 Citizens
Revolution, their cab


     proceeds toward the Bois de Boulogne, whose alleys are
     draped with luminous garlands. The coach moves slowly
     amid a raging lightning storm, amid burst of flashing rock¬
     ets, and patriotic shouting; the thunder is deafening through¬

     out Paris, flashes of lightning seem to celebrate their lust.
     As Gustave would write Louise a few days later: “They
     blamed for us .. . like a flaming beginning of love. ”


     Jean-Paul Sartre “is certain that Louise’s and Gustave’s
first lovemaking took place then and there, inside that black
hansom cab.’d

* Alistair Horne, Seven Ages of Paris.
f Francine du Plessix Gray, Rage and Fire: A Life of Louise Colet.
                           Western Paris                         97


   Marcel Proust, who played in the Bois as a child, resur¬
rected it in Swanns Way. The fashionable courtesans of Co¬
lette’s Cheri staged their promenades and liaisons erotiques in
the shelter of the ancient trees, their spirited rendezvous the
backdrop of the opening scene of the film Gigi. Director Rob¬
ert Bresson takes a more satiric view of the women of western
Paris in his 1945 film Les Dames du Bois de Boulogne. The
2001 novel The Sexual Life of Catherine M, by Catherine Millet,
describes the nightlife of prostitutes and groupies in the area
of the Porte Dauphine entrance, northeast of the gardens,
descriptions not taken as fictional.
   In the daylight hours, this vast parkland of lakes, lawns,
flowers, groves, waterfalls, bridges, duck ponds, race courses,
playgrounds, cafes, and restaurants—and a Shakespeare
garden—is a comfort zone for Parisians and tourists who
want a break from the noise and air of the city. Here you can
rent boats and bicycles, play the horses, picnic, stroll, or lie
in the sun.
   And from every winding path of the Parc de Bagatelle,
night and day, you can smell the roses.




l’orangerie        In the eighteenth century, every great house had
its orangerie. In this lovely classical building within the Parc de
Bagatelle, which is perpendicular to the original house, the Baga¬
telle (built by the brother of Louis XVI, the future Charles X),
there are exhibits of paintings and sculpture May to October; in the
summer months there are nightly concerts of Chopin.


PARC   des    serres     d’auteuil         3,   avenue de la Porte
d’Auteuil. Metro, Porte d’Auteuil (10—7, according to the season).
98                     THE LEFT BANf



Renovated, in 1999, this is one of the most magnificent garden
structures in Europe, made ofmetal and glass and greenery. There
is a rare silence here, though the innovative green space is popu¬

lar with Parisians.

NEUILLY-SUR-SEINE          The sidewalks along the quiet shady
streets of this well-bred suburb, only minutes from the Bois and
the center of Paris, are planted with trees. Pretty flower boxes
decorate the windows of the comfortable modern apartments. The
Seine runs along the southern border. Kandinsky lived here, as
did Nicolas Sarkopy before he moved to the Ely see.
    entrance: 47, rue Raynouard

    metro: Passy, via no. 6 metro

    hours: Tues—Sun, io—6 (closed Mon, holidays)



T     he number 6 metro—the aerial metro—is the best scenic
       ride in Paris. The track is elevated after Bercy. Take it to
Passy, to Balzac’s off-the-beaten-track garden, which served
its famous resident as an actual hideaway. Here on the hillside
of once rural Passy, the writer Honore de Balzac (1799—1850),
whose finances were as complicated as the plots of his novels,
evaded his creditors and escaped out the back door down into
rue Berton when they caught up with him. The walk up the
hill from the Passy metro station, “hidden behind chestnut
trees and roses, and the tracks leading towards the Pont de
Bir-Hakeim . . . famous from Last Tango in Paris”* leads to
rue Raynouard and, after a five-minute walk, to the entrance
to Balzac’s cottage; once you descend into the garden you
feel as if you’ve left far behind the city and the monotonous
suburb, the sixteenth arrondissement—“snob Passy” to the
protagonist of Alan Furst’s novel of Occupied Paris, Red Gold.
    When in bloom, the luxuriantly fat hydrangeas and rhodo¬
dendrons and rosebushes—with chairs and a fine sculpture
of Balzac tucked discreetly along the winding paths—make
the place a delightful sanctuary for both pilgrims and readers
deep into, say, Cousin Bette (1846), one of the masterpieces


* Eric Hazan, The Invention of Paris: A History in Footsteps.

                                       10
102                         THE LEFT BANl^



Balzac wrote here. As the self-defined “secretary of French
society,” he wrote almost one hundred novels, a chronicle
entitled La Comedie Humaine {The Human Comedy). He began
writing at midnight, continued until midday, fueled by black
coffee. Because he didn’t limit (or patronize) his readers with
his “judgmental interference,” an admiring Henry James pre¬
ferred him to Flaubert* Nowadays, to quote Francine Prose,
when readers and publishers demand happy endings and
“sympathetic” characters, “few novelists would have the
nerve” to produce Balzac’s brand of unsparing, courageous
fiction in which the faces of Paris blend corruption, misery,
vanity, and gloryfi The dying Cousin Bette “kept the Secret
of her hate” from the family she’d tried to destroy and who,
in their ignorance, mourned her “as the angel of the family.”
When Bette’s cousin asks what is the cause of the deep-rooted
evil in the world, Balzac’s answer is a want of religion and
the “encroachment of money . . . another name for egoism
solidified. Money has become the measure of everything.”
      On days when schoolchildren visit the cottage museum—
to see Balzac’s desk and religious paintings—the garden
remains a quiet preserve. Off to the northeast, looming over
the Seine, is the landmark Balzac never set eyes on, the Eiffel
Tower, opened in 1889. In winter, it’s lit at sunset, a twinkling,
roaming golden beacon as if in praise of the evening sky.




allee des CYGNES               En route to Passy, get off the elevated
and scenic number 6 metro at Bir-Hakeim (named for a French



* Peter Brooks, Henry James Goes to Paris.

t Honore de Balzac, Cousin Bette. From the introduction by Francine Prose.
                                Western Paris                      103



victory in North Africa in 1942), walk halfway across the lower
level of the double metro and road bridge, until you reach the
stairway on the left that leads down to this quiet, mesmerising
walk across a narrow man-made island in the Seine lined with
plane trees and benches from which you can look up at the exqui¬
site gray grillwork on the top level of the bridge and the sculpted
green river gods on the bottom. This was a favorite walk of Samuel
Beckett. Returning to the bridge, continue across to the Passy
metro station.

TROCADERO GARDENS                    The number 6 metro continues from
Passy to Trocadero (oryou can walk). By some accounts Trocadero
is a monumentally ugly stone heap facing the Eiffel Tower, and by
others it is “the prettiest spot in Paris. The hill of Chaillot—
the historic name of the place . . . this view over the Seine, just
where the river swings south-westwards, is unequaled by any other. ”*
The gardens, with jet fountains, pine trees, flowers, and meticu¬
lously groomed hedges, slope down to the Seine, and at sunset the
dome of Les Invalides in the distance glows like liquid gold. Its
a friendly public space where people—and their strollers, skate¬
boards, and scooters—have a good time. Atget photographed these
sprawling gardens before the present Place du Trocadero was
built in 193J. A bronqe sculpture of Benjamin Franklin, Passy
resident, at the end of rue Benjamin Franklin injects a kindly
American presence on the Place. Ambassador Franklin was happy
in Paris: he was “among a people that love me, and whom Ilove. ”
Stacy Schijf’s daqfling A Great Improvisation: Franklin, France,
and the Birth of America would make the perfect literary com¬
panion for a visit to the Trocadero Gardens.




* Gregor Dallas, Metro Stop Paris.
Nymph, in the Jardin des Tuileries