              S QUARF/G EORG E.S-CAIN




   entrance: 8, rue Payenne

   metro: Saint-Paul; Chemin Vert

   hours: Mon—Fri, winter, 7:30—5:30; summer, 7:30—9:30;

      weekends, open 9:00


     pretty square, as well as an archaeological depository
jCjL of stone fragments from older gardens like the Tuileries.

The benches, which face a circular central garden with a
bronze sculpture called Dawn, seem the most favored pre¬
serve of Parisians reading Le Monde or basking in silence
under a pale sun. In late spring you’re surrounded on all sides
by a profusion of blooming rosebushes. The square, which
opened in 1931, is bordered on its east side by the back of the
Carnavalet museum in rue de Sevigne where Georges Cain
(1856—1919), a painter and writer, was the first curator. Extend¬
ing along the square’s north perimeter is the seventeenth-
century Orangerie of the Hotel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau,
the mansion at a right angle to Carnavalet. Both mansions
are linked together by a long gallery. Wrapped in the hush and
privacy of this square, you’d never guess you’re only minutes
away from the crowded heart of Marais museum country:
Musee Picasso, Musee dArt et d’Histoire du Judaisme, the
Archives Nationales de France, Musee de I’Histoire de France,
and Musee Cognacq-Jay, each a short walk to the west. Square
Georges-Cain is truly the Paris that keeps to herself.




                               133
r34                    THE RIGHT BANK




square    leopold-achille           At the north corner of rue
Payenne as it ends in rue du Parc Royal. A large lawn crowded
with reclining families on Sunday afternoons, who can look up
at the magnificent mansions along rue du Parc Royal. Francis
I raised camels and ostriches in the large Parc Royal, which gave
its name to the street. Outside the railings boys play football, in
front of Cafe Sevigne. East of the lawn is a playground.

CAFE DES MUSEES         At the corner of rue du Parc Royal and
49, rue de Turenne. A very good bistro with an upstairs and down¬
stairs dining room, the food and ambience especially satisfying
on cold nights in fall and winter. Open daily. No reservations.

CLOS    DES   BLANCS-MANTEAUX            2i,   rue   des   Blancs-
Manteaux, the street Sartre wrote a song about. This small
enclosed garden o/^biodiversite has a modest charm, with z5o
varieties ofplants, dedicated to the memory of Princess Diana,
who died in Paris on August31, 199J. Its only open on weekends.
During the week there’s a day-care center and preschool in the sur¬
rounding buildings.
fcfirafjr^ 3®
                ®*L^gk   .»j
                 SQUARE DU TEMPLE




   entrances: rue du Temple; rue de Bretagne; rue

      Perree; rue Eugene-Spuller
   metro: Temple; Arts et Metiers

   hours: dawn to dusk, according to the season



O    n a quiet Sunday morning—the sleepy fathers mind¬
      ing toddlers and solitaries sitting under the apple trees,
deep in newspapers—it would never cross your mind that
Square du Temple has been eyewitness to carnage, confla¬
gration, torture, regicide, genocide, eight centuries of atroc¬
ities buried alive in Parisian memory.
   In 1140, the site became the headquarters of the Knights
Templar, a hugely wealthy and propertied international re¬
ligious order established to protect pilgrims to Jerusalem.
The Templars’ territory included large swaths of land in
the northern and southern Marais. Their fortress, a tower¬
ing castle, was inhabited by thousands of monk-soldiers;
in the center of the enclosure was the prison. The Tem¬
plars acted as bankers to financially stressed kings, hiding
them on occasion from rioting mobs. In 1307, in need of
cash, the savage Philippe le Bel (he was good-looking) de¬
clared war on the Templars. Charging them with heresy,
sodomy, and necromancy, he invaded, razed, arrested, tor¬
tured, and burned at the stake the monks who would not
confess, including Jacques Molay, the Father General: he was
hung from the scaffold and burned alive, near the Square


                              J37
i38                     THE RIGHT BAK



Vert Galant. Louis XVI, Marie-Antoinette, and the dauphin
(Louis XVII) and his sister were imprisoned in the same
Temple keep where the Templars had been tortured, before
the king and queen went to the guillotine in 1793; the dau¬
phin was held for another three years, when he died. Napo¬
leon, afraid the site would become a destination of royalist
pilgrims, had the prison razed.
      Today there’s a large sign in the square bearing the names of
the youngest children—unrecorded in school registers—who
were deported by the Nazis from the Marais homes bordering
the square, once the property of the incinerated Templars, later
the neighborhood of Jewish artisans and merchants.
      At the rue de Bretagne entrance there’s a lovely rock garden
and pond with a small waterfall, another triumph of the engi¬
neer and landscape architect John-Charles Adolphe Alphand.
All along the paths the gardens are planted with spirea and
lilacs and flowering fruit trees. Near the western edge, you
pass the sculpted head of the poet and songwriter Beranger,
the French Robert Burns, whose socialist sympathies and
lyrics landed him in jail in the nineteenth century. Winding
back toward the bandstand, where there are concerts in spring
and summer, you pass a bird sanctuary, dense with shrubbery
and trees, the birds performing like divas in the Sunday air.




MARCHE DES enfants-rouges                 The oldest covered food
market in Paris, named for an orphanage founded on this site by
Francis I: the orphans wore red. The narrow entrance is off rue de
Bretagne and rue Chariot. (Tues—Sat, 8:30—1, 4—J.30; Sun,

8:30—2). Inside, a lively and diverse clientele order food to suit
many ethnic tastes.
                               The Marais
                                                                      •39


MUSEE DES ARTS ET METIERS                 A short walk, at 60, rue de
Reaumur; Tues—Sun, to—6; Thurs, until 9:30. It is part of the
Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers, with a wide range of exhibits
and information about technological innovation. On its south
side, on the ancient rue Saint-Martin (passing Saint-Martin
des Champs and Saint-Nicholas des Champs), you will find the
small Square E. Chautemps, under chestnut trees; a Wallace
fountain—a symbol of Parisian parks and squares—faces the
Conservatoire.

AU-DELA DES FRONTIERES                A short walk east, across boule¬
vard Ftlles du Calvaire, at 106, rue Amelot. A good fair-trade
shop with handmade toys, jewelry, and artifacts made in Africa
and Asia, a jewel of the laid-back eleventh arrondissement.

LE CENTENAIRE            104, rue Amelot, at the corner of rue
Oberkampf; metro, Filles du Calvaire. A high-spirited neighbor¬
hood bistro. Open j—midnight; closed Sunday night.

IL PREZZEMOLO OSTERIA italiana                     13, rue Commines;
metro, Filles du Calvaire. Open every day: a good choice on Sun¬
day nights when many Marais bistros and restaurants are closed.

HOTEL BEAUMARCHAIS               3, rue Oberkampf; tel: 01.S3.3C.SC.
SC; www.hotelbeaumarchais.com. A friendly, modestly priced
hotel, with an outdoor breakfast cafe, a minute’s walk from the
metro and boulevard Filles du Calvaire: cross it and you’re in
the Marais. In the other direction (left as you exit the hotel),
you head up the hill of Oberkampf into the eleventh arrondisse¬
ment and “the increasingly energetic northeast quadrant of the
city.



*Mark Bittman, “In Paris, Farther-Flung for Taste and Value,” The New York
Times.