                    MUSEE ZADKINE



   entrance: ioo bis, rue d’Assas
   metro: Vavin
   hours: Tues—Sun, io—6


      he painter and sculptor Ossip Zadkine (1890—1967),
 -L   born in Belarus, the son of a Jewish father and Scottish
mother, came to Paris from Russia in 1909 by way of a London
art school. At first he lived at La Ruche, an artists’ community,
but finding it too confining, he moved on, though remaining
a regular among the artists and poets of the Russian diaspora
in the cafe worlds of Port-Royal and la Rotonde in Montpar¬
nasse. He counted among his colleagues the painters Soutine,
Chagall, Kandinsky, and Survage. Auguste Rodin was a strong
influence on his early sculpture. Zadkine was one of the shin¬
ing lights of the School of Paris, composed of many foreign
artists who settled in Paris. Achieving recognition in the
1920s, in 1928 Zadkine bought the small home and studio
that is now a museum filled with his sculptures in stone and
wood and bronze and numerous paintings. “Come and see
my Assas folly,” he wrote to a friend, “and you’ll understand
just how much a man’s life can be changed by a pigeon loft,
by a tree.” You enter his “folly”—a gift to the city after his
death—through a small sculpture garden shaded by tall birch
trees; in late afternoon they filter the falling sunlight as it
moves beyond the garden walls. Since Zadkine’s retreat is well
off the beaten track, most days you’ll find the peace to con¬
template the beauty of his sculptures, Melancholy and The Birth
                               81
82                          THE LEFT B A »K



of Venus, among many others. Inside the museum you can
see the range of his styles: from early primitivism and cubism
through expressionism and abstraction.
     Zadkine’s retreat is a small piece of the Russian diaspora
that followed the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 when about
four hundred thousand of the Russian “intelligentsia”—artists
and writers—who left their homeland emigrated mostly to
Berlin and Paris,* bringing their genius with them. Nina
Berberova, Zadkine’s contemporary, arrived in Paris in 1925
and stayed until 1950, when she moved to the United States.
The Assas dovecote is a nice setting for discovering her fic¬
tion of post-revolutionary Russians—for instance, her mas¬
terpiece, The Accompanist. Zadkine had many writers among
his friends, Russian and others; he himself was a serious and
respected poet. Indeed, the subtlety and silence of his sculp¬
tures suggest the inspiration and power of poetry itself.




MUSEE BOURDELLE               16, rue Antoine-Bourdelle, a short dis¬
tance from Gare Montparnasse through the underground passage
to Place Bienvenue. Open Tues—Sun, 10—6. This museum consists
of the house, studio, and garden (where you'llfind Zadkine’s huge
bronzes) of sculptor Antoine Bourdelle (\86i—ic>2C)(), a student

of Rodin who went on to work alongside him and who has been
called “the man who invented modernism.”1


CLOSERIE DES LILAS               iji, boulevard Montparnasse. A fa¬
vored cafe of writers and poets such as Baudelaire, Verlaine,


* Valerian Obolensky, Russians in Exile: The History of the Diaspora. On the
  Web: Valobel.blogspot.com./russians-in-exile-history.
f Gregor Dallas, “Montparnasse, ” in Metro Stop Paris.
                  Montparnasse and Southern Paris                83

Gautier, and Zola, and painters Manet, Gauguin, and other im¬
pressionists. Such poets as Max Jacob and Apollinaire used to read
their work here on Tuesday evenings called “Vers et Prose. ”

MONTPARNASSE CEMETERY               Enter from boulevard Edgar
Quinet (daily, 8—6) and pick up a map from the guardhouse at
the entrance to guide you to the graves of the famous. A quiet
place, with few visitors wandering in the shade of the linden trees.
Here lie Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, side by side; also Samuel
Beckett, Baudelaire, Captain Dreyfus, and Ossip Zadkine.
The Campanile, Parc Georges-Brassens, Montparnasse
             PARC (i H O K ('. K S - B R A SS KN S
                   V



   entrance: 36 bis, rue des Morillons

   metro: Convention

   HOURS: dawn—dusk




O    n the map it may look far from the city center, but after
      you exit the metro, the delightful Parc Georges-Brassens
is only a ten-minute walk away on rue Dantzig and left into
rue Morillons at the Prefecture de Police building on the cor¬
ner. Farther on, the main entrance opens wide beneath a pre¬
siding pair of bronze bulls. Ahead of you is a modest and
diverse loveliness, but the bulls remain an iconic reminder of
the nineteen-acre parkland’s former life as the grounds of
the old Vaugirard slaughterhouses, where 110,000 cows and
steers, 70,000 calves, 500,000 sheep, and 80,000 pigs were
slaughtered and butchered annually. Before 1977, when this
land was transformed into a park, it reeked.
   In deference to that past, stroll first toward the left as you
cross the main plaza, past the round pool, the fountains and
ducks, the benches and trees, until you come to tht fragrance
garden, planted with over eighty species of aromatic and me¬
dicinal plants; when they’re in bloom, the scent perfumes
the air, a pleasant revision of history. Behind the campanile—



atop the building where the beasts were once auctioned off, no
doubt shrieking and groaning—as you climb the winding
path up a small hill, you pass an apiary and cross a stream bor¬
dered with pine and birch trees; spread over the hilltop are
beehives and a small terraced vineyard. The path continues

                               85
86                      THE LEFT BAN|



past lush beds of heather, rhododendron, azalea, wildflowers,
and magnolia trees. Then you enter a shady wooded area, a
haven of silence moving with breezes out of tall maple trees.
The children’s rock-climbing area and the playgrounds are
tucked away elsewhere. To the south is a theater, with bleach¬
ers, in the shape of a pyramid.
     The pleasures continue as you circle back toward the east,
in the vicinity of rue Brandon. What was once the old horse
market is now the venue for the Saturday and Sunday book
fairs: book dealers assemble their tables of rare, used, and
new books, and the book-loving connoisseurs who show up
faithfully make it worth their while. It’s a thriving scerie ani¬
mated with good spirits and the quiet attention of book lovers.
The words of rock musician Patti Smith, lover of Paris and
winner of the 2010 National Book Award for Just Kids, reso¬
nate beautifully in this setting:


     Please, no matter how we advance technologically, please
     don’t abandon the book—there is nothing in our material
     world more beautiful than the book.


It doesn’t seem in much danger among the weekend book
buyers or the people relaxing in Georges-Brassens on one bright
golden afternoon in mid-October: on the benches, on the
grass, to a man, to a woman, everyone had their nose in a book
(or newspaper).
     How pleased Georges Brassens (1921—1981) would be.
The singer, songwriter, and poet—the sculpted bust of his
handsome head stands to the east near the site of the book
fairs—studied and loved the poems of Apollinaire, Francois
Villon, and Louis Aragon, which he set to music. Singers
                  Montparnasse and Southern Paris                    87


Charles Trenet, Tino Rossi, and Ray Ventura were his idols.
A high school dropout from the provinces—he called himself
a “thug”—he arrived penniless in Paris and spent his time
in the library. During World War II, the Germans deported
him to a forced-labor camp. Going AWOL, he hid in a friend’s
flat nearby, without running water, gas, or electricity, and
studied Baudelaire, Verlaine, and Victor Hugo. He wrote
songs, such as “L’Auvergnat,” praising the protectors of the
poor and mocking the pettiness of the bourgeoisie. Ordinary
Parisians adored his singing and the countercultural lyrics
of his 250 songs advocating social justice, friendship, and
love. A mural portrait of him hangs in the Porte des Lilas
metro station, along with the lyrics of his song, “La Porte
des Lilas, ” which plays in the film of the same name by Rene
Clair.




AUBEHIERD’ARGENT              Restaurant and cafe at 5, place Jacques
Marette across from the main entrance of the park. A quiet and
pretty prospect, with excellent coffee.

VILLA SANTOS-DUMONT              Bressens moved to 42, rue Santos-
Dumont in 1968, a garden home along this leafy green cul-de-sac.

LA RUCHE        (The Beehive) Off rue Dantqig, to 2, Passage rue
Dantqig, to the right of Cafe Dantqig. The name comes from the
design, by Gustave Eiffel, of the artists’ studios laid out around
a staircase in the shape of cells in a beehive. Opened in 1902 as a
home for refugee artists from central Europe, it offered space to paint¬
ers and sculptors—Chagall, Leger, Archipenko, Soutine, Modigli¬
ani, Zadkine—and poets—Apollinaire and Max Jacob—in
                       THE LEFT BANK



the years when the fifteenth arrondissement in Montparnasse
was the setting of a new art scene, sometimes called the School of
Paris. Chagall and Andre Malraux saved the studios from demo¬
lition in the i<)6os. You can look through the locked gate into an
old mossy courtyard, and sometimes are allowed entrance.




                                                           s
Parc Montsouris
                  PA




   entrances: avenue Reille; rue Gazan; rue de la Cite;

      boulevard Jourdan
   metro: Porte d’Orleans; RER line B to Cite Universitaire

   hours: 8—7, according to the season




B   on Weekend! You hear that all over Paris on Friday after¬
    noons. Saturdays, you realize these are words Parisians
translate into action. In late morning they start pouring into
the streets, lining up at cafes, and sprawling on the grass and
under the trees of, for example, the beautiful and large Parc
Montsouris on the southern border of Montparnasse. The
winding paths of Montsouris take you up, down, and around
the mounds of lawn. They circle the waterfall above the ar¬
tificial lake, lead past dense and deep groves of flowering
shrubbery—forsythia, jasmine, hydrangea—and eventually
move into shade under century-old trees. The bronze sculp¬
tures of lovers, of tigers battling snakes, of wild animals that
decorate the sloping lawns are wonderful. The city’s meteor¬
ological observatory is housed on the western side, with the
day’s weather predictions posted on the door. Near the south¬
ern entrance—the green campus of Cite Universitaire is across
the boulevard—up on a stagelike platform, you can observe
a class practicing Tahtib, Egyptian martial arts, on Saturday
mornings. It’s a kind of stick fighting or stick fencing accom¬
panied by bass drums that originated along the Nile four thou¬
sand years ago.
   When Jean-Charles Adolphe Alphand, Napoleon Ill’s

                               91
                           THE LEFT BANK
92


director of public works in charge of landscape architecture,
opened Montsouris in 1878, carrying out Georges-Eugene
Haussmann’s plan to create green spaces around the city, he
had to close quarries and clear dozens of windmills before
the area’s fifty acres could be transformed into an English-
style park, all winding contours and random flower beds,
so different from the perfect symmetry of the Tuileries. The
Englishness of Montsouris extends beyond its borders. In
the charming narrow side streets and culs-de-sac off its
western border, as you stroll through square de Montsouris,
rue du Parc Montsouris, and rue Braque (the painter Georges
Braque lived at number 6), passing the handsome old houses
of timber and stone wrapped in wisteria and ivy and fronted
with gardens of roses and lilac in season, you’re reminded of a
small country village, Bucklebury, say, in West Berkshire.




JARDIN ZAC ALESIA MONTSOURIS                       A few blocks to the
northwest, across avenue Reille, this smallpark holds the remains
of two aqueducts, one Gallo-Roman, the other from the time of
Catherine de Medicis, discovered during the construction of
the garden, which opened in 2005. A large space ondule—

undulating—between the pretty community garden on the hill¬
side and the childrens play area near the street makes this an unusual
and appealing park design.


la butte aux cailles*               Follow avenue Reille from Mont¬
souris into rue Tolbiac, bearing left up into the hilly area—the

butte—of the village-like neighborhood o/’Butte aux Cailles.


* Helene Hatte and Valerie Addach, Promenades dans le Quartier des Gobelins et
 la Butte-aux-Cailles.
                  Montparnasse and Southern Paris                 93


From Place de la Commune, where heavy fighting took place in
the civil war of i8ji, continue to explore the narrow cobblestone
streets, especially rue Daviel in Little Alsace, past the workers’
villas—numbers j and to—with their small, intimate courtyards

and bright flower gardens. Also look for rue des Cinq Diamant:
Les Amis de la Commune (no 46) preserves the memory of the
communards with posters and books for sale ('"The Letters ol
Louise Michelj. Chez Gladines, at 30, rue des Cinq Diamant,
serves good French Basque meals in an informal but crowded setting.
Fhen bear left at Square Jonas to the hillside Jardin Georges-
Brassai, with its profusion of flowering trees in spring. Back toward
the Place d ’Italic metro is the pretty Square Henri-Rousselle
with the excellent La Butte Aveyronnaise restaurant just off it at
12, rue de la Butte aux Cailles.

CITE florale         Off rue Brillat-Savarin (36—38), south of
rue Tolbiac along rue Bobilot. The little streets are named for the
flowers in the front gardens of the charming small houses: rue des
Orchides, rue des Glycines, rue des Liserons, rue des Iris, and
Square des Mimosas. So fragrant after a morning of light rain,
this neighborhood is a hidden treasure, utterly removed from the
beaten track.

SQUARE RENE LE GALL           Descend the staircase of rue Eugene
Atget from Jardin Georges-Brassai, cross boulevard Auguste Blan-
qui, and continue down rue Corvisart to the entrance. The friendly
and busy square, tree-lined and lush with greenery along its long
rectangular esplanade, is named for a city councilman killed by
the Nafis in 1942. Metro Les Gobelins is nearby.