        SQUARE DKS ARENES DELUTECE
                      V


   entrance: io, rue des Arenes, Square Capitan

   metro: Place Monge; Jussieu; Cardinal Lemoine

   hours: winter, 8—5:30; summer, until 10




      he Latin Quarters best-preserved remnant of the Roman
 JL   occupation, the arena functions now as a public space
used by neighborhood residents for ordinary pleasures. There
is no trace of the splendid Roman residences or imperial pal¬
ace from the time when the Celtic Parisii were conquered by
Caesar. Kids play football, run through the playgrounds;
couples sit on the bleachers of the ancient (much restored)
Roman theater enjoying the sunset or a long spring after¬
noon. The hillsides that rise to surround the arena are deep
with flowering shrubbery and trees—hemlocks, evergreens,
luxuriant holly. The arena is also framed by the fa9ades of
tall mansions that arc along the stately uphill curve of rue de
Navarre. The arena feels sheltered and out of the way, a local
enclave that’s off the beaten track and likes it that way.
   It’s built on the ruins of an arena and theater going back
to the first century when Lutetia was a Roman province, and
people, as many as seventeen thousand, sat in these bleachers
watching theatrical entertainments, gladiators in combat,
and wild animals in circus acts. The male population sat
low and close up; the highest seats were reserved for slaves,
the poor, and women, as in the Mother City’s Colosseum. Two
hundred years later, the stones of the amphitheater were taken
away to protect the lie de la Cite from invading barbarians.

                               33
34                     THE LEFT B A N K*



Later the Christians used the space as a burial ground. It
took Paris more than sixteen hundred years to investigate
what lay buried beneath centuries of rubble and corpses.
(Victor Hugo advocated strongly in favor of resurrecting
and restoring the architecture of the past.) The dig at Lutece
ended in the twentieth century with the final restoration of
the unearthed arena as a public park, the accomplishment of
archaeologist Joseph-Louis Capitan in 1917—1918; there are
green squares named for him on two sides of the arena. The
caves from Roman times where the animals were kept and
the actors waited for their cues can still be seen at ground
level.
     Paris has not obsessed about its history as a colony. It
forgot or neglected this site for almost two thousand years as
if it was just as well to ignore the long and layered memory
this place preserves and the fact that from the beginning Pa¬
risians have had a taste for bloody public spectacles.
     Today the city’s Roman past seems remote to the point of
unreality as you sit high in the stone bleachers, watching the
games of exuberant children, the birds diving in and out of
lush greenery, the throbbing concerts and dancing couples
on cool summer nights under the stars.




CONTRESCARPE       AND    MOUFFETARD         Walk West up the
slope of rue de Navarre, across rue Monge, and along rue Rollin

or rue Lacepede into Place de la Contrescarpe, a popular and pic¬
turesque square lined with plane trees, a favorite of the writers

of the 1920s and 1930s. Hemingway remembered Contrescarpe
(which once stood at the edge of the medieval city) in his short
                             The Latin Quarter                      35

story “The Snows of Kilimanjaro ” (1938).* Walk south on the
ancient rue Mouffetard through the quartier Moujfetard—la
Mouffe—past a good bookshop, a few cafes and boulangeries,
to the morning market stalls selling fruits and vegetables, and at
the end, to the storied old church of Saint-Medard (Tues—Sun,
8—12:30; 2:30—9:30) and the small square beside it.

LIBRAIRIE MICHAEL SEKSIK                  18, rue Lacepede. www.librai
riemichaelseksik.com. Open to—7, closed Sun. A good book-and-
print shop, with a strong inventory of old fancienj and modern
art books. Also near Jardin des Plantes, across rue Cuvier.




* Ian Littlewood, Paris: A Literary Companion.
The Alpine, Qarden in the Jardin des Plantes
    entrances: corner of rue Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and

        rue Buffon; rue Cuvier; quai Saint-Bernard
    metro: Gare d’Austerlitz; Jussieu; Place Monge

    hours: Apr—Aug, 7:30—8; Sept—Mar, 8—dusk



I f you enter the Jardin des Plantes from Quai Saint-Bernard
    (or from the direction of the Austerlitz metro), you’ll see
stretching before you the often-photographed long prome¬
nade that cuts between wide lawns and flower beds groomed
to perfection. In spring, midway along, you’ll pass flower¬
ing cherry trees of an almost unreal luxuriance. (Behind the
cherry trees is a children’s carousel as distinctive as a museum
treasure.) Elsewhere in season you’ll pass through gardens
of roses, peonies, iris, and an orchard of laurel near the chil¬
dren’s playground.
    In contrast to the formality and grand scale of this intro¬
duction, you’ll find, off to the right and through a tunnel, the
entrance to le Jardin Alpin—the Alpine Garden—a hide¬
away of such delicacy and tranquility it’s hard to believe such
a place could exist in the middle of a great city. Under a gray
sky or blue sunlight, you pass over two thousand species of
alpine flowers and plants—white, purple, yellow, and pink—
from Pakistan, the Himalayas, Nepal, Afghanistan, the Bal¬
kans, Mexico, Argentina, North Africa, the Alps, the Pyrenees,
Provence. The genius that has created such a flourishing
environment for so many tender plants is supremely evident
38                      THE LEFT B A N I?



in the beauty of the garden’s design. It’s a fragrant place, too,
with a few wonderful trees and benches in secluded places to
allow you to be alone.
     From the exit, bearing right, follow the signposted path
to the hill leading through a forest of holly trees and ever¬
greens up to the labyrinth with a pagoda at the top. On the
way you will pass—near the rue Cuvier entrance—a mag¬
nificent cedar of Lebanon; an American sequoia; and in the
shade of the forest, the sculpture of Theodore Monod, a lifetime
luminary at the Musee Nationale d’Histoire Naturelle, his
face and head expressing the visionary intelligence behind
this magnificent preserve of nature’s diversity.
     The Grande Galerie de TEvolution (open daily except Tues;
located near the entrance of rue Buffon and Geoffroy Saint-
Hilaire) presents the story of Mother Nature and her offspring
with interactive and dramatic power.




MOSQUE GARDEN and tearoom                   Open daily, £)—midnight.
On the corner of rue Daubenton and jp, rue Geoffroy Saint-
Hilaire, opposite the Jardin des Plantes. A pretty outdoor terrace
planted with jasmine, olive bushes, and fig trees where singing
birds nest and play. With its dark blue mosaic of the tables and
fountain and the surround of cool blue tiles, this courtyard cafe is
pure beauty and calm.


institut     DU MONDE       arabe      i,   rue des Fosses-Saint-
Bernard, entrance through the south-side facade; daily except Mon,
io—6. A gleaming glass marvel of a building by one of France's

best architects, Jean Nouvel, overlooking the Seine from the Left

Bank. From the ninth-floor terrace the views of lie Saint-Louis
                         The Latin Quarter                       39


and Notre-Dame may be the best in Paris. The Middle Eastern
food served outdoors and in the cafeteria is very good. The gift
shop on the mam floor sells fine fabrics and pottery of exquisite
Islamic designs and colors.

JARDIN TINO ROSSI         On Quai Saint-Bernard, along the Left
Bank ofthe Seine. In summer, there’s dancing at night. It’s a peace¬
ful little enclave, with pretty flowers, popular at lunchtime with
students and faculty and visitors to the adjacent Musee du Sculp¬
ture en Plein Air.