Square du Vert Galant behind the Pont Neuf
                SQUARE DU VERT GALANT




    entrance: from the Pont Neuf, descend the staircase

        behind the statue of Henri IV
    metro: Pont Neuf

    hours: 9-dark




A     stride the Pont Neuf, Henri IV seems to welcome us to
      -the lie de la Cite, “the head, the heart, the very marrow
of the whole city.”* The leafy green triangular square behind
the bridge is named for that lusty gallant on horseback who
loved his city mightily, especially its wine, women, and good
times. Once you descend the staircase and enter the square,
Vert Galant presents a magical combination of delights: a
strong, wide river, flowers and grass, a riverbank shaded with
willows and a prospect of magnificent architecture: the Louvre
on the right and the gold-domed Institut de France on the
left. There’s also, in early evening in all seasons, a fair portion
of privacy, a promise of intimacy.
    This romantic western tip of the boat-shaped lie de la
Cite—the original settlement of the Parisii, a Celtic tribe
subdued by Caesar—is a fitting introduction to the City of
Light. For from the beginning, Paris has been an object of
affection: (the Romans called it Lutetia)—Cara Lutetia,
“my beloved Lutetia,” in the words of the late Roman
emperor Julian in 358 AD.l As king, le Vert Galant Henri IV

* Guy de Bazoches, “Description de Paris vers 1175.”

f Colin Jones, Paris: The Biography of a City.




                                        3
4                              lie de la Cite   %


(1589—1610) declared his intention “to make this city beau¬
tiful, tranquil, . . . desiring to make a whole world of this
city and a wonder of the world.”* Such triumphs as the elegant
Pont Neuf (the “new bridge” is the oldest bridge in Paris), the
Place Dauphine opposite the bridge, and the Place Royale
(later renamed Place des Vosges) show his genius as architect
and urban visionary. His energetic love life—he had two
wives, at least fifty-six mistresses, and households full of
bastards—also won him the heart of Parisians (until his serial
amours began to bore and irritate).
      But Henri the obsessive lover was above all a peacemaker.
Born and raised a Protestant by a rigidly reformist mother,
he converted to Catholicism, the religion of the majority, to
end the long religious wars between Catholics and Protestants
that by the end of the sixteenth century had left Paris starving
and looking like a bomb site. Detesting religious partisan¬
ship, he drafted and signed the Edict of Nantes (1598), which
put toleration of the religion he had renounced on the books.
Sounding like a Dalai Lama, he explained:


       Those who honestly follow their conscience are of my reli¬
      gion, and as for me, 1 belong to the faith of all those who
      are gallant and good. . . . We must be brought to agreement
      by reason and kindness and not by strictness and cruelty
      which serve only to arouse men.



The fanatical Catholic who stabbed him to death, Francis
Ravaillac, was not persuaded.
      But to this day, in the words of Andre Maurois, “together

* Jean-Pierre Babelon, “Henri IV, urbaniste de Paris,” in Festivaldu Marais,
    1966.
                                lie de la Cite                        5

with Charlemagne, Joan of Arc, and Saint-Louis IX, Henri
IV remains one of France’s heroes.” He declared kindness
and mercy the primary virtues of a prince.*




PLACE DAUPHINE             Enter through rue Henri Robert on the east
side of Pont Neuf. Henri IV designed this hideaway for his son
Louis XIII—the dauphin—who was nine years old when his
father was assassinated. Some of the low brick buildings are of
Henri’s period; the trees are new and small, having only recently
been planted to replace the white chestnuts that were attacked by
a virulent pest. Yves Montand and Simone Signoret, who loved
the village-like Place, lived here.

PONT DES ARTS             The footbridge connecting the Left Bank
to the Louvre carries a lively traffic of musicians, painters, stu¬
dents, lovers, tourists, and children, with a wide view of the Seine
and a rear view of the Square du Vert Galant. Pierre Auguste
Renoirs painting Le Pont des Arts (1868) was the first he sold
to the art dealer Paul Durand-Ruel, one of the most important
advocates for French impressionists in Europe and the United
States.

SQUARE HONORE-CHAMPION                     Through an arch to the right
of the Institut de France on the Left Bank s Quai de Conti, a
statue of the eighteenth-century philosopher Voltaire stands
atop a small green mound bordered with flowers. Without this
immensely influential leader of the Enlightenment, the Decla¬
ration of Independence (and the American Revolution) would


* Andre Maurois, A History of France.
6                         lie de la Cite   *




never, according to Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson, have
come to pass.

LES BOUQUINISTES        The quintessentially Parisian version of
bookselling. The large green standing boxes full of books and
prints line the quais on both banks of the Seine. The first ones
were located on Pont Neuf.




                                                          s
Square Jean-XXIII and the Cathedral Gardens of Notre-Dame of Paris
                              JEAN-XXIII




   entrance: the riverside and east end of the Cathedral of

       Notre-Dame of Paris
   metro: Cite

   hours: 8-8:30



U    ntil 1831, when it was destroyed in a riot, the palace of
      the archbishop of Paris occupied the land between Notre-
Dame and the Seine. Both the palace gardens and the cathe¬
dral had long been revered sites in this quartier of religious
associations dating back to the fourth century when Em¬
peror Julian presided in a temple dedicated to Jupiter. These
Roman ruins became the foundation of the basilica of Saint-
Etienne (Saint Stephen) in 528 and the first Notre-Dame. The
new Notre-Dame, begun in 1163, stands today, after centu¬
ries of renovations and the fanatical rampages of the Terror,
as one of the crown jewels of Gothic architecture not only in
Paris but all over Europe.
   The new cathedral gardens are dedicated to the memory
of Pope John XXIII, born Angelo Roncalli (1881—1963), in
Lombardy, the papal nuncio in Paris from 1944 to 1953 who
went on to become the “good pope” and the progenitor of
the Second Vatican Council (1962—1965). “Jesus came to
break down the barriers,” he preached. “The central point of
his teaching is love.” Parisians remember Roncalli’s long walks
through the city accompanied by his friends, Protestants,
Catholics, Jews, agnostics, atheists. At diplomatic receptions


                               9
IO                            lie de la Cite


he enjoyed the champagne and the conviviality of men and
women. He read French literature and knew the post—World
War II French intellectuals and theologians, whom he would
invite to participate in the reforms of Vatican II. A savvy
diplomat, he was trusted by the French government. On the
occasion of being awarded the Legion of Honor, President
Auriol praised him for understanding and respecting “the
traditions of justice and tolerance,” the honor of the French
nation.
     Flowering cherry trees, in luxuriant bloom along the south
porches in April, screen but do not hide the original medal¬
lions that bear images of student life. Beds of daffodils and
tulips run the length of the cathedral’s southern flank as far
as the eastern end, where flying buttresses rise above a small
square generous with flowers, benches, and travelers taking
their ease. The mood here often feels more peaceful than
Notre-Dame s interior, where getting stuck behind a crush of
tourists aiming cameras at the stained glass is almost inevi¬
table. Lambert Strether, however, the protagonist of Henry
James’s The Ambassadors, notes the “beneficent action on his
nerves” of sitting alone “in the great dim church,” soothed
in this “place of refuge,” with “a sense of safety, of simplifi¬
cation.”
     The inviting square beneath the flying buttresses is a fitting
memorial to the genial man who confessed a deep sadness
when he was recalled from Paris to Rome: “I love France and
I love Paris,” he told a friend, “and I hoped to stay a little lon¬
ger. I can’t really see myself in Rome.”*




* Thomas Cahill, Pope John XXIII.
                            lie de la Cite                        ii




GARDEN OF THE HOTEL-DIEU                 On the left of the pla^a as
you face the western front o/ Notre-Dame. Founded in 651 by
Bishop Saint-Landry, Hotel-Dieu (since rebuilt) is the oldest
public hospital in Paris. Leave behind the hordes queuing for Notre-
Dame, enter the lobby, and bear right, then left, into the lower
garden. Go up the stairs to the larger upper garden, where you will
find flowers and calm and a place to sit.

LA MEMORIAL DES MARTYRS DE LA DEPORTATION                       Off
Square de l 'lie de France, the eastern tip of lie de la Cite. Cross
Quai Archeveque and enter the small rose garden (weekends,
8—9; weekdays, y:jo) surrounded by the Seine and facing lie
Saint-Louis. Beneath the garden, down a narrow staircase, the
writings on the walls of the memorial to the French martyrs of
the Nafi Deportation are by Eluard, Saint-Exupery, Sartre,
Aragon, Desnos. Tues—Sun, 10—12; 2—j.
View of Notre-Dame from Square Rene-Viviani on the Left Bank
                                            ANI




   entrances: 25, quai de Montebello; rue Lagrange;

       rue Saint-Julien le Pauvre
   metro: Maubert-Mutualite; Saint-Michel; Cite

   hours: Open every day until 9:30



      he Gothic glory of Notre-Dame de Paris presents a
 J_   dramatic angle to this small Left Bank square along the
Seine. Any weekday around noon, a few Parisians sit under
the trees, reading, painting watercolors; children chase pi¬
geons, a tourist eats a salad. There’s a tall bronze fountain in
the center (by Georges Jeanclos, 1995) that tells the story of
Saint-Julien le Pauvre, the name of the small church in the
square’s southwest corner, perhaps the oldest in the city. (It
was built in 1170—1240 on the ruins of the sixth-century church
of Saint-Julien the Martyr.)
   Up close on the fountain you see sculpted images, motifs
of the medieval legend about Saint-Julien: a stag, drops of
tears, a river, a forest, as well as words from the adaptation by
Gustave Flaubert, “The Legend of Saint Julien,” in his Three
Tales (1876). A traveler made curious by the fountain’s inscrip¬
tion could pick up a copy of the Flaubert collection in the
nearby bookstore Shakespeare and Company, a few minutes’
walk to the west on rue de la Bucherie, and then follow Flau¬
bert’s retelling while studying the images and words on the
fountain. It’s a religious story, unusual for Flaubert, appropri¬
ate to the place where the ancient church and the new fountain
remember it: Julien, a “savage heart,” possessed of a blood
i6                      THE LEFT BANK



thirst similar to a wild animal’s, murders his parents. He re¬
pents, lives alone in the wild, becoming a poor Hospitaller
who devotes himself to helping lepers and ferrying them
and other poor travelers across a river. At the end, there is a
mystical and tender scene of transformation, such as never
lightened the conclusion of Madame Bovary. a leper, who is
Christ himself, embraces Julien and, in Flaubert’s words, “the
firmament unfolded—and Julian rose up into the blue of
space, face to face with Our Lord Jesus, who bore him off to
heaven.” The decorations on the fountain evoke a tradition
of tendresse and compassion that Square Rene-Viviani com¬
memorates. An annex of the Hotel-Dieu, the public hospital
for the poor, once stood here. And the square is named for the
politician who, with Jean Jaures and Nobel Peace Prize win¬
ner Aristide Briand, founded the Socialist Party of France,
originally intended to provide a network of helping services
for workers and for people who had nothing.
     The square sinks into deep shade on its south side, benches
under trees offering a place to sit out of the sun. What is said
to be the oldest tree in Paris, a Robinia (an acacia), planted in
1601 by Jean Robin, botanist and director of the royal apoth¬
ecary garden, stands along the path to the ancient church,
which hosts concerts.




Shakespeare and company              jy, rue de la Bucherie. A
scruffy English-language bookshop packed from floor to ceiling

with new and used books, the descendant of the original shop in
rue de VOdeon where owner and publisher Sylvia Beach published
James Joyce’s Ulysses in 1922. A fun place on Bloomsday, June
                         The Latin Quarter                       17



16, with readings and wine-tasting upstairs. There’s a good selec¬
tion of books about Paris on the right wall as you enter.

GARDEN OF THE CHURCH OF SAINT-SEVERIN                       A short
walk west, across rue Saint-Jacques, to the rear entrance of the
church. A series of engravings by Georges Roualt—Miserere—
hangs in the oval-shaped chapel of the Holy Sacrament. The
garden can only be entered from inside the church (begun in the
thirteenth century, to accommodate the students from the Sor-
bonne) through a doorway in the fourth bay on the south wall; its
surrounded by the city’s only surviving charnel house, the reposi¬
tory for bones dug up from a burial ground when it became full.

ABBEY BOOKSHOP          A block south of the church at 29, rue de
la Parcheminerie (named for the bookbinders and illustrators who
worked in this street from the twelfth century), the shop has a
huge selection of new and secondhand books and a bookseller who
can put his hands on whatever title you request before you blink.
Ask for Brian Spence, the helpful owner, who also guides weekend
tours into the countryside. Mon—Sat 10—7. www.abbeybookshop.net.