The Medicis Fountain in the Luxembourg Gardens
              JARDIN DU LUXEMBOURG




   entrances: place Edmond-Rostand; rue de Vaugirard;

       place Auguste-Comte
   metro: Odeon

   hours: 7:30—dusk, according to the season


   June, Luxembourg Gardens:

   A Sunday morning full ofwind and sunlight. Over the large pool the
   wind splatters the waters of the fountains the tiny sailboats on the
   windswept water and the swallows around the huge trees. Two youths
   discussing: “You who believe in human dignity. ”
                                          ALBERT CAMUS, Notebooks




H    aving borne witness to the life of Paris for almost four
      hundred years, the Luxembourgs pleasures embody
the beauty of that life, the harmony and ease that travelers
never forget: symmetrical rows of chestnut trees; in April
the pretty beds of tulips; the murmur of so many people re¬
laxing in the sun; children jubilant before the puppet theater,
then hunched over the rim of the large central octagonal basin,
intent on their sailboats; above them, in the shade of the gazebo
on the eastern terrace, the conviviality of music and wine and
the company of friends.
   The city’s other life—a history of violence, catastrophe,
and vicious politics—is also resonant in some of the garden’s
best-known features.
   The Medicis Fountain in the northeast corner, an Italian
Renaissance gem of the 1620s, was built for the Florentine
Marie de Medicis, queen and then widow of vert galant

                                   41
42                    THE LEFT BANff



Henry IV. Paris despised her—in the words of Andre Mau-
rois, she was “a haughty Italian—a fat blonde, handsome
enough when Rubens painted her, very well pleased with her¬
self, an authoritarian without authority.” But the fountain is
Marie’s legacy. The stillness of the pool, shadowed by a sur¬
round of arching plane trees, contrasts with the mad narra¬
tive of the fountain sculpture: the mythological Polyphemus,
the gigantic Cyclops and jealous suitor, is menacing the lovers
Acis and Galatea, as if poised to devour them.
     The orchard of pears and apples in the garden’s south¬
west corner (adjacent to the rue Auguste-Comte) is a small
remnant of the original settlement on the grounds of the
Luxembourg: the thirteenth-century monastery garden of
Carthusian monks—Le Monastere Chartreux—destroyed
by the Terror. (Beekeeping classes are offered in the apiary.)
     The Luxembourg Palace (another of Queen Marie’s at¬
tempts to re-create her hometown in this foreign city—she
had the Pitti Palace in mind), though no longer open to the
public, is built on ground where the Romans once set up
their military camp, now the proud house of the French
senate. In the Paris Commune of 1871, government troops
dumped the corpses of Communards in the surrounding shrub¬
bery. During the German Occupation (1940—1944), though
it served as the headquarters of the Luftwaffe and the SS,
the palace was bordered—then as now—by lovely flower
gardens (Nazi gardeners kept them groomed and flourish¬
ing.) In August 1944, as Allied and French troops fought to
take back Paris, seven hundred Germans, ready to “fight to
the last cartridge,” dug trenches and hid tanks in the beds of
geraniums and begonias. From the roof and cupola of the
palace they kept track of the approaching regiments. The
                             The Latin Quarter                           43

Luxembourg Palace was the last German stronghold in Paris
to surrender. When it did, on August 25, “formally and de¬
finitively, Paris was free.”*
    The gardens were replanted. A commemorative sculp¬
ture to the students of the Resistance stands just inside the
Vaugirard gate. The statues of the royal and saintly women
of France that encircle the eastern and western terraces in
front of the palace were also restored. One of their number,
the serenely self-possessed Laure de Noves (1307—1348), was
neither queen nor saint. Her statue stands first in line on the
western terrace, toward the southern entrance. Laure, who
holds a book in her sleeve, was the muse of Petrarch, the
woman he first saw at Mass in a church in Aquitaine—the
inspiration of his sonnets, the Can^oniere—who had married
into the de Sade family. More than four centuries later, in
his prison cell at Vincennes, her descendent, the mad Mar¬
quis de Sade, dreamed of Laure, his ancestral idol:


    “Her eyes had the same fire as when Petrarch sang ofi
    them. . . . Iam like a child. I flung myselfat her feet, call¬
    ing, ‘Oh, my mother!”’^


    Walking east of the eastern terrace, near the Saint-Michel
entrance, you’ll pass a statue of another iconic French writer,
passionately unconventional, not in the slightest mad: George
Sand, novelist, admired by Flaubert, Matthew Arnold, the
Brownings, Charlotte Bronte, George Eliot, Heinrich Heine,
Turgenev, and Proust. Oscar Wilde loved her for her


* Larry Collins and Dominque Lapierre, Is Paris Burning?
j- Francine du Plessix Gray, At Home with the Marquis de Sade: A Life.
44                         THE LEFT BANl^



compassion and generosity: “For the aristocracy of the in¬
tellect she had always the deepest veneration, but the de¬
mocracy of suffering touched her more.”*
     West of the western terrace, the graceful Laure de Noves
at your back, you’ll pass more statues of French artists and
statesmen set into the deep lawns as well as the Luxembourg
regulars, for whom the word “ leisure” is not an abstraction—
the chess players near the Orangerie, the men on the boules
courts, the children on the carousel, the readers who are
everywhere. You get a sense of down-to-earth practical
wisdom, of the arts of survival that have seen Parisians
through centuries of wars and suffering. In the Luxembourg,
the tough complex soul of the city comes through.




DELACROIX MURALS, THE CHURCH OF SAINT-SULPICE

Daily, 7:30—3:30. In La Chapelle des Saints-Anges (Chapel of
the Holy Angels), the first chapel on the right side of the church.
La Lutte de Jacob avec l’Ange is one of three masterpieces.

village voice bookshop                  6, rue Princesse, two streets
north of Place Saint- Sulpice, open 7 days a week. The superb

English-language bookstore is presided over by owner Odile Hellier,
an extraordinarily knowledgeable bookseller who also hosts regu¬

lar readings by contemporary writers, www.villagevoicebookshop
.com.


INSTITUT CATHOLIQUE                2i, rue dAssas,just off rue Vaugi-
rard, adjacent to the Church of Saint-Joseph des Carmes. The court¬

yard of warm brick in a Flemish Gothic style and benches under


* Elizabeth Harlan, George Sand.
                         The Latin Quarter                        45


plane trees is deserted in summer. It leads into the cobhlestoned
churchyard where 120 priests were murdered in IJ92. Simone de
Beauvoir studied mathematics here, and Jacques Maritain taught
philosophy. Stranded in the United States during the Occupation,
he taught at Princeton and wrote France My Country (1941), a
love letter to Paris: ‘‘How did it fall, this city of our hopes, this
country that taught liberty to the worldl ”

LA MEDITERRANEE            2, place de I’Odeon; open every day
for lunch and dinner. A first-rate seafood restaurant, facing Le
Theatre de l’Odeon (which has its own open-air cafe on the
Place), a block from the rue Vaugirard entrance to the Luxem¬
bourg. Reservations required: tel 01.43.26.02.30.

LA BASTIDE ODE ON          j, rue Corneille, a block north of the
rue   Vaugirard entrance to the Luxembourg. An excellent
restaurant—Samuel Beckett s favorite—specialising in the food
of Provence and the South of France. Reservations: reservations@

b as tide- Odeon.com.
Garden 'oif iSjJuse'i
                                   > ■

                        * fill      i«
                                        dr •• Wir^ * j
                        f '■ 4'-ti? HESS 1 infill
              MUSEE ETfGENE DELACROIX




    entrance: 6, place de Furstemberg

    metro: Saint-Germain-des-Pres

    hours: daily, except Tues, 9:30—5



       urning left, off rue de VAbbaye and into a corner of the
 JL    serene Place de Furstemberg, you’ll find the apartment
and studio—now a museum—of the sublime French painter
Eugene Delacroix (1798—1863). The museum’s small shaded
garden with benches is a delightful place to sit and read The
Journal of Eugene Delacroix (on sale in the bookshop), “per¬
haps the greatest literary testament any painter has left.”*
Delacroix moved here from the Right Bank in 1857 so he
could walk back and forth to Saint-Sulpice, where his murals
had been commissioned for the Chapelle des Saints-Anges
(Chapel of the Holy Angels). “I like my studio,” he confided
to his journal. “I work well here. The view from my small
garden . . . always gives me pleasure.” In this silent retreat,
sitting under the trees, he planned his last masterpieces. Though
his health had been poor, he told his friend George Sand that
now he was


    doing a job which has given me back the health 1 thought
    lost forever. I get up very early and hurry off to my work. I
    return home as late as possible and begin again the next



* Hubert Wellington, ed., The Journal of Eugene Delacroix.




                                     47
48                        THE LEFT BA N»K



     day. . . . Nothing gives me more pleasure than painting. . . .

     1 am buried in my work.


     He does not mourn the loss of his social life, the nightly
dinner parties, concerts, and openings in the company of his
friends Baudelaire, Balzac, Corot, Berlioz, Merimee, Madame
Sand, and his beloved Chopin (1810—1849).


     What a good life! What a divine compensation for my
     solitary state. . . . Painting, its true, like the most exact¬
     ing of mistresses, harasses and torments me in a hundred
     ways. ... I have been getting up at dawn, and hurrying
     off to this enchanting work as though I were rushing to
     throw myself at the feet of a beloved mistress. . . . How is
     it that this unending struggle revives instead oj destroy¬

     ing me!


     His memoir illuminates the passion of an artist for the
beauty of the world and the medium of his art. He writes about
mixing colors, how to achieve specific effects, his excitement
at the sight of his palette. He notes the pleasures of the Lux¬
embourg Gardens, where he studies the shapes of leaves and
trees; he records his visits to the Jardins des Plantes where he
watches the animals in the Natural History museum. Reading
Delacroix, you want to see both his Paris and his paintings,
many of which, including the most famous—Liberty Guiding
the People, commemorating the uprising of July 28, 1830—

hang in the Louvre as well as in the Musee du Petit Palais
and the Musee d’Or say.
     Inside this small uncrowded museum, you find powerful
evidence of Delacroix’s genius for dramatizing color in works
suffused with love for women subjects {Jenny Le Guillou,
                       Saint- Germain-des-Pres                    49


Magdalen au Desert, Education de la Virgin, a drawing of
George Sand), as well as for the sea, for landscape (La Nuit
ou Vlnondatiori), and for wild animals (Bacchus Fresco). But it
is outside, in the stillness oi the garden, where the visitor may
best contemplate the reveries of this romantic visionary. “God
is within us,” he writes on October 12,1862. “He is the inner
presence that causes us to admire the beautiful.”




PLACE DE FURSTEMBERG              This small square takes you by
surprise. Its proportions and sophistication appear so quintessen¬
tially Parisian, so charming, especially in the dappled light of late
afternoon.


CHEZ LADUREE         At the corner ofrue Bonaparte and rue Jacob.
A fine patisserie, specialising in macarons, with a gracious tea¬
room above the shop.


ECOLE DES BEAUX-A RTS            The national school of painting
and sculpture at 14, rue Bonaparte. Hours: Courtyard: Mon—Fri,
9—5; Exhibitions: Tues—Sun, 1—7. The glass-domed ceiling over
the main entrance hall of terra cotta and teal blue is gorgeous. An¬
other highlight is the Cour du Murier, the cloister of an old
convent with a huge old mulberry tree—murier—in the center
surrounded by arcades and a fountain.


9, QUA I MAI, AQUA IS       Delacroix’s friend George Sand lived
here (1832—1836) along the Seine when she-first came to Paris
with her two children, in flight from a loveless marriage. Here
she wrote Lelia and began dressing in mens clothing in order to
be seated at the opera without an escort. In Sand’s day, unaccom¬
panied single women were refused admission to public places.
5°                      THE LEFT BANK



THE   CHURCH       OF   SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRES              (Saint-
Germain of the Fields) Open daily 8—y. The tower dominates the
Place, the familiar image of the Romanesque origin of what re¬
mains of a huge Benedictine monastery from the sixth century.
The transition from Romanesque to early Gothic is evident in the
interior, a beautiful setting for the concerts held here and posted
outside. The marble statue, Notre-Dame de Consolation, given
to the Abbey of Saint-Denis in 1340, stands in the rear of the south
aisle. Fragments from the Lady Chapel (1212—1255) are scattered
outside next to the church entrance in the garden of Square
Laurent-Praghe, where Picasso’s Head of a Woman also stands.
                                                            s
■
Square Boucicaut