                 SQUARE BOUCICAUT




   entrances: rue de Sevres, rue de Babylone;

       rue Velpeau; boulevard Raspail
   metro: Sevres-Babylone

   hours: 8—dusk, according to the season



W       hether it’s the employees from Bon Marche relaxing
        on a break or the happy children on the carousel or
the magnificent tall trees under a wide sky, this square has
such a feeling of benevolence that you walk around soaking
it up and wondering about the source. What collective mem¬
ory lives in the blue air that colors this thick exotic greenery?
A part of the answer is in the square’s namesake: it commem¬
orates Aristide Boucicaut, the founder of the elegant Bon
Marche department store across the street (1852), and his
wife and business partner, Marguerite Guerin Boucicaut,
who inherited his fortune, one of the largest in nineteenth-
century Paris, and gave most of it away to poor children,
to hospitals, teachers, journalists, artists. The sculpture
of Madame Boucicaut at the square’s entrance captures
the kindliness of the woman, an exceptionally generous
Parisian who began life as the illegitimate daughter of a
peasant.
   Maybe her story has colored this space, feeds the currents
of harmony—a common register in many of the squares
and gardens of Paris. The children who play in them also
say something about the culture of the Boucicauts’ city, which


                               53
54                         THE LEFT BANK



the “non-stop brilliant”* twentieth-century Austrian jour¬
nalist Joseph Roth describes in “The Child in Paris”:


     There are children playing in all the parks. . . . And if
     there is something that grown-ups are not allowed to do in
     one or other of the city’s great parks or little green spaces,
     then you can bet children will be allowed to do it. In Paris
     children are allowed to stand on benches, squeeze between
     railings, clamber over fences, throw balls into flowerbeds,
     and pluck flowers. The French are not the ones to apply
     Spartan principles of education. This people, that makes
     and bears so few children, not only respects the child as the
     future of the country, the nation, the world—it quite un¬
     thinkingly loves it, the child as creature, the becoming per¬
     son who is still half an animal. . . . French children behave
     with the ease and confidence of grown-ups. It’s not so much
     a matter of race and blood as it is the consequence of the
     warm, loving, nurturing softness in the way they are brought
     up. The French pedagogical principle is not Spartan
     strictness but Roman freedom accorded to the individual
     disposition—it’s not discipline but civilisation. ... In parks
     and gardens, at every fair, in open spaces on particular holi¬
     days, there are carousels for children. . . . Children are allowed
     to do everything: to rush ahead, ... to feed swans, and sail
     little boats in ornamental ponds k



     A look at the expressiveness of the Madame Boucicaut
monument in the context of an Austrian’s take on Parisian
child-rearing—the warm, loving, nurturing softness—strikes


* Jeffrey Eugenides, New York Times Book Review.
f Joseph Roth, Report from a Parisian Paradise: Essays, 1925—1939.
                          Saint- Germain-des-Pres                       55

a major chord of recognition. On the other hand, in the spirit
of French contrariness, the nineteenth-century poet Charles
Baudelaire, who felt a brotherhood with the Paris of the poor,
might have felt only dislike toward this stone homage to the
tradition of philanthropy: in Les Fleurs du Mai, “he never
shows pity for the poor, nor—still worse—charitable tender¬
ness, sentiments so widespread at the time, and that drove
him into a rage.”*




BON MARCHE            Partly designed by Gustave Eiffel in a brilliant
glass-and-steel construction like Londons Crystal Palace, it’s as
much a light-filled, welcoming museum as a department store, the
oldest in Paris.

hotel LUTETIA             45, boulevard Rasp ail at rue de Sevres, op¬

posite Square Boucicaut. Afternoon tea in the main salon of the
Lutetia delivers the exquisite pleasure of Parisian hospitality and
tasteful elegance. Its easy to see why Henry James, Matisse, and
Picasso chose to stay here. During the Occupation, the Naps
installed the Gestapo; after the Liberation, Paris received its return¬
ing POIVs and concentration camp survivors here. In her book The
War (translatedfrom the French Le Douleup), writer and Resis-
tante Marguerite Duras (1914—1996) caught the sorrow and the
muted reliefof the days ofrepatriation. A plaque, in French, bears
witness to the Lutetia’s tragic role during World War II.

jardin CATHERINE-LABOURE                      33, rue de Baby lone. A tidy
vegetable andflower garden on the grounds ofthe Sisters of Char¬
ity convent, with a lovely arbor. A haven for Parisians at lunchtime,
just a few minutes’ walk from Square Boucicaut.

*Eric Hazan, The Invention of Paris: A History in Footsteps.
                              Ik




Garden behind La Clinique Saint-Jean de Dieu
              JARDI                  UNIQUE
                 SAINT-JEAN .EXE DIKE



   entrance: 19, rue Oudinot
   metro: Saint Frangois-Xavier
   hours: daily, during hospital visiting hours


     pleasant receptionist in the hospital lobby will guide you
iito the garden: down a short hallway and through doors
to the left. If you happen to visit in May and June, what awaits
you outside, behind the hospital, is one of the most beautiful
rose gardens in Paris. Whereas the Bagatelle in the Bois du
Boulogne is a performance, the garden of Saint-Jean de Dieu
(Saint John of God) feels like a state of being. If you sit far in
the back, facing the fine white building that houses the
clinic—it was originally the town house of Madame de la
Sabliere—this long view of the manicured flower beds beneath
sheltering trees can make you feel as if you’ve come into an
outdoor church sanctuary. (“The best place to find God is in
a garden,” said George Bernard Shaw. “You can dig for Him
there.”)
   The healing spirituality of the hospital garden is now a
theme among medical professionals and administrators who
advocate making such green spaces integral parts of medical
facilities. A garden, it is said, reaches a deeper level of being
than the simply visual: “Here lies a reservoir of feelings, such
as pleasure, displeasure, awe, fear, or fascination” with the
power “to heal psychic stress.”


                                57
58                        THE LEFT B A N £



     For in the stress of urban living, the crowding, traffic, over¬
     load of stimulation, lack of peace and quiet, all take their
     toll. . . . Vegetation serves as a shock absorber for the human
     sensory system assaulted by the sights, smells, sounds of
     the city. It does not present a challenge to the senses, does
     not have to be screened out, but provides an opportunity for
     rest from the constant mental alertness. ... It helps to heal
     the psychological wounds congested cities inflict on their

     residents*


     In the garden of Saint-Jean deDieu the beauty feels muted,
unaccompanied by the sounds of the more popular gardens—
the buzz of the crowds, say, on a Saturday afternoon in the
Luxembourg. Here you notice only the occasional crunch of
the pebbles on a path as a visiting friend and a patient stroll
past arm-in-arm. This would be a good place to get well,
under the balm of roses. (To your right are the high old roof¬
tops of rue Rousselet, alongside the clinic garden, admired for
its quiet charm.)
     The hospital, which specializes in surgery, was founded
by a member of the Order of Saint John of God in 1843, a fra¬
ternity that opened hospitals to serve the poor and the sick
in Spain and France in 1546. Disbanded during the Terror, the
Order reestablished itself in nineteenth-century Paris. Saint-
Jean de Dieu, named for the founder, is no longer run by a
religious community serving the poor. It is now a private op¬
eration serving the comfortable environs of le septieme.




* Charles A. Lewis and S. Kaplan, “The Healing Power of Gardens,” in The
  Meaning of Gardens: Idea, Place, and Action, eds. Mark Francis and Ran¬
  dolph T. Hester.
                     Saint- Germain-des-Pres                    59




THE GARDEN OF THE CINEMA LA PAGODE                5j bis, rue de
Baby lone. This Japanese garden, with its stone dragons, lions,
Buddhas, birds, and a ginkgo biloba, is the entrance to one of
the best independent art cinemas in Paris.

GARDENS OF UNESCO          j, place de Fontenoy. Featuring the
work of renowned Japanese American sculptor and landscape
architect Isamu Noguchi. Reserve a visit through an answering
service: 33.(0).145.681.060.

avenue DE BRETEUIL         A long mall of lawns lined with trees
and benches, the golden dome of Les Invalides always in view.
    entrance: 77, rue de Varenne

    metro: Varenne

    hours: Tues-Sun, Apr—Sept, 9:30-6:45; Oct-Mar,

         9:30-5


       he spacious gardens can be visited independently of the
  X    museum, the most popular in Paris dedicated to a sin¬
gle artist. In Rodin’s day, this was a wild park. A makeover
in 1993 established a highly designed layout well suited to
the architecture of the museum, an elegant eighteenth-century
mansion. A variety of trees—lindens, chestnuts, trimmed box
trees, clipped yews—complement the generous flower beds
and a large pool. The entire composition frames the man¬
sion’s south facade, where Rodin (1840—1917) had his studio.
The trees you can see from his studio windows would have
delighted him. As he wrote in his poetic Cathedrals of France:


      Trees bring order and animation to everything . . . like
    archangels, [they] bow their heads to one another, their
    wings unfurledvertical against the sky. ”*


    The most powerful presences in the garden are the sculp¬
tures, scattered about in the open, others discreetly set among
holly bushes and other greenery. Along one path, thick with
plantings, you suddenly come upon The Thinker (and all the


* Auguste Rodin, Cathedrals of France.

                                         61
62                          THE LEFT BA N«K



thinking tourists posing for cameras in front of him). Else¬
where are The Burghers of Calais; The Gates ofHell, influenced
by the imagery of Dante’s Divine Comedy and Michelange¬
lo’s Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel; and in the pool,
Ugolino and His Children. Inside the museum are sketches
and models Rodin made for his masterpiece, Honore de Bal¬
zac. There’s a copy in the garden; the original, which Pari¬
sians despised at first, stands on a pedestal under trees on a
median north of the intersection of boulevard du Montpar¬
nasse and boulevard Raspail in Montparnasse.
     In late afternoon, as the sun fades slowly in the west behind
the nearby gold dome of Les Invalides and the Eiffel Tower
seems to touch the pink sky, the gardens feel animated by
the spirit of the artists who had their studios in the mansion
with Rodin as well as by the city that at once inspired and
enraged them. One of the artists who shared his space was
the sculptor Camille Claudel (1864—1943), Rodin’s collabo¬
rator and lover for eleven years. Their breakup, like their affair,
was tempestuous, having lifelong tragic consequences for
Claudel. (The movie Camille Claudel, with Isabelle Adjani
as Claudel and Gerard Depardieu as Rodin, tells the bitter
story.)
     It was Rodin’s friend, the poet Rainer Maria Rilke (1875—
1926), who first told him about the available studio space in
what was then called Hotel Biron, and who later worked as
his office assistant.* (Rilke’s novel, The Notebooks of Malte
Laurids Brigge, completed after his first stay in Paris in 1908,
tells the story of his survival in those early years in the alien¬
ating yet supremely alive city.) After Rodin’s death, Rilke
wrote a brilliant monograph about his friend. His insights


* Ruth Butler, The Shape of Genius.
                          Saint- Germain-des-Pres                        63


achieve a rich texture when contemplated in the silence of
this garden in late afternoon:


    Indeed, it is an underlying patience in Rodin which renders
    him so great, a silent, superior forbearance resembling the
    wonderful patience and kindness of Nature. . . . “One
    must not hurry, ” said Rodin . . . He possessed the quiet
    perseverance of men who are necessary. *




THEGARDENCAFE                 A treasure, tucked away under the hedges,
along a shady path.

BASILICA OF SAINT-CLOTILDE                      2j, rue las Casas. Metro,
Solferino. A lovely nineteenth-century mock Gothic cathedral,
where Cesar Franck was the organist for fifty years, and now the
setting for glorious choral concerts (Brahms, Mendelssohn, Bach,
Faure). Schedules available at www.sainte-clotilde.com. Edith
Wharton, who lived nearby at ,5j, rue de Varenne, loved the sound
of Saint-Clotilde’s church bells.

S Qu aresamuelrousseau                     Directly across from the church,
a lively green space in the afternoons, full of children and Pari¬
sians taking their time. There is a statue of Cesar Franck and a
sculpture of a woman reading to a child.

THE SQUARE           21, rue Saint-Dominique. A good restaurant with
a nice bar, convenient for dinner before the concerts, which start
at 8:45. Outdoor seating has a view of the square and Saint-

Clot ilde.



* Rainer Maria Rilke, Letters on Life, ed. Ulrich Baer.