rhe..ciescent into the Vallee Suisse
                      LA          .LEE SUISSE




    entrance: the corner of avenue Franklin D. Roosevelt

        and Cours la Reine
    metro: Invalides; Franklin D. Roosevelt

    hours: daily, 24 hours



                     One of my favorite places in Paris.

                          -ELAINE SCIOLINO *



T     hanks to Sciolino, the former correspondent for the
       Paris bureau of The New York Times, who wrote about
her adopted city’s out-of-the-way green spaces, you can find
your way to the Swiss Valley. It’s easy to miss.
    Immediately to the right of a melodramatic sculpture of
romantic poet Alfred Musset—his “male gaze” resting upon
an assortment of his swooning naked lovers and muses (George
Sand, the best known)—some narrow, cracked stone stairs
lead down into the hidden “valley.” What ypu find at the
bottom comes as a surprise and delight: utter quiet and
simple beauty to the accompaniment of the sound of water
flowing from a small waterfall into a pond shaped by rocks
and shaded by an old weeping beech tree. There’s a surround
of tall evergreens and maples rising toward the sky, bushes
thick with lilacs and jasmine, roses in bloom in late October.
The wooden footbridge has the look of a set design. (Sciolino
describes the place, aptly, as “a tiny stage-set.”) It’s an en¬
chanting and comforting place, a sanctuary that’s part of the

* Elaine Sciolino, “Hidden Gardens of Paris,” The New York Times.

                                    119
120                    THE RIGHT BAN\



larger and more public Champs-Elysees gardens where you
can be completely alone—or not—in the middle of a great
metropolis.
      Returning to the street above, you encounter some humor
on the corner of the intersection of avenue Franklin Roose¬
velt and Cours la Reine: the sternly heroic sculptures of
Jacques Cartier and Samuel Champlain, seventeenth-century
explorers in the New World, who appear just next to the
swoony lyricism of the nineteenth-century Musset tableau.




PETIT PALAIS, THE INTERIOR GARDEN                Avenue Winston
Churchill; open daily except Mon, 10—6. The most dramatic ap¬
proach is from the Left Bank, across the Pont Alexandre III,
the most extravagant of the Seine bridges, named to please Rus¬
sia in 1900 at a time of expanding German domination. The
Petit Palais, on the right, has a pretty interior garden and indoor-
outdoor cafe. The outdoor tables face the wonderful dome of the
palais and a garden dense with palm and banana trees and pools
decorated with gold and blue mosaics. The design of the tile floor
of the main lobby is another among many highlights of this de¬
lightful free museum, which also offers concerts and lectures
about Parisian culture. Ask at the information desk.

PALAIS DE LA DECOUVERTE IN THE GRAND PALAIS                     Av¬
enue Franklin D. Roosevelt; open Tues—Sun, p:jo—6'. An interac¬
tive science museum beloved by Parisian schoolchildren.

GARDENS OF THE CH AMPS-ELYSEES                 Walk west from the
Place de la Concorde, called “the Heart of Paris, ” along avenue
Gabriel under a canopy of sycamores, plane trees, pines, magnolias,
chestnut trees, with bleeding hearts still blooming in November. The
                 The Champs-Ely sees and Environs              12 I



Elysees palace is to your right, protected—and inaccessible—by
high hedges. At the circle—Rond Point des Champs-Elysees—
there’s a taxi stand. Or you can take the long walk along opulent
avenue Montaigne to n, avenue du President Wilson, where
you’ll find the Museum of Modern Art of the City of Paris,
located in one of the two wings of the Palais de Tokyo. The per¬
manent exhibits—especially Dufy’s La Fee Electricite (The
Good Fairy Electricity), at 25o panels the largest painting in the
world—are superb (Matisse, Picasso, Chagall). There’s a spacious
terrace with palm trees and cafe service, overlooking the Seine
through a screen of plane trees.
                                     Pi»




Place des Vosges, southwest corner
   entrances: rue Saint-Antoine and rue de Birague,

      through the southern Pavilion du Roi (King’s
      Pavilion); through the northern Pavilion de la Reine
      (Queen’s Pavilion); east of rue de Turenne
   metro: Saint-Paul; Bastille; Chemin Vert

   HOURS: daily, 24 hours



P   aris remembers this open-air square in the heart of the
    Marais as the inspiration of its best-loved king and urban
planner, Henri IV. The lovely harmony of its proportions—
the border of thirty-six mansions of warm red brick and
white limestone around the quadrangle, the tall fountains
watering each of the four corners, the arches and arcades
lining the perimeter, the rows of linden trees bordering the
arcades—Place des Vosges has a graciousness resonant with
the memory of the Vert Galant. Long before it became po¬
litically correct, Henri IV made religious tolerance the ideal
of his reign, and this square, his masterpiece, reflects the
sophistication and magnanimity of that ideal.
   The site, originally the royal grounds—Chateau des
Tournelles—of Henri II, was near the scene of his accidental
death in 1559 from wounds received in a jousting tourna¬
ment on what is now rue Saint-Antoine. In mad reaction, his
widow, Queen Catherine de Medicis, had Tournelles razed,
sent Henri II’s mistress, Diane de Poitiers, packing, and moved
her own entourage west, where she built herself another pal¬
ace in the Tuileries. But a few kings later, in 1605, Henry of
                              123
124                         THE RIGHT BANJC



Navarre—or Henri IV—wanting a new palace and a neigh¬
borhood free of the Valois dynasty’s taint, looked east to the
medieval Marais: it had been a quartier of watered gardens
(maraichers) rather than an actual marsh. There he began Place
des Vosges (originally called Place Royale) but didn’t survive
to savor its finished glory. From the outset this enclave ob¬
served rituals of luxurious pleasure among the resident aris¬
tocrats: weddings, tournaments (more jousting), balls, fairs,
duels, and, the speciality of le grand siecle—the great age of
the seventeenth century—the salon, an elite cultural gather¬
ing presided over by women* Effervescent with conversation
and political debate as well as news of the amours of Parts, the
elegant houses (or hotels) on the great square entertained
the city’s most original wits in their salons. Moliere, his rival
Racine, La Fontaine, La Rochefoucauld, Boileau, Madame de
Sevigne, who was born at i bis, place des Vosges, and her
best friend, Madame de Lafayette, all became regulars.
      One salon to which the richest and sexiest were most
faithful was presided over by Ninon de PEnclos (1620—1705).
Like all Frenchwomen of the seventeenth century, Ninon in
her youth had had four vocational choices: wife, nun, prosti¬
tute, or governness. Her career as a nun fell to ground after
a year in the convent. Returning home—to 36, rue des Tour-
nelles just off the northeast corner of Place des Vosges—she
settled in to host what became a fabled literary salon. And as
a fabled courtesan (she was determined not to marry), she
entertained many lovers, famous nobles as well as the priests
and bishops who denounced her from the Sunday pulpit, ob-

* Stacy Schiff, A Great Improvisation: Franklin, France, and the Birth of America.
  “The women of France . . . kept the salon, which was the equivalent of run¬
  ning the newspapers.”
                            The Marais                         I25

jecting more to the woman (and author, in her private hours)
who scorned organized religion than to Ninon the courte¬
san. Moliere wrote that “she has the keenest sense of the ab¬
surd of anyone I know.” His Les Precieuses Ridicules (The
Pretentious Young Ladies) mocked the idle chitchat of the sa¬
lons and their salonnards (sycophants). The pious Queen Anne
of Austria, mother of King Louis XIV, had Ninon locked up
in jail for a few months—actually, a convent—more for her
influence than her transgressive sexual mores. “Feminine vir¬
tue is nothing but a convenient masculine invention,” Ninon
observed. Her guests listened to her unconventional bon mots,
including the memoirist Saint-Simon, who took notes. When
Ninon died, she left money to Voltaire, whom she’d met when
he was a nine-year-old boy, to buy books.
   On late Sunday afternoons in all seasons, Parisian fami¬
lies gather and stroll in Place des Vosges, in summer finding
shade under the trees that surround the statue of Louis XIII,
the son of Henri IV. Dusk moves in and the cafes under the
arcades fill up. On weekday mornings, the square is almost
empty, except for the twittering swallows. It’s a lovely place
to sit and read Madame de Lafayette’s La Princesse de Cleves
(1678), the first significant French novel, its subject the adul¬
terous passion of a young Frenchwoman for another man, set
in the court of King Henry II, at Tournelles, before and after
his fatal jousting. Or for less serious history, the 1,500 letters
of Madame de Sevigne take you back to the heyday of the
gossipy and promiscuous salons (both her husband and son
were lovers of Ninon) when the intelligentsia and artists of
Paris first looked out over the magical square. Its founding bon
vivant would have adored it.
126                    THE RIGHT BANK




PARIS WA L K s    For more facts andfiction while walking through
this legendary quartier: 33.1.48.0^.21.40, www.paris-walks.com.

JARDIN SAINT-GILLES GRAND veneur                Via rue des Arque-
busiers or rue Villehardouin, through an archway, a two-minute
walk from Place des Vosges, to the northeast. In spring and sum¬
mer, this secret garden is framed by trellises of roses against a
background of elegant tall apartments. The crowds of travelers
afoot in the Marais are within neither sight nor sound. There is a
plaque in honor of Pauline Roland (i8o5—i852), socialist, teacher,
and feminist, who was imprisoned in Algeria for resisting Napo¬
leon Ill’s coup d’etat in i85i.

hotel SULLY        The main entrance is at 2, rue Saint-Antoine.
The mansion, the residence of Henri IV’s finance minister, the
due de Sully, has a pretty garden, with benches and orange trees
and no sound of the traffic on Saint-Antoine. In the southwest
corner is an excellent bookstore—Librairie des Monuments
Historiques—well-stocked with books about Paris (for ex¬
ample, Le Monde de Colette au Palais-Royal^. Open Tues—Sun.

Through an archway in the northeast corner is another entrance
to Place des Vosges.


PLACE DU MARCHE SAINTE-CATHERINE                   Walking west
along rue Saint-Antoine, almost opposite the Church of Saint-

Louis—Saint-Paul, turn right into rue Caron, which leads straight
into this small neighborhood square facing rue d’Ormesson. Nice
bistros and benches, under the trees.
■■■




                              -
                        ■
                            I1
                1
      [
          1 p
          PMfe .*.f!
          '         *
                            w &X
          JARDIN DLMUSEE CARNAVALET




    entrances: 23, rue de Sevigne; 16, rue des Francs-

        Bourgeois
    metro:S aint-Paul

    hours: Tues—Sun, 10—5:30.



O     nce inside the courtyard of Carnavalet you’re sur¬
       rounded by one of the most formidable historic build¬
ings in the Marais. Hotel Carnavelet (now a museum), built
in 1546 under the influence of the Italian Renaissance, over¬
looks the highly formal and symmetrical design of the small
French garden. The mansion has two wings at right angles to
it. The four reliefs on the main fa§ade opposite the entrance—
The Seasons—are the work of the Renaissance sculptor Jean
Goujon (1510—1564), admired by Bernini, who also carved
the decorations on the southwest side of the Corn Carree—
the “square courtyard” part of the Louvre palace—and on the
fafade of the salle—the reception room—on the ground floor
of the Louvre.
    The grounds of Carnavalet delighted Madame de Sevigne
(1626—1696), one of the greatest letter writers in French lit¬
erature, who lived in the hotel for the last twenty years of
her life and wrote many of her letters here, outdoors, in the
shadow of her residence.* “It is an admirable affair, we shall
all stay here and enjoy the fine air. Since it is impossible to
have everything, we shall have to dispense with parquet floors


* Madame de Sevigne, Selected Letters, trans. Leonard Tancock.

                                    129
130                         THE RIGHT BANK



and fashionable little stoves; but at least we have a fine court¬
yard, a beautiful garden, and nice little blue girls who are
most convenient.” (The “blue girls” were nuns who lived in a
convent in rue Sevigne       —   then called rue Sainte-Catherine—
where the Lycee Victor-Hugo now stands. They wore a blue
habit.)*
      Madame de Sevigne’s correspondence has, for more than
three centuries, received high praise for its range as well as
its style, an unusual mix of elegant and natural. An educated
woman, widely read in history, philosophy, religion, and the¬
ology as well as the French moralists Montaigne, Rabelais,
and her contemporaries Corneille, Moliere, La Fontaine, and
Pascal, she wrote to friends and family about the intrigues and
comedy of le grandsiecle, Paris under Louis XIV. But her main
subject was her obsessive love for her married daughter, who
lived in Provence, that distance the cause of her mother’s
mournful and repetitious confessions of love and longing. Be¬
cause she grew up in the Marais as an orphan—her parents
were dead by the time she was seven—one Madame de Sevi¬
gne biographer believes these childhood losses fueled her
morbid attachment to her own maternity.!" Another of her pet
subjects was health, protecting it, defending oneself against
inevitable hateful death as well as the horror of getting fat. A
regular at the spa at Vichy where she purged and sweated, she
had strong opinions on the importance of keeping the bow¬
els open—chocolate and coffee are recommended; of get¬
ting enough sleep; of not getting pregnant too often. Although
Saint-Simon found her “lovable” and “such excellent com¬
pany,” to her daughter’s husband, the opinionated Madame de

* Eric Hazan, The Invention of Paris: A History in Footsteps.
t Francine du Plessix Gray, “Mother Love: Madame de Sevigne,” in Adam and
Eve in the City: Selected Nonfiction.
                           The Marais                          131



Sevigne, who also offered contraceptive advice, was a mother-
in-law from hell. A practicing Catholic, she worshipped close
to home, at Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis, 99, rue Saint-Antoine, a
Jesuit church modeled on the Gesu in Rome.
   The interior of Musee Carnavalet and the adjoining Ho¬
tel le Peletier de Fargeau offer excellent exhibits about the
history of Paris. Madame de Sevigne’s apartments are re¬
constructed on the first floor, in room 21, with her writing
desk as well as portraits of her and her literary friends. After
her death, her uptight descendents sugarcoated some of her
letters before their publication, just as the prissy English
daughter of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu would “edit” her
mother’s brilliant Embassy Letters (1763), a correspondence
Voltaire rated superior to Madame de Sevigne’s.




L A TARTINE     rue du Roi de Sidle (rear entrance) or 24, rue de
Rivoli. A good old (\90c) cafe with political associations—the
Politburo met here—in this once radical neighborhood of arti¬
sans and workers. Rue du Roi de Sicile figures in a first-rate
novel set in pregentrification Marais during the Algerian War,

The Mark of the Angel by Nancy Huston ('999).


QUARTIER SAINT-PAUL—SAINT-GERVAIS                 South of Musee
Carnavalet. The quiet empty streets and hidden gardens between rue
Saint-Antoine and rue de Rivoli and the Seine offer much to enjoy:
rue des Barres, rue Pont Louis Philippe, rue Fran^ois-Miron,
the Maison Europeenne de la Photographic, rue de Fourcy, Mon—
Tues, 5—yWed—Sun, 11—8; www.mep-fr.org). The public library,

Bibliotheque Forney in Hotel de Sens, has a charming garden,
at 1, rue du Figuier, metro, Pont-Marie; Tues—Fri, 1:30—8:30.
                      <0