                  SQUARE RECAMIER




   entrance: rue de Sevres and rue Recamier

   metro: Sevres-Babylone

   hours: early morning—dusk



P   erhaps the best-kept secret of the city’s small squares,
     Square Recamier is hard to find. Off to the right as you
walk west on the north side of rue de Sevres, just past its in¬
tersection with rue des Saints-Peres, you’ll come upon the
narrow pedestrian rue Recamier (and its fine restaurant, Le
Recamier, where President and Mrs. Obama dined), which
leads directly to the square. A staircase under the drapery
of a pergola takes you down past a small waterfall and pool,
into a valley-like romantic space hung with the spreading
branches of trees, overgrown rhododendron, and rock gar¬
dens thick with ivy, myrtle, and, in season, white tulips and
buttercups. The surrounding architecture is as tasteful as the
garden. With its hidden-away corners and nooks where it’s
possible to sit unobserved from other parts of the square, it’s
also a discreet place.
   The square’s namesake, Juliette Recamier (1777—1849), is
remembered for her exquisite beauty and grace—her portrait
by David hangs in the Louvre; Gerard’s in the Carnavalet—
but most of all she is defined by her romantic “friendships”
which brought a certain frisson to the hermetic world of the
literary salon. Madame Recamier’s salon was the first one to
reopen its doors after the Revolution. Of all her admirers, it


                              65
66                           THE LEFT BANK



was Chateaubriand who offered the most passionate adora¬
tion. Every morning he wrote her a love letter: “In looking at
your divine beauty one feels transported, and it robs death of
its shadows of gloom.” Every afternoon he went to visit her.*
     Though she was Germaine de Stael’s closest woman friend,
and the model for the main character of her novel Corinne,
ou I’ltalie (1807), she was also the confidante of Benjamin
Constant, de Stael’s longtime lover. Their nasty breakup did
not destroy the bond between Constant and Julie.
     She lived at Abbaye au Bois, a large old building in rue
de Sevres overlooking a pretty garden, preserved today as
Square Recamier. She is described as “a small, delicate woman
with a timid, whispering voice; she adopted a manner at once
frigidly chaste and playfully coquettish.”’! she remained a vir¬
gin until her forties. When the afternoons spent flirting with
Chateaubriand eventually turned into passionate nights, the
liaison between them would last for the rest of her life.
     Napoleon exiled her from Paris for a time along with her
friend Germaine de Stael, who had disapproved loudly and
in print of his politics. “Women should stick to knitting,”
Napoleon responded. “Paris is . . . where I live. I don’t want
anyone there who doesn’t like me.”f




POILANE         8, rue Cherche-Midi. One of the oldest and best

Parisian bakeries, offering the legendary large round loaves of
brown bread, butter cookies, and nut rolls.



* Delia Austrian, Juliette Recamier.
f Francine du Plessix Gray, Madame de Stael: The First Modern Woman.
flbid.
                     Saint- Germain-des-Pres                   67



THEATRE     vieux-colombier          21, rue   Vieux-Colombier.
Part of the Comedie Francaise, a popular theater—where Sartre’s
No Exit was first performed in 1944—dedicated to contemporary
repertoire, with an inviting bar and old stage sets located in the
trliW




                   go! ■$!»$'&




        The Eiffel Tower at the western edge of the Champ de Mars
    entrance: place Joffre and avenue de la Motte Picquet,

        across from l’Ecole Militaire
    metro: Ecole Militaire

    hours: Open 24 hours



T     he Eiffel Tower, rising over the Seine at the western edge
       of this long slice of green, commemorates the shock
heard round the world in 1789, the storming of the Bastille
on July 14. Gustave Eiffel opened his Tower in 1889 in honor
of the centenary of the French Revolution, the most radical
and transformative political event in modern Western history.
    The Revolution’s first anniversary was celebrated here on
the vast expanse of Champ deMars—the “Martial Fields”—
also the setting, in 1794, for Robespierre’s first and only festi¬
val of the Supreme Being—Fete de lEtre Supreme. Having
outlawed Catholicism, the Revolutionary Convention pro¬
claimed “a deistic substitute for the Christian God” and as¬
sembled a procession of thousands to worship the “Author
of Nature.”* Citizens, soldiers, cavalry, politicians, starting
at the Tuileries, marched across the Seine and down the Left
Bank behind floats and bands and choruses to climb an arti¬
ficial mountain and declaim their patriotism at the altar to
the Supreme Being. Four generations later, in the same place,
Gustave Eiffel, an engineer of genius, “wrought a monument


* Frederick Brown, For the Soul of France: Culture Wars in the Age ofDreyfus.



                                      69
70                          THE LEFT BAIiK



to the god of scientific progress. Where the mountain had
stood, a tower rose.”* The Revolution’s bicentenary was com¬
memorated by the sculpture Monument des Droits de VHomme
et du Citoyen (.Monument to the Rights of Man and Citizens) in

the vicinity of La Bonbonniere de Laura et Marie and the
small cafe behind the children’s carousel toward the east end
of the field.
     Originally a local market garden, and later used for mil¬
itary exercises from the time of Louis XV to Napoleon,
Champ deMars now serves as a place to relax. Couples lie in
the grass, people read and sleep, children run, polite French
poodles jump, gardeners prune rosebushes—still blooming
in November—and in the bright pink light of an evening in
June, joggers jog along the bordering tree-lined paths. There’s
music on hot summer nights when the grass is crowded with
picnickers and the park stays open round the clock. Across
from l’Ecole Militaire on the eastern end—directly opposite
the Eiffel Tower—-the magnificent glass Peace Wall,l- incised
with messages of peace from all over the world, in many lan¬
guages, expresses hope for the world’s future. In the far dis¬
tance, more than a kilometer away, its lattice sides twinkling
with champagne lights after dusk, the Tower bears witness
to one man’s imagination and his century’s dream of progress.
     Nowadays Robespierre’s bloody reign feels remote to
the point of oblivion, as does the scorn that Gustave Eiffel
got for his troubles in 1889. The day his Tower opened, he
climbed the 2,731 steps to the top and unfurled the French
flag. But the protest against him and his iron marvel was bitter:
la Tour Eiffel was denounced as an “odious column of bolted

* Brown, For the Soul of France.
f Clara Halter and Jean-Michel Wilmotte, Peace Wall, www.murpourlapaix
  .org.
                       The Eiffel Tower and Environs               7i

metal.”* The protesting Parisians, artists in the main, pre¬
ferred their monuments carved in stone.




GARDENS        OF THE MUSEE         DU   QUAI    BRANLY     56, quai
Branly; Tues—Sun, 10—6:30; Thurs, until 9:30. The work of
architect Jean Nouvel, opened in 2000, the museum of ethnogra¬
phy and ethnology presents the art of Oceania, Asia, Africa, and
the Americas. The outdoor restaurant, Les Omhres, faces the
delightfully unmamcured gardens of tall grasses, bamboo, and
banana and palm trees. It also has views of the Eiffel Tower. A
footbridge, Passerelle Debilly, connects quai Branly to the Right

Bank.

AMERICAN CHURCH IN PARIS                 65, quai d’Orsay. The notice
board of this Protestant church and community center has all sorts
of useful information about events, concerts, and services for
English-speaking visitors, www.acparis.org.




* Brown, For the Soul of France.
             SQUARE SAN TIA G O DU CHILI




    entrance: boulevard de la Tour-Maubourg and rue

        Grenelle
    metro: La Tour-Maubourg

    HOURS: dawn to dusk




P    erhaps the greenest and sweetest-smelling grass in Paris
      early on a June morning after a night of steady rain cov¬
ers this small triangle of a square; on such a morning it feels
almost preternaturally alive. It’s surrounded by the wide
lawns of the Esplanade of Les Invalides, and from its benches
you face the gleaming and elegant Eglise du Dome. Though
it’s bordered by boulevard de la Tour-Maubourg and rue
Grenelle and a few bistros, somehow the square is an oasis
of peace. The particular brightness of the summer morning
light—the feeling of sky and openness—tells you the Seine
is near, even if you don’t know it from a map.
    The most compelling attraction is the sculpted bust of An¬
toine de Saint-Exupery (1900—1944). One of the first profes¬
sional airplane pilots at the age of twenty-six, Saint-Exuperys
renowned, most indelible gift to France was his writing.
His books are now classics of French and world literature.
Some draw on his flying experiences: Southern Mail, Wind,
Sand and Stars, Night Flight, Flight to Arras.* He wrote his
best-known work, The Little Prince, in New York while in

* Antoine de Saint-Exupery, Wartime Writings 1939—1944. Introduction by Anne
  Morrow Lindbergh.



                                    73
74                          THE LEFT BAM



exile during the German Occupation. According to biogra¬
pher Stacy Schiff, he was about as unconventional as only a
great man can be: an adventurer who loved the natural
world and discovering new places despite the danger. He
was also a visionary for whom the interior life, private,
mysterious, inexhaustible, was the most significant of all
human experiences.*
     The bust is placed here because when he wasn’t in the air
or in the African desert, Saint-Exupery lived nearby, in rue
de Chanaleilles, and later in an art deco apartment at 15, place
Vauban (marked with a plaque), at the rear of Les Invalides,
near the entrance to the museum—a short walk south along
boulevard de la Tour-Maubourg and left into avenue de Tour-
ville. Though he belonged to the literary community of Saint-
Germain, drinking and talking and writing at Che^Lipp and
Deux Magots, he felt himself an outsider in Paris and disliked
what he considered the “small world” of the capital’s cultural
elites. To sit in this pretty square (named for the Chilean em¬
bassy, which is nearby) and read Schiff’s superb book about
this brave and complicated man—“he lived so much tangled
up in paradox”—is to come close to an enigmatic pilgrim soul
and thereby to the interior heart of the city he both loved
and hated.
     It’s fine, too, to just sit and smell the grass and flowers
under the wide blue sky.




CHURCH GARDEN OF SAINT-JEAN                   Evangelical Lutheran
church 14J, rue de Grenelle. The small lovely flower gardens—


* Stacy Schiff, Saint-Exupery: A Biography.
                    The Eiffel Tower and Environs                 75

and benches and trees—extend around the church, providing
another oasts in which its hard to believe there’s a city just beyond
the front courtyard. The only sound comes through the windows
of the school buildings behind the church. Sometimes the chil¬
dren sing.
                                                         c&/U&




   entrances: from Gare Montparnasse; or from place des

      Cinq Martyrs du Lycee Buffon
   metro: Montparnasse

   hours: daily, 8:30—9:30



A    garden has been planted on the roof of one of the larg¬
     est train stations in Paris. It’s laid out on a long concrete
slab that has been transformed into an ingenious green oasis
with a maritime theme, since the trains from Gare Montpar¬
nasse run to the Atlantic coast and Brittany. Walking south
down the central lawn, you have the choice of spending time
in a forest of five hundred trees—weeping willows, pines,
oaks, and evergreens—and plants—holly, yew, ferns, and
hostas—or sitting inside the sand dunes area, among the reeds
and tall wild grasses moving in the wind, just as you’d find
on the French Atlantic coast. Most incredible—since the
tracks of a huge train station are just below—is the Room of
Silence or the Garden for Meditation. Or if you prefer the
sounds of nature, there are small waterfalls and fountains in
the Room of Moisture. Teenagers hang out on the sun deck,
near a few tennis courts and Ping-Pong tables. Each of the
thematic gardens has an originality sparked by the imagina¬
tion and boldness of architects Francis Brun and Michel
Pena, who opened the 8.5 acres of Jardin Atlantique in 1994.
   At the north end, back toward the stairway leading
down to the station, is an informative and moving memorial
to French courage. First, the Musee Jean-Moulin covers the

                               77
78                           THE LEFT BAN^K



French Resistance to the German Occupation (1940—1944),
using documentary evidence connected with its greatest hero,
Jean Moulin (1899—1943), an agent from Charles de Gaulle’s
London-based Free French, who unified the many secret
networks into the ragged army of the French Resistance. In
1943, he was captured and tortured by the notorious Klaus
Barbie, who beat him to death. “He who knew everything
betrayed nothing,” as his sister put it.* Andre Malraux’s speech
upon the transfer of Moulin’s ashes to the Pantheon in 1964
is one of the most famous and powerful in French history.!"
The museum is located in Montparnasse because it was
Moulin’s favorite quartier. an artist himself who had an
apartment and many artist-friends in the neighborhood, he
spent a lot of time in its cafes and his friends’ homes.
     The highly informative Memorial of the Liberation of
Paris focuses on Marechal Philippe Leclerc, the leader of the
French Second Armored Division, who, with his American
allies, won the fight for the Liberation of Paris in 1944 and
made Gare Montparnasse his headquarters during the days
before the final victory on August 25. It was here, too, that
General von Choltitz, commander of the German army of
Occupation, signed the cease-fire agreement.




TOUR MONTPARNASSE                 Open every day, g:jo—n. Entrance
on rue de I’Arrivee, in front of the Gare Montparnasse. The lift
to the top—the fifty-sixth floor—ofthe city’s tallest building takes

thirty-eight seconds, ending in an unforgettable panoramic overview

* Patrick Marnham, Resistance and Betrayal: The Death and Life of the Greatest
 Hero of the French Resistance.

f www.oocities.org/resistancehistory/malraux.
                  Montparnasse and Southern Paris                  79

ofthe city’s parks and squares, the sparkling Seine, the white lines of
boulevards, the spires and domes and palaces. Through headphones,
the chansons of Josephine Baker, Charles Trenet, Georges Bras-
sens, Jacques Brel, Mistinguett, and others accompany the view.
Beyond the walls of photographs ofthe bridges and hotels ofParis,
there’s an open-air terrace.

RUE DE LA GAITE         Since the eighteenth century, this has been
the street of popular commercial theaters, cabarets, and dance halls:
for instance, the Bobino music hall; la Gaite, where Colette per¬
formed; and Theatre Montparnasse.

RUE DELAMBRE           Where Gauguin lived in a hotel, leads into
place Pablo Picasso and boulevard Montparnasse, the cross¬
roads where from the terrace of he Dome (one of Sartre and de
Beauvoir’s favorite cafes) you can see Rodin’s Balzac on a pedestal
across boulevard Montparnasse under trees.
Sculpture Garden, Musee Zadkine