Parc des Buttes-Chaumont
   entrances: rue Manin; rue Botzaris

   metro: Botzaris; Buttes-Chaumont

   hours: daily, 7—dusk, according to the season



M    onsieur Alphand had his work cut out for him when
      Haussmann and Napoleon III directed him to transform
the foul terrain in eastern Paris into a scenic garden that
would become Buttes-Chaumont. And once again the genius
landscape engineer/architect pulled off an inspired metamor¬
phosis. Today Buttes-Chaumont is one of the city’s most pop¬
ular parks, where sprawling and picnicking on the grass is
permitted to weekending crowds from all over the city. Some
visitors are aware that in an earlier life the park served as a
quarry for gypsum—plaster of Paris—as well as a garbage
dump. But its function in preceding centuries is less widely
known. Historian Colin Jones evokes the long-ago horror of
the countryside around what is now Buttes-Chaumont: in
the Middle Ages, as far to the west as Place du Colonel-Fabien,
this land was the site of the gibbet of Montfaucon:


   Established by Saint Louis (1223—yo) as a sign of royal
  justice over the city, . . . the gibbet was ... an elaborate
   stone structure with some 16columns, each ten meters high.
   From it literally scores of decaying criminals’ bodies could
   be hanging at any time. The gibbet was a place of execu¬
   tion in its own right, but also the place of exhibition of the
   remains of individuals tortured and executed in one of the

                                 9
192                        THE RIGHT BANK



      many execution sites in Paris. . . . Bodies could be left
      therefor two or three years or more, at the end ofwhich time,
      crows and (in bad times) wolves having done their worst—
      they were a gruesome sight, and their noisome stench wafted
      towards the Faubourg du Temple. ... In its garbage dump
      years, this landscape also fed a plump army of rats, who
      could strip a corpse to its skeleton within 24 hours. *


      These days Buttes-Chaumont is considered a “legendary
paradise,” as poet Louis Aragon put it, “a vast expanse of
kitschy pleasures”—Colin Jones again—a “romantic” and
“fairy-tale-like park,” in various guidebooks. Wandering the
three miles of walking paths, up and down the gentle hills
beneath the cedars of Lebanon, past a grotto with a waterfall,
you’ll come to a lake with a huge rock above it, which in turn
is topped by a mock Corinthian temple: there are good views
of Montmartre and Saint-Denis from up here. You can cross
the lake on a suspension bridge or on the Pont des Suicides.
There’s also a children’s carousel, a few cafes and the pop¬
ular Rosa Bonheur restaurant/ginguette, open for dancing,
eating, and drinking (Wed—Sun until midnight), even when
the park is closed. Rosa Bonheur (1822—1899) was the most
famous female French painter of the nineteenth century ( The
Horse Fair hangs in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New
York City), scorned in her day for wearing pants, smoking
cigarettes, and enjoying the company of women.
      Many tourists do not make it out this far from the city
center, but the robust and exuberant Julia Child (with her
husband, Paul) found her way, on foot, early in her time as a
Parisian:


* Colin Jones, Pans, The Biography of a City.
                  Around Bastille and Northeastern Paris              193


    Paris was wonderfully walkable. . . . one could easily hike
    from the Place de la Concorde to the top of Montmartre in
    a half-hour. . . . One cold afternoon just before New Year’s,
    Paul and I strolled up to the Buttes-Chaumont park. At
    the top of the hill, by the little Greek temple, we looked back
    at Sacre-Coeur on Montmartre, now silhouetted through
    layers of mist by the declining sun. ... *


Then they retired to a nearby cozy bistro, complete with
cats, dogs, neighborhood characters, and two monkeys squeal¬
ing and chattering.
    In the streets bordering the park today, there are a number
of ethnic bistros and cafes, including L’Estampe at 74, rue de
Botzaris. In the picturesque Mouzaia District (named for a
place in Algeria)—between Buttes-Chaumont and Square de
la Butte-du- Chapeau-Rouge—in the streets around rueMiguel-
Hidalgo and rue de Mouzaia, you can imitate the indefatigable
Julia, who loved to “intentionally wander off the beaten path”
all over the city and no doubt discovered these pedestrian
cobbled streets of terraced villas and small gardens of fruit
trees and flowers, perhaps en route to the Danube metro.




PARC DE LA VILLETTE                 North of Buttes-Chaumont; metro,
Porte de Pantin near the avenue Jean-Jaures southern entrance,
with its good Information center to help you get the lay of Villette’s
vast lawns and many buildings. The park goes on and on for miles,
past one innovative themed garden after another—the Garden of
Mirrors, of Dunes, of Winds, of Shadows, of Dragons (with a


* Julia Child, My Life in France.
194                     THE RIGHT BANK



dragon slide), all joined together by the Promenade des Jardins. Other
highlights (near the southern entrance) include the Conservatoire
de Paris,- the Musee de la Musique, with five floors ofiinstruments,
an overview ofithe history of IVestern music, and special exhibits—
Chopins bicentennial tribute in 2010 was superb; the Cafe de la
Musique; and the Cite de la Mu sique auditorium, featuring great
concerts and performers (www.cite-musique.fr). The huge Cite
des Sciences et de VIndustrie, like a number ofithe other buildings,
rises above abandoned abattoirs: La Villette was originally the
site ofi the city’s main slaughterhouse.

PARC de BELLEVILLE           Metro, Belleville. Walk from boule¬
vard de Belleville, the bustling, gritty hub ofiartists, students, and
immigrant residents from the Middle East, Africa, and Asia, up
the hill ofi rue de Belleville (no J2 is the legendary birthplace ofi
Edith Pia£), turn right into rue Piaf, and keep climbing, bear¬
ing right at the top toward the park’s welcoming panorama, a
higher overview ofi Paris than from Montmartre. Descending the
steep paths and steps, beneath arches ofi wisteria, you’ll come into
the lower park meadow, unforgettable in June when the roses are
in bloom, the neighborhood children run free, and people relax on
the grass. The streets around the park give a sense ofi a contempo¬
rary Paris not to be had elsewhere: the ateliers, squats, and exhibits

ofi artists in rue Ramponeau,- the studios and work spaces in rue
des Couronnes, with access to the rose gardens. Further downhill
is the Couronnes metro.
                 fc




Pere-Lachaise Cemetery
    entrances: boulevard de Menilmontant (maps of the

         cemetery are for sale); avenue du Pere-Lachaise; rue
         de la Roquette; rue de la Reunion
    metro: Pere-Lachaise; Gambetta; Philippe Auguste

    hours: Easter—Sept, 8—6; Oct—Easter, 8—dusk



C     olette (1873—1954), ecstatic lover of nature, would ap¬
       prove mightily of her final resting place. There are twelve
thousand trees in Pere-Lachaise Cemetery, avenues of cy¬
presses, sycamores, tall, ancient chestnuts, a thick sheltering
green roof over the cemetery’s 105 acres of unspoiled beauty.
Flowers are planted around the graves, some garlanding the
monuments, symbolizing perpetual affection for the dead.
“Throughout my existence,” Colette wrote not long before
she died, “I have studied flowering more than any other man¬
ifestation of life. It is there, for me, that the essential drama
resides, and not in death, which is just a banal defeat.”*
    Among the 300,000 men and women buried in Paris’s
largest cemetery are icons of a prodigious flowering of French
civilization who inspired a cultural reverence for that flow¬
ering in science, philosophy, politics, and especially the
arts—the writers, painters, sculptors, singers, composers, and
cineastes who make us love life more. Time spent in Pere-
Lachaise quickens that love. There’s no hurry here, no dis¬
tractions. You can stroll the silent hillsides, follow the long,

* Colette, “The Ripening Seed,” quoted in Judith Thurman, Secrets of the
 Flesh: A Life of Colette.

                                  197
198                       THE RIGHT BANK



winding cobbled paths, stirred to your depths as you sud¬
denly come upon the graves of Proust and Wilde, Delescluze,
Daumier, and Poulenc. You can stop midway at a bench along
a steep avenue to contemplate this landscape of memory.
Memory, said Gertrude Stein: the only true immortality. (Her
grave is at the eastern edge of avenue Circulate?)
      From the heights of Pere-Lachaise, you see on your map
that Chopin lies down the hill, near the center, not far from
Colette, or from another of George Sand’s lovers, Alfred de
Musset. Delacroix (under black lava) is to the west, his artistic
style—a striving for a surprising violent exotic beauty*—
the romantic painter’s version of his beloved Chopin’s ro¬
mantic music. Balzac, another friend of Delacroix, and another
genius of that great nineteenth-century artistic explosion,
rests in the same section. Again in the vicinity of Colette’s
flower-strewn black granite are the lovers Heloise (1101—1164)
and Abelard (1079—1142), together in death, in eternal defi¬
ance of the ecclesiastical powers that forced them apart in
life. Their bodies were moved into Pere-Lachaise—along with
Moliere and La Fontaine—in an effort to attract the impor¬
tant dead to what was a remote section of Paris when the cem¬
etery was opened by Napoleon in 1804. In the seventeenth
century the land had belonged to the Jesuits, who called it
Mont Louis-, the prominent Jesuit Francis de la Chaise d’Aix,
confessor to Louis XIV, lived here and retired to a splendid
country house on Mont Louis. Supposedly, the simpatico
confessor and the young king-to-be watched the civil revolt
called the Fronde (1649-1652) from here (“the hill of Char-
onne”), that traumatic vigil the source of the Sun King’s life¬
long fear and hatred of the mob (the frondeurs), which would


* Umberto Eco, ed. History of Beauty.
                  Around Bastille and Northeastern Paris      199


eventually drive him to abandon Paris and move the royal
court to Versailles.
    The cemetery’s associations with—and proximity to—
political violence did not disappear in le grande siecle. Two
hundred years later, the Paris Communards, in rebellion
against the remnant Versailles government of Napoleon Ill’s
autocratic regime, made their last stand here among the tomb¬
stones (and in the nearby streets of Menilmontant, Charonne,
and Belleville). Finally subdued on May 28, 1871, 147 rebels
were rounded up and shot against the eastern perimeter wall;
the corpses of another thousand Communards were dumped
in pits against the same wall. Today the Mur des Federes—
the Wall of the Communards—to the right and down a few
steps off avenue Circulaire—is a site of annual pilgrimage to
commemorate the bravery of the working classes and the sav¬
agery of a government terrified of popular revolt.* Now clas¬
sified as a national historical monument, the Wall is always
decorated with the flowers and wreaths left by pilgrims who
arrive in all seasons. (The autumn foliage is beautiful here.)
    In the same corner of the cemetery, opposite the Wall, are
the memorials to the murdered Resistants and the victims of
the deportations to the Nazi labor and death camps in World
War II. Buried close to the Resistants is Edith Piaf (1915—1963),
native of Belleville, where she grew up homeless and starv¬
ing until her voice reached her natural audience, the ordinary
workers and marginalized poor of Paris. Hers is the most
visited grave in this campo santo.
    The Dutch filmmaker Heddy Honigmann’s documentary
Forever unfolds an elegaic profile of the consoling beauty of
Pere-Lachaise. Some last words of Colette’s resonate with


* Colin Jones, Paris: The Biography of a City.
200                    THE RIGHT BANK



the film’s muted joy: “What a wonderful life I’ve had. I only
wish I’d realized it sooner.”




JARDIN NATUREL         At 120, rue de la Reunion and a few steps
from the Reunion exit from the cemetery; metro, Alexandre Du¬
mas; open 7:jo—5:jo. The city created this nature reserve as an
educational resource for neighborhood schoolchildren who study
the ecosystem here. There are woods, a pond with water lilies, fish,
dragonflies, frogs, all sorts of insects. With two hundred varieties
of plants and singing birds fluttering through woods dense with
laurel and spirea, this is a man-made haven for nature lovers and

people watchers.


LIB R AIRIE EQUIPAGES         6i, rue de Bagnolet. To the right from

rue de la Reunion, a smallish but good bookstore with helpful

service.


LE merle MOQUEUR           51, rue de Bagnolet. A large bookstore
with a strong childrens section that hosts readings and discus¬
sion groups; information: www.lemerlemocquer.fr. Rue de Bagnolet
and the streets between it and the cemetery have a warm, small-town
intimacy.


CEMETERY OF EGLISE SAINT-GERMAIN DE CHARONNE

in, rue de Bagnolet (on Place Saint-Blaise); metro, Gambetta.
From place Gambetta walk down rue Stendhal and descend the
staircase alongside pretty houses; from the square in front of the
church (fifteenth century, though the first church on this site dates

from the ninth), you will see the entrance to the cemetery, a bucolic
sanctuary on a hill of cherry trees in April as well as flower¬

ing shrubbery. You re in the ancient village of Charonne, still a
               Around Bastille and Northeastern Paris          201


countryside-within-the-city. From the cemetery, bear left onto
rue de Bagnolet and continue to Jardin Debrousse, 148, rue de
Bagnolet, a sprawling riot of bright flowers and schoolchildren
on weekday afternoons. These are the remaining grounds of the
Chateau de Bagnolet estate, originally twice the sfe of Pere-
Lachaise. Farther along rue de Bagnolet is metro Porte de Bagnolet.