Section: La Promenade Plantée

      '•; • >•*>J
SMMIlIM&:
. h t'VjV;
V/
             <lamc/




   entrance: up a stairway or lift at the intersection of rue

      Ledru-Rollin and avenue Daumesnil, south of the
      Bastille opera house
   metro: Bastille; Ledru-Rollin

   HOURS: Mon-Sat, 9-7




M    y Parisian friends prefer New York City’s High Line
      to their own Coulee Verte, the first of the abandoned
railroad viaducts transformed in the 1990s into a landscaped
walkway above the streets of a big city. The newer High Line
is wider than the Promenade Plantee, more open to the wind
off the Hudson River, the plantings more diverse. Walking
the Promenade from Bastille to the Jardin de Reuilly—a mid¬
way point—you have a sense of enclosure, of feeling protected
along this lush corridor of flowering cherry trees, spirea,
jasmine, quince. A still place, except for the play of shadows
and sunlight or the slow movement of walkers, the Prome¬
nade provides plenty of benches for taking a break and en¬
joying the views: the small rooftop gardens of the apartments
to the north that face the walkway, and the architectural
facades to the south. (Cinephiles may recognize the Prome¬
nade as a romantic setting in Before Sunset.) Like a secular
outdoor cloister walk that goes somewhere—as far as the
Bois de Vincennes if you stay the three-mile course—the Prom¬
enade in early evening has a meditative calm. As you pass a

                              169
170                   THE RIGHT BANK



solo jogger, or parents pushing a stroller, or couples (Julie
Delpy and Ethan Hawke look-alikes), you overhear soft ex¬
changes and laughter floating in the air, which, because of the
lush vegetation, can be buggy on a warm summer night. But
bugs and all, there’s something thrilling about this overview
of the streets of northeastern Paris, the home ground of les
classes dangereuses. So much tumultuous history erupted in
these quartiers below the old railroad tracks (part of the Paris-
Cherbourg line). The political uproars and retreats of the ar-
rondissements of northeastern Paris come closer to the actual
character of the city—its multiple faces and voices—than the
tamed tourist areas to the west. Looking down, you can imag¬
ine your own scenarios, the atrocities of poverty and injustice
that once made these streets the cradle of revolution. You’re
also walking above the inevitable urban gentrification—or
boboisation (bourgeois boheme)—the designer cafes and arty
boutiques inside the sixty arches of the Viaduc des Arts, the
underbelly of Avenue Daumesnil. Patrons of these hot spots
may not be aware of the uncivil past of the twelfth ar-
rondissement.




JARDIN DE REUILLY         An inviting meadow of grass and trees,
azalea and rhododendron, midway along the Promenade Plantee,
where, after work, at first sign of spring, the neighborhood takes
to the lawns. A popular green space with a strong, warm pulse. Head
for the Reuilly metro if you’ve had enough promenading.


BISTRO DU PEINTRE         116, Ledru-Rollin, at the Bastille end
of the Promenade, on the corner of rue de Charonne. Named for

Alexandre Ledru-Rollin, a nineteenth-century radical leftist law-
                 Around Bastille and Northeastern Paris               171


yer who owned property in the area. The cafe-restaurant hasn’t
changed since it opened in 1902 to the artists and artisans—
carpenters, cabinetmakers, ironworkers, blacksmiths—of the elev¬
enth and twelfth arrondissements. Entering, what catches your eye
first is the triptych of mirrors over the long fine bar; the incised glass
behind it, the woodwork, its swirling carvings, the frescoes and little
angels and nymphs in fields of flowers on the stucco ceiling—all of
it original. Walter Benjamin noted the effect of glass:


    Paris is a city of mirrors. The asphalt of its roadways
    smooth as glass, and at the entrance to all bistros glass
    partitions. A profusion of windowpanes and mirrors
    in cafes, so as to make the inside brighter and to give
    all the tiny nooks and crannies, into which Parisian
    taverns separate, a pleasing amplitude.*


 The small dining rooms, on two floors, serve basic bistro fare; the
service is smooth, kind to the stranger.



square raoul nordling                     Next to the old Eglise Sainte-
Marguerite (metro, Charonne), just off rue Charonne between rue
Saint-Bernard and Charriere. A melancholy space dedicated to
the memory of Raoul Nordling, the Swedish ambassador who, in
 1944, persuaded the German General Choltit% to ignore Hitler’s
order to blow up Paris. Other gardens along these majelike back
streets of artisans, artists, boulangeries, andfine old facades and
doorways are the communal Jardin Nomade Saint-Bernard (Sat—
Sun, 11—j, in spring), at the corner of rue Charles Delesclu^e and
rue Trousseau; and the busy Square Trousseau on rue du Fau¬

bourg Saint-Antoine.

* Walter Benjamin, The Arcades Project.
172                    THE RIGHT BANK



PARC de bercy        Metro, Bercy. A newish modern park on the
grounds of the old wine warehouses of the Right Bank. On the
south terrace, the twenty-one sculptures hy RachidKhimoun, Les
Enfants du Monde, line either side of the Simone de Beauvoir
footbridge, which crosses the Seine to the Bibliotheque Nationale
Mitterand with its interior garden modeled after a pine grove.
Cinephiles visiting Paris could make Bercy their sole destination
and be happy: the Cinematheque Fran^aise at 5i, rue de Bercy,
the city'sfilm institute, showsfilms all day, every day, except Tues¬
day, from its collection of forty thousand plus films, the largest
in the world, on the four screens ofits multiplex. There’s a museum,
with special exhibits—a first-rate one about Georges Melies (1861—
1938), the father of special effects, ran in spring 2008—a cafe,
bookshop, andfilm library (www.cinematheque.fr). Outside, the
wide lawns, like most Paris parks, are covered with people on week¬
ends. The childrens carousel plays Bach s Brandenburg concertos.
The gardens to the east, dedicated to the assassinated Israeli prime
minister Yitqhak Rabin, are beautifully designed and varied—
tulips, roses, pansies, an unearthly birch grove, an orangerie,
majestic trees, rock gardens, bird sanctuaries. Don’t miss the high
curving staircases over the roadway at the far eastern end, leading
to more gardens.
        BOIS DE VINCENNES: PARC FLORAL




    entrances: 283, avenue de Daumesnil; avenue de Paris

        at the Vincennes metro
    metro: Chateau de Vincennes; Porte-Doree; Porte de

        Charenton; buses 46 and 86
    hours: summer, 9:30-8; winter, 9:30—dusk



    No large modern city has been so fortunate as Paris in keeping its
    surrounding woodland... In the twelfth century these woods were
    as wild as the far Sierras and filled with wolves, bear, and leaping
    stags. *



T     he Bois de Vincennes began, like the Bois de Boulogne
       to the west, as a royal hunting ground in the twelfth cen¬
tury. The thirteenth-century King (later Saint) Louis IX, as
first judge of the realm, famously met his subjects and heard
their cases under an oak tree in the Vincennes forest: “Seated
on a scarlet blanket, dressed in a simple coat of wool but with
a cap of peacock feathers, [he] delivered decisions without
concern for wealth or social rank.’fi (The oak tree turns up
in many histories, but few mention the wolves.) The saintly
Louis (canonized in 1297) walked back and forth between
Vincennes—in the southeast of the city—and Paris. In both
places he built a chapel. La Sainte-Chapelle on the lie de la Cite
remains today, a reliquary shrine of blue and flaming ruby-
colored glass, its relic—the Crown of Thorns—now missing.


* Allan Temko, Notre-Dame of Paris.
| Andre Maurois, A History of France.

                                        T75
17 6                    THE RIGHT BANK



(Louis had bought it after one of his enthusiastic crusades
against the heretics in the East.) The royal chapel he built at
Vincennes has been under restoration for years.
       The main attraction for travelers who don’t have time to
roam the historic woods in search of Louis’s oak (the Bois de
Vincennes is three times larger than Central Park) is Parc
Floral (www.parcfloraldeparis.com). It has been called the
most beautiful flower garden in Paris. Hundreds of species
flourish here: a garden of orchids from early March, a dahlia
garden in fall, a garden of water lilies and lotus, a forest of
camellias, a vast wavelike display of tulips from April on,
fields of irises, azaleas, and rhododendrons in May. It’s an
enchanting garden, seventy-five acres of color and fragrance,
with trees reaching toward the sky. Rilke’s pantheistic hymn
to “the treetops, like a rising from the dead” rings true. In
summer, there are free evening outdoor jazz concerts in the
park, close by the lovely Lac des Minimes, where you can
feed the ducks or dine in the island restaurant. Farther away
you can rent boats on Lac Daumesnil. The stark pine forests
of Parc Floral, shot through with flashes of sunlight across
the smooth forest floor, are popular with picnickers and fam¬
ilies. The breezes are bracing, making clear why Vincennes
to the east of the city and Boulogne to the west are called
“the lungs of Paris.”
       Other attractions are the royal medieval buildings on the
grounds of the chateau—a prison (where the Marquis de Sade
dreamed of Petrarch’s Laure), a castle, a fortress, ramparts, an
arsenal of cannon for the defense of Paris—occupied by the
Germans during World War II. As they withdrew from
the castle in August 1944, they shot twenty-six members of
the Resistance and set fire to some of the ancient buildings.
As you walk the long and dusty courtyard of the military
                      Around Bastille and Northeastern Paris         177



grounds today, you notice there is nothing growing any¬
where, not one blade of grass.
    Head lor the Parc Floral. Or return to the far end of the
Promenade Plantee and head back, in the footsteps of King
Louis,* to the city center.




BUDDHIST TEMPLE                 Southwest of Parc Floral, across several
roads, on the southern side of Lac Daumesnil near the Porte Doree
metro, there’s a Buddhist center, with a Tibetan temple, a pagoda,
and a Vietnamese chapel. Open spring and summer only; infor¬
mation: 01.43.41.54.48. Boating on Lac Daumesnil, you think
you’re in the countryside. There’s a cafe on one of the islands.




*For the full story of Louis IX and his purchase of the Crown of Thorns—
 from a Venetian pawnbroker—see Ina Caro’s “Sainte Chapelle in Paris,” in
 Paris to the Past.
Square Maurice-Gardette, in Uon^ieme—
     the eleventh—arrondissement