                  JARDIN DES TUIJUERIES



    entrances: rue de Rivoli; place de la Concorde; the
        Louvre; the Solferino footbridge from Musee d’Orsay
    metro: Tuileries; Concorde; Palais-Royal
    hours: daily, 7:30—7


W        hether you walk west to east or east to west—the
          preferable route, along the “grand axis” in the direc¬
tion of the obelisk in Place de la Concorde, the Champs-Elysees,
and the Arc de Triomphe—the garden of the Tuileries of cen¬
tral Paris has survived a history of violence such as you would
never imagine from the perspective of today’s fastidiously
groomed flower beds and treescapes.
    Once the private preserve of royal families, the garden
displays a dazzling formal design decorated with gleaming
white sculptures of mythological and historical celebrities.
You can spend hours here, people-watching from a bench next
to the lovely statue Nymph, promenading along the many
graveled paths, thinking back to, say, Henry IV, who walked
here, edgy with premonition, the night before he was mur¬
dered, or Marie Antoinette, who also strolled anxiously after
1789 when she was imprisoned in the Tuileries palace: one
night she escaped, only to get lost in in the unmapped city
she’d never set foot in on her own.*
    The more than one thousand trees—linden, sycamore, pine,
palm, maple, clipped horse chestnut, boxed orange—provide


* Graham Robb, Parisians: An Adventure History of Paris.
                                      07
io8                   THE RIGHT BANJ!



ample shade and breezes. The basins are ringed with chairs.
You can watch the children navigating boats with long
poles, or, alongside the northern terrace—La Terrasse des
Feuillants—delighting in the trampoline facing the statue of
the brilliant author of fairy tales Charles Perrault (1628—
1703), his Puss ’n Boots character tucked in to his side. Bright
flowers decorate the lawns, a sweeping green, luminous un¬
der the wide spray of fountains. Cafes, inside the deep green¬
ery of chestnut groves, offer shade and decent food; the cafe
on La Terrasse de Pomone faces a pool of water lilies with a
statue of Daphne pursued by Apollo; in the southwestern
corner of the “riverside” terrace overlooking the Seine
(where the imprisoned Marie Antoinette and the dauphin
used to walk), the Orangerie displays Monet's Water Lilies,
a kind of homage to the beauty of the city and of the world
(daily, except Tues, 12:30—7; Fri, 12:30—9).
      Originally owned and occupied by the city’s tile manu¬
facturers in the thirteenth century, the site of the tile works—
tuileries in French—was bought by Franpois I in 1517. It

was his daughter-in-law, Catherine de Medicis, who, as the
grieving widow of Henri II, claimed the property for her¬
self. The niece of a pope and daughter of a Florentine banker,
Catherine loved elaborate gardens in the style of the Italian
Renaissance popular in sixteenth-century Florence. Al¬
though the Tuileries Garden has since known many different
configurations—Andre Le Notre (1633—1700), the great land¬
scape artist, designed both Versailles and the Tuileries we see
today—it was a grieving Medici queen mother who first es¬
tablished the lavish garden, with a palace thrown in on the
side, in the heart of the capital. Paris disliked her extravagance:
Ronsard (1524-1585), the “prince of poets,” put it this way:
                    The Champs-Elysees and Environs                 109



    The queen must cease building; Her lime must stop swal¬
    lowing our wealth. . . . Of what use is her Tuileries to us l
    Of none, Moreau: it is but vanity. *


    Like Catherine herself, the Tuileries’ history during her
reign as queen dowager was tempestuous. Strolling under the
lindens one August afternoon in 1572, the fanatically Catholic
Catherine is reputed to have discussed, planned, and given
the signal for the Saint Bartholomew’s Day Massacre on
August 24. With her approval, fifteen thousand Protestants
were slaughtered in a frenzy of religious hatred, their bodies
hacked to death around the Louvre, the Tuileries, and the
French countryside. Catherine’s pathetic son, King Charles
IX, looked on from his window in the Louvre: “Kill them
all! Kill them all!” he criedd In Rome, the triumphant pope
ordered a Te Deum sung. Two centuries later, during the
Terror, the garden witnessed the massacre of the Tuileries
palace’s Swiss Guards. In 1871, the Paris Commune burned
the palace to the ground: it was never rebuilt. But the garden,
the oldest and largest public green space in Paris, has survived
for almost five centuries.
    Just inside the entrance at Place de la Concorde—“one of
the true wonders of the world,” in the words of Ina Caro’s Paris
to the Past—to the left of the large octagonal basin, the statue
of Le Silence stands out from the crowd, as if coolly contem¬
plating the passage of time. A sensual and graceful figure, her
dispassionate gaze registers the garden’s mortal haunted
beauty, its bloody history buried under the linden trees.


* Robert J. Knecht, The French Renaissance Court.
flbid.
IIO                       THE RIGHT BANJC



      These days, there’s no anguish here, no fights, no argu¬
ments, no noise. The crowds of spring and summer are full of
smiles and kissing couples; no one seems in a hurry. You can
imagine Edith Wharton and her lover, Morton Fullerton,
who in the early twentieth century sat on a terrace above
the Seine, long after Marie Antoinette walked in the same
spot, under the same trees. “He said ‘My love! My darling!’
How happy I was!’ ” Wharton later wrote. “Never had we
been happier. . . . Blissful hours.”*




GALIGNANI           224, rue de Rivoli. The Galignani family, which
began publishing in i5zo in Italy, is now the legendary owner of
the first English-language bookshop established on the continent,
in business at this location since i856. A fine interior ofdark wood
paneling shelves fiction, politics, art history, travel, and many
titles published in America and England and translated into
French.

Angelina’s          Next to Galignani, at 226, rue de Rivoli. The
crowded tea room, beloved ofParisians and travelers for its choc-

olat chaud and Mont Blanc, faces the Tuileries through the arches
of rue de Rivoli.


CHURCH      OF SAINT-GERMAIN l’aUXERROIS                Walk east
through the Tuileries, past the Louvre and its oldest part, the
beautiful Cour Carree. Cross rue de TAmiral de Coligny andplace
du Louvre and a median of tulips and trees to enter the front porch
ofwhat used to be the parish church ofthe royal families, built on
the site of a Viking stronghold. From the belfry of Saint- Germain,


*Hermione Lee, Edith Wharton.
                 The Champs-Ely sees and Environs                m



the church hell— “la Marie ”—rang out the signal to launch the
Saint Bartholomew's Day Massacre. These days its Wednesday
carillon concert (1:30—2) plays Bach, Couperin, Mozart. Inside,
the statue of Saint Mary of Egypt stands in the rear of the lovely
thirteenth-century Chapel of the Holy Sacrament, where the me¬
dallions in the stained-glass windows bear motifs from the He¬
brew Bible: beautiful Esther in the first window; fearless Judith in
the second, holding a sword and draped in turquoise, coral, and
purple; a brilliant Deborah in the third.
In the Garden of the Palais-Royal
                          PALAIS-ROYAL




    entrances: rue de Beaujolais; place du Palais-Royal;

         place Colette
    metro: Palais-Royal; Louvre

    hours: daily, 7:30—8:30



        self-described “migrant” in Paris, who moved many
-/JL times through many different quartiers, Colette (1873—
1954), France’s greatest natural writer according to many crit¬
ics, finally found her earthly paradise living above the garden
of the Palais-Royal. In Places, she remembers this master¬
piece of landscape and architecture, for centuries the social
center of Paris and “a unique point on the globe. Visit Lon¬
don, Amsterdam, Madrid or Vienna, you will see nothing like
it. . . . It is called the capital of Paris. Everything is to be
found there.”*
    Colette makes you feel her delight as she looks down
over the clipped lime trees at dawn and sunset, and, after rain,
smelling the fragrance of flowers “that last into late autumn”
under the “great ceiling of the Parisian sky.” She could see
“the tree trunks of the arbor, the quivering of whipped-up
water in the great fountain.”! The “enchantment” of this
place is intensified by the “mutual courtesy” of her neighbors,
who included her friend Jean Cocteau. During the Occupa¬
tion (1940—1944), when the Nazis made daily raids through
the Palais apartments, hunting for Jews, Colette’s neighbors

* Louis Sebastien Mercier, Tableau de Paris.
| Colette, Places.
114                         THE RIGHT BANJ



hid her Jewish husband, Maurice Goudeket, in their tiny maids’
rooms and crawl spaces, saving him from deportation. She,
in turn, learning that some of her neighbors, like most of
Paris, were hungry during the war, gave them food and
money.
      Characteristically, there’s not a hint of puritanism in the
free-spirited Colette’s approach to the history of the Palais-
Royal (originally Palais-Cardinal, as the site of the palace
Cardinal Richelieu built for himself). She mentions its “bad”
reputation, then summons the ghosts of the “ladies of plea¬
sure” who once, like her, must have enjoyed the view of the
garden beneath their windows. Historians detail the liheage
of the Palais-Royal as “the home of Parisian hedonism.” In
addition to the wild commerce of brothels, gambling houses,
and taverns inside the colonnades, both before and after 1789,
the coffeehouses welcomed journalists and politicians, bour¬
geoisie and aristocrats, who argued the radical politics that
led to the Revolution.


      The storming of the Bastille on 14 July iy8c> . . . had its
      origins in the Palais-Royal. It was there, legend has it,
      that the journalist Camille Desmoulins stood on a cafe
      table to .. . launch a call to arms. ... As Victor Hugo later
      put it, it was “the core of the comet Revolution



      Today the Palais-Royal is a refuge of tranquillity, beautiful
in all seasons but especially in spring. A profusion of yellow
and white tulips frame a pretty fountain surrounded by mag¬
nolia and lime trees and Parisians on benches reading and
sleeping and taking the sun. (Colette often observed from


* Colin Jones, Paris: The Biography of a City.
                     The Champs-Ely sees and Environs             ”5


her window how devoted Parisians are to books.) There’s
little traffic into the shops of the arcades. At the north end,
where Colette lived (there’s a plaque on p, rue du Beaujolais),
one of her (and Julia Child’s) favorite restaurants, Grand
Vefour (17, rue du Beaujolais, under the northwestern ar¬
cades), opened in the 1780s as the Cafe de Chartres, and still
serves its haute cuisine in an elegant dining room. The Mus-
cade, a friendly modest cafe just south of it, with outdoor ta¬
bles, serves a “salade Colette.”
    On the occasion of Colette’s death, though the nearby
church of Saint-Roch refused her a Catholic funeral Mass, she
received the first state funeral that France ever gave a woman.
Her bier rested in the Palais-Royal’s Cour d’Honneur in front
of Cardinal Richelieu’s original palace. Thousands of Parisians,
mostly women, filed past, leaving bunches of wildflowers in
her honor*




COMEDIE FRAN^AISE THEATRE (LA MAISON DE MOLIERE)

Located in the southwest comer of place Colette, an entrance to
the garden of the Palais-Royal.

CAFE NEMOURS               A brass-fronted hangout of theater people,
across from the baubly and aluminum metro entrance on place

Colette.

LIBRAIRIE DELAMAIN, PLACE DU PALAIS-ROYAL                       Cross
place Colette and walk south. The bookstore stocks Colette’s writ¬
ing, in French. On its walls are photographs of French writers
Annie Ernaux, Marguerite Duras, Marguerite Yourcenar, as well


* Judith Thurman, Secrets of the Flesh: A Life of Colette.
ii6                    THE RIGHT BANg



as foreigners Henry James, Samuel Beckett, Edith Wharton, and
Djuna Barnes.

CHURCH OF NOTRE-DAME DES VICTOIRES                 Place des Petits-
Peres. Through the north end of the Palais-Royal at rue de
Beaujolais—detouring through the elegant covered passage of
Galerie Vivienne, home to a good antiquarian bookstore, Librai-
rie Jousseaume—you come to this friendly little square where boys
play soccer in front of Colette’s parish church. A baptised Catholic
and lifelong agnostic, she lit candles here before a Marian altar
(still ablaqe with the vigil lights ofParisians) for her friends who
were sick and in danger during the Occupation.

CHURCH OF SAINT-ROCH             West, on rue Saint-Honore. Andre
Le Notre (1613—ijoo), the landscape designer of Versailles and
the Tuileries, had his workshop in Saint-Roch. Behind the Wall

of the Deportation are buried pieces of earth from ten German
concentration camps as well as the ashes of French deportees.