            SQUARE SUZANNE-BL'ISSON



   entrance: from Place Casadesus
   metro: Place de Clichy; Lamarck-Caulaincourt
   hours: 8-8


     he most delightful approach to this corner of beauty
 -L on the hill of Montmartre is from the west: climb rue
Caulaincourt from the Montmartre Cemetery, midway up
take the stairs to the right onto avenue Junot, then a left into
rue Simon Dereure, which ends in the charming Place-des-
Quatre-Freres- Casadesus. The small steps to the right, through
a rock garden, take you up to Square Suzanne-Buisson. You
can sit and recover from the climb in the company of a few
Parisians, pairs of friends or lovers, or grandparents keeping
an eye on the children in the playground. Birds twitter and
don’t fly away, diving in and out of the trees, the wildflowers
in the rock garden, circling the small greenhouse and the
heights of the white mansions of Place Casadesus, home to
generations of a family of great musicians. If, as Baudelaire
said, all art aspires to the condition of music, then here in this
square and its beautiful environs—Allee des Brouillards
(“Fog Alley”) and Place Dalida—the art of landscape suc¬
ceeds as a melodious adagio.
   Near the front of the square a statue of Saint-Denis hold¬
ing his severed head overlooks the fountain and mall shaded
by plane trees. According to legend, when Denis, the first
bishop ofLutetia, was decapitated by the Romans, c. 258 AD
(the site traditionally believed to be at the foot of the butte
                               M7
                       THE RIGHT BANK
i5«


in rue Yvonne le Tac just east of Place des Abbesses), he carried
his bloody head up to the spring that until the nineteenth
century flowed here, washed it, and then continued north to
the site of the Basilica of Saint-Denis, where he is buried.
The origin of the name “Montmartre” is commonly thought
to be Mons Martyrum, after the story of the martyrdom of
Denis and his two companions.
      The square is named for a victim of a modern totalitarian
regime, Suzanne Levy Buisson, born in 1883. At the rue Girar-
din entrance, a “Histoire de Paris” plaque identifies her as a
martyr of the Resistance and secretary of the Women’s So¬
cialist Party. Arrested and tortured by the Nazis, she revealed
nothing about the movement. Deported, she died in Germany,
the date of her death not known. So little is known about
Suzanne Buisson and the other Resistantes, her story and
the near anonymity of the plaque’s profile inject a disso¬
nance into this hilltop place so filled with light. We stand at
the entrance, wanting to know more yet grateful to come
upon the memory of two people who, in ancient and modern
times, had the courage to resist the ruthless force of empire
and fascism, two who were murdered for their courage. Again,
a musical analogy comes to mind, the jangling harmonics of,
say, the French composer Maurice Ravel (who knew Mont¬
martre). In the face of a personal disaster, Ravel once said:
“I firmly believe that joy is far more fertile than pain.” In
this Montmartre homage to the memory of Suzanne Buisson
and Saint-Denis—in this pretty corner of Paris—there is
in their courage a distinct vibration of joy.
                   Northern Paris and Montmartre                    *59




MONTMARTRE CEMETERY                8—6; Sun, opens at 9. Entrance
off boulevard de Clichy, at the end ofavenue Rachel, where there’s a
map. Here lie Stendhal, Berliop Julie Recamier, Heinrich Heine,
and Fragonard, under the linden trees, where Colette used to roam
and gather flowers. Visitors include German students looking for
the grave of Heine. Truffaut ('932—1984), who grew up in Mont¬
martre, is buried here. A scene in The 400 Blows takes place
on the bridge over the cemetery that leads up rue Caulaincourt to
Square Suqanne-Buisson.

SQUARE CARPE AUX           “A people’s park, the anti-Luxembourg,”
according to one local. Descend the longfight ofsteps upon exiting
the metro at Lamarck-Caulaincourt, walk west on rue Marcadet,
then left, down rue Carpeaux. The square is on the right, with a
statue of the sculptor Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux (1829—i8j5) sur¬
rounded by tall trees flush with singing birds, flower gardens, beds
ofshrubbery, a kiosk for local concerts, and a statue of a woman
without an arm. A scene from Jean-Pierre Melville’s Montmartre
film. Bob le flambeur, takes place here, with the armless woman
distinct in the background as Bob the compassionate crook talks
business with a partner on a park bench. There is graffiti on a
wall: “Le peuple n’obtient que ce qu’il prend”—“The people
only get what they take. ”Montmartre was from the first a neigh¬
borhood of workers, artisans, and the poor. It’s mythologised now
as a paradise of the well-heeled and successful artist—Picasso
and company—but parts of it were always the territory ofrebels,
outsiders, and students who couldn’t afford the rents in other parts

of Paris.

SQUARE LEON-SERPOLLET                Another people’s garden built
on terraces, the former sites of artists’ ateliers. The pretty entrance
i6o                     THE RIGHT B AlSI K



is from rue Cloys (from rue Marcadet go down rue Ruisseau and
turn left). Built in memory of the children deported by the Vichy
government under the German Occupation, the square opens onto
the terraces through a pretty arbor and spreads out as you ascend,
next to an elementary school. Exiting on rue Marcadet, walk up
another long flight ofsteps to return to rue Caulaincourt; in Place
Pecqueur, there's a sculpted reliefof an emigration scene by Stein-
lein. Next to the Place is a good bookstore, L’Attrape-Coeurs,
with a large childrens section in the rear.

LE CEPAGE MONTMARTROIS              6j, rue Caulaincourt, an attrac¬

tive cafe, brasserie, andja7g club, not far from the metros
Garden behind the Musee de Montmartre, once a
home to Auguste Renoir and studio to Raoul Dufy
             MUSEE DE MONTMARTRE




   entrance:    12, rue Cortot
   metro: Abbesses

   hours: Tues—Sun, io—6




T    he approach to rue Cortot from the metro is an exhila¬
     rating and scenic climb up the Montmartre hill (butte):
follow rue des Abbesses west, right to rue Tholoze, then right
again into curvy rue Lepic (the old quarry road where Vin¬
cent Van Gogh lived with his brother Theo at number 54 in
1886—1888 and where the only windmills of Montmartre still
stand); continue uphill along rue Norvins    —  there’s a small
garden to the left, at Cite Internationale des Art, with flower¬
ing cherry blossoms in season and a view over Place Marcel-
Ayme —  until the left downhill turn into rue des Saules of the
willow trees, and, finally, right into the picturesque rue Cor¬
tot. The entrance to the garden is through the bookshop of
the Musee de Montmartre.
   The loveliness of the garden’s setting—it’s next to the
museum, a seventeenth-century house first owned by an
actor-colleague of Moliere’s—in spring its borders are thick
with tulips, a softening grace under tall old trees. Beyond
the lily pond and the rear garden are views of the small back¬
yard gardens of rue Cortot and, below them, the Montmartre
vineyards, parallel to rue des Saules—all of it feels like a
generous reward for the rigors of the ascent. Sitting in the
peaceful garden, you can enjoy the beauty of Montmartre,


                                 163
164                        THE RIGHT BANK



knowing you’ve escaped the crowds thronging Place du Tertre
and the steps of Sacre-Coeur.
      The museum offers sketchy details of the hill’s history. In
the Middle Ages, the abbesses of Montmartre owned huge es¬
tates up here. Henri /^occupied the original twelfth-century
Benedictine Abbey (founded by Louis the Fat) during the
Siege of Paris in 1589. His artillery dug in on the top of
Montmartre as he bombarded the starving city below, which
was defended from the Protestant Henri by armed monks
and priests. “My mistress”—Paris—“is very cruel to me,”
he complained. Having neither wife nor mistress omhand,
he seduced the Abbess Claude and another nun in his con¬
vent headquarters, rewarding them later with control of
the abbeys of Vernon and Montmartre. Today the tiny (re¬
stored) church of Saint-Pierre de Montmartre, behind Sacre-
Coeur, is the last surviving vestige of the great abbey where
Henri IV flirted with the Catholic Church.*
      The museum also has a few remnants of uRed Mont¬
martre,'151 where the Paris Commune began in 1871. There’s
a bust of the Communards’ emblematic heroine, Louise Michel
(1830—1905), the schoolteacher who inspired the seventy-day
resistance to the government’s army and fought to claim the
city for the people who had nothing. She read Baudelaire in
the trenches, directed the construction and defense of the bar¬
ricades, and led more than ten thousand women to fight with
her during the bloody and brutal week—la semaine sanglante—
of May 1871. Many artists and intellectuals supported the
rebels or participated themselves in the civil war, including
Courbet, Pissarro, Rimbaud, and Verlaine.


* Hesketh Pearson, Henry of Navarre: The King Who Dared.
f Eric Hazan, The Invention of Paris: A History in Footsteps.
                     Northern Paris and Montmartre            165



    The Montmartre of the nineteenth-century painters—
Lautrec, Van Gogh, Renoir, Degas, Utrillo—is also repre¬
sented. Renoir lived in this house and knew the nearby
moulins—used as dance halls by workers on weekends—
painting the famous Bal du Moulin de la Galette in 1876 (now
in the Musee d’Orsay). Raoul Dufy had his studio in the right
wing in 1901.
    In Van Gogh’s time, the hill was dotted with twenty-five
windmills—moulins—which were being converted into
dance halls and cabarets, a feature at the heart of Montmartre’s
reputation as a neighborhood of pleasure and adventure. The
impressionists, in particular, were inspired by the rural atmo¬
sphere and the wide sky over the highest point in Paris. “Here,
from the top of Montmartre, circles the wonderful city: Paris
lighting its lamps in the smoky dusk, shrugging its shoulders
at the moon. The Cathedral, Saint-Sulpice, the Pantheon, are
toy buildings far across the Seine.”*
    Van Gogh, however, saw desolation beneath the gaiety of
Montmartre (Le Moulin de la Galette, Festival a Montmartre,
La Butte Montmartre, the latter two in the Rijksmuseum),
a perception shared by some of his literary contemporaries,
poets Paul Verlaine and Arthur Rimbaud and novelist Emile
Zola. What did inspire Van Gogh was the panoramic pros¬
pect from the butte: the vast city below, often shrouded in fog
and smoke, and the Seine running through it.




PARC TURLURE           A neighborhood hilltop green space of many
parts, north of Sacre-Coeur. (Back here you hear nothing of the


* Allan Temko, Notre-Dame of Paris.
i66                     THE RIGHT BANK



hordes and buses in front of it.) The most scenic approach is along
the village-like rue Saint-Vincent (at the bottom of rue des Saules)
past Au Lapin Agile—a cabaret-bar favored by Picasso, Modi¬
gliani, and Utrillo—uphill, past the beautiful intersection with
rue Mont-Cenis framed by tall, elegant, ivy-covered mansions
with a long view across northern canyons of steep steps until you
wind right into rue de la Bonne and the entrance to the park.
With your back to the cascading artificial waterfall (and Sacre-
Coeur), you look out over the high brick mansions of Montmartre
on the slopes below. Inside the shade of the arbor court, thick with
greenery, there is silence and the fragrance of jasmine, which is
everywhere.

SQUARE LOUISE-MICHEL             “Institutrice, Heroine de la Com¬
mune de Paris. ” At the bottom of the steep, grassy hill beneath
Sacre- Coeur, usually a mob scene, the square is built into a circular
staircase. A rich grove of trees—oranges des osages, chestnuts—
surrounds the playground, a jubilant scene of music from the
carousel and the camaraderie of children and parents from the
surrounding multiethnic neighborhoods.

square des abbesses             Walk west from Square Louise-
Michel to metro Abbesses. A few steps north of the entrance is the
little square with the charming Je t’aime Wall—written 311 times
in z5o languages on an enameled fresco made of 5n tiles. The
fragments of color represent the pieces of a broken heart.