17th Arr: Overview

    THE 17TH ARRONDISSEMENT
A VAST, elongated territory stretches across the north-
western edge of Paris, ripped open by twelve railway lines creating
an iron social divide that relegates the poor to the north and the
better-off to the west. From the start, shabby grey tenement houses
arose on the wrong side of the tracks, ‘smelling of the shameful
destitution of Parisian roomings’, as Guy de Maupassant wrote in
Bel Ami; his hero, Duranty, stood in the window of one of these
houses and watched the tantalising new buildings of the recently
opened rue de Rome, on the other side of that ‘immense trench of
the western railway’, luminous at sunrise, as though ‘painted with
white light’. Despite the jarring discrepancy, the two sides of the
tracks were united into one of the eight new arrondissements
created and annexed to Paris by Haussmann on 1 January 1860.
    Of all the 8 arrondissements, the 17th is Haussmann’s creation
par excellence; for, despite the ‘deep chasm’ that separated north
from west, no arrondissement was as true to the new middle-class
spirit of the Second Empire or promoted the values it stood for to
the same degree. Understandably, it was not to the taste of some-
one like Paul Verlaine who, growing up in the 1850s and early 1860s
at 2 rue Saint-Louis (now 10 rue Nollet) in Batignolles, described it
as a neighbourhood of small, decent people where his father felt at
home, ‘pettily bourgeois, shabbily well-to-do, neat, niggardly, but
as clean as can be’. The village, however, bore him no grudge and
buried him in its cemetery, where his humble grave can still be
seen.
   Similarly, young Colette was put off by the whitewashed cleanli-
ness of the middle-class area west of the tracks. Criss-crossed by
broad, well-ventilated arteries, which had mushroomed over-
night, it still bore the smell of fresh paint. At the turn of the
century, her aunt was living on the new Avenue Wagram, ‘in a
magnificent, unattractive new block of flats’ with a rapid lift. ‘I
rather disliked all those white walls,’ remarked      Colette.   ‘The
drawing-room ... desperately carried on the whiteness of the
staircase. White-painted woodwork, frail white furniture, white
cushions with light-coloured flowers, white chimney piece. Good

                                150
                   S

                 S~~=
                        a




               ‘immense trench of the western railway’

heavens, there wasn’t one single dark corner!’ Needless to say,
Aunt Wilhelmine Coeur greatly disapproved of Papa’s living with
17-year-old Colette on the narrow, dark rue Jacob on the Left
Bank. ‘My dear,’ she said to her brother, ‘the new neighbourhoods
are far healthier, far airier and far better built.’ Of course propriety
and respectability were the underlying virtues of these virginal
beaux quartiers of western Paris, as against ‘that dirty Left Bank
where no nice people live’.
   Carrying no tainted heritage or stigma from the past, the vast
stretches of land, hitherto covered with cornfields, hunting
                                  151
                       17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


grounds and meadows, became a land of opportunity for the
emerging middle classes — four clear-cut strata which, within just a
few decades, poured into the arrondissement, dividing themselves
up neatly into four distinct neighbourhoods according to their
wealth — west of the tracks the wealthy and the well-to-do, in
Monceau and Ternes respectively; east of the tracks, in Batignolles,
small employees, shopkeepers and pensioners, and further north
in Epinettes, honest workmen.         It was as neat a distribution as
Haussmann’s whitewashed avenues themselves.
   Back in the early 19th century small Parisians had already been
attracted to what was then the village of Batignolles-Monceau,
situated beyond the toll walls, where they could enjoy better air
combined with a lower cost of living. Thus, between 1810 and
1820 the number of its inhabitants increased from 498 to nearly
6,000.
   The wealthy Plaine de Monceau, on the other. hand, did not
develop out of an independent nucleus but was the natural exten-
sion of the beaux quartiers that had erupted in the 8th arrondisse-
ment during Haussmann’s feverish metamorphosis of the French
capital, with Boulevard Malesherbes* as their backbone. And yet,
there had been a chdéteau in Monceau, going back to the Middle
Ages, around which a village should have logically developed. In
1429, Jeanne d’Arc, heading a numerous army, stopped there to
rest, before resuming her advance on the gate of Saint-Honoré, by
way of today’s rue Lévis and rue du Rocher, through which she had
hoped to take Paris, ‘leur pucelle avec eulx et trés grant foison char-
iots, charettes et chevaulx (‘their Maiden with them and chariots,
carts and horses in great plenty’), according to the diary of an
anonymous contemporary, Le Journal d’un bourgeois de Paris.
   In 1753 the chateau was bought by the Farmer General Grimod
de la Reyniére as a country residence. Notoriously wealthy, La
Reyniére was already the owner of a magnificent hétel on the
corner of today’s rue Boissy-d’Anglas and Avenue Gabriel in the
8th arrondissement, now occupied by the Embassy of the United
States. He was equally well-known as a writer and gourmet, with a
love for haute cuisine. Ironically, he died of indigestion after over-
indulging in foie gras. The chateau gradually faded away through a
process of sales and parcelling and disappeared altogether
  * Boulevard Malesherbes had actually been conceived in 1800 by Napoleon.

                                    152
                           INTRODUCTION


unnoticed, in 1840. Its grounds extended roughly between what is
now rue Lévis and Place Lévis and rue de la Terrasse and Boulevard
Malesherbes.
  Whether rich or humble, the new inhabitants of the area enjoy-
ed the healthier quality of the air and the protection of the hill of
Montmartre, which provided a natural barrier against the north
wind. Sharing a taste for an orderly lifestyle, they went about their
own affairs and, as much as possible, kept aloof from the turb-
ulence that shook Paris in that century. When, during the 1871 civil
war of the Commune, social unrest finally erupted into violence in
the 17th arrondissement, it was to a large extent brought about by
outsiders. Advancing towards the strategic target of Gare Saint-
Lazare, which linked Paris and Versailles, the Versaillais* pushed
through the 17th arrondissement, where wine casks from nearby
brasseries had been piled up into barricades, while the dead, after
summary execution in Square des Batignolles, in Parc de Monceau
and in front of the Mairie, were buried hastily in Parc de Monceau.
The galvanising ‘Red Priestess’, Louise Michel, who headed a
detachment of 25 women on Boulevard des Batignolles, later wrote
in her Souvenirs de la Commune: ‘Les Batignolles, Montmartre
étaient pris, tout se changeait en abattoir...’ (‘Les Batignolles,
Montmartre were taken, everything turned into a slaughter-
house’). However, neither Louise Michel nor her disciple
Hubertine Auclerc had a great following in the 17th arron-
dissement. When the latter, sporting the red revolutionary cap,
came to deliver fiery speeches in the church of Sainte-Marie in
Batignolles, now converted into a women’s club and decked with
red flags, few came to listen. La femme Lefevre, the malevolent
laundress from the wash-house of Sainte-Marie (an occupation
notorious for bringing out the most violent instincts in the female
populace of Paris) —a tall, lank, fanatical, trigger-happy pétroleuse
(an incendiary woman during the Commune), sporting a pistol
in her belt and vociferously inciting hate — became the terror of
a predominantly law-abiding neighbourhood. Such were her
murderous fury and thirst for blood, that news of her death on 22
May, while posted on the barricade of rue des Dames, was greeted
with relief and even jubilation.
    * The government forces, so called because the government’s seat was in
Versailles.

                                    153
                      17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


With the victory of the Versaillais, the Third Republic could stride
out and proceed with the economic development of the 17th
arrondissement, which, though boosted by Haussmann, was in
fact the astonishing achievement of two brothers, Emile and Isaac
Pereire, who can justly be claimed as its founding fathers. Of
Jewish Portuguese extraction, they had come up to Paris from
their native Bordeaux in the 1820s. Inspired by Saint Simon’s
concept of a harmonious industrial society based on social justice,
and impressed by the development of the railway in Britain, they
believed that in France too the railway would be the driving force
of the new industrial society. They took over the 17th arrondisse-
ment and turned it into the cradle of France’s railway and, as a
result, the pacemaker of its economic and social revolution. Twin
boulevards now honour the names of the two pioneering brothers
equitably, a unique example in Paris’s road network. These run on
either side of the railway tracks that they built around Paris, known
as la Petite Ceinture (‘the little belt’). Also unique was the fact that
this honour was bestowed during their lifetime.
    The first railway tracks ran between Saint-Lazare and Saint-
Germain-en-Laye. They were laid in 1835, after a relentless three-
year struggle against doggedly unyielding financiers, politicians
and bureaucrats. When Louis-Philippe finally promulgated a law
allowing Emile to proceed with the venture, he stipulated that it
should be ‘at his own expense, risks and perils’. Opposition on the
part of the scientific community also had to be overcome. When
the optimistic Pereire chose to avoid the altitude problem of the
hill of Monceau by means of two tunnels, the physicist Arago de-
clared these would cause pneumonia and pleurisy! Others spoke of
an inflammation of the retina. None of this happened, of course.
Instead, a more spectacular and tragic accident took place on 6
October 1921, caused by the excessive traffic in the tunnels, ending
with 102 casualties, 28 of whom died.
   On 24 August 1837 Queen Marie-Amélie arrived for the inaug-
uration of the railway at the Europe pier, north of Gare Saint-
Lazare. Louis-Philippe did not accompany her on her journey to
Saint-Germain, opponents of the project having used all their
energy to persuade His Majesty that ‘he could not expose his prec-
ious life to a journey fraught with dangers’. It was all right for his
heroic queen and children (who would not let their mother travel

                                 154
                          INTRODUCTION


alone) to expose their own, however. Flowers and flags decked the
new train as it chugged along to the cheerful sounds of the brass
band of Batignolles. “Nobody caught a cold in the tunnel, the
steam engine did not explode, the carriages were not derailed and
one could believe that a journey by rail was not necessarily fatal,’
commented Maxime du Camp. The next day the cabinet minis-
ters, green with fear, put on a brave face and took a trip aboard the
train. Two days later the first fare-paying passengers crossed the
future arrondissement by train on their way to Saint-Germain. By
the following August this fashionable new mode of locomotion
was taking its first load of enthusiasts to Versailles and, in no time,
a merchandise station and workshops transformed the landscape
of the hitherto villagey Batignolles, singling out the 17th for a
destiny indissolubly linked to the railway and, later, to other
industries connected with transport, notably the automobile. By
1869, 13,254,000 passengers were taking the train at Saint-Lazare
yearly, 11 million of whom were travelling to the suburbs.
   With his eyes riveted on England, the tireless Emile Pereire now
planned an underground railway for Paris, taking as a model the
Metropolitan underground line which had been opened in Lon-
don in 1863. However, the minister Thiers was not endowed with
the same far-reaching imagination and vision as Pereire, and ac-
ceded to no more than an extension of existing lines, and on
strategic grounds only. He therefore gave Pereire permission to
build a railway line parallel to the 1840 fortification walls to speed
up the transfer of troops and ammunition — a mere 22-minute run
between the Cardinet bridge and Auteuil on the southern edge of
the 16th arrondissement. The fortifications, which had been
Thiers’s initiative, proved ineffective against the Prussians, but the
Chemin de fer de Ceinture, or la Petite Ceinture, once completed
in 1864, played a significant economic role rather than military,
connecting the outlying neighbourhoods of the capital, just as its
visionary founder had conceived it.

Industries and workshops continued their expansion north of the
tracks, drawing a working-class population, who, however poor,
was bent onachieving a middle-class lifestyle. Simultaneously, west
of the tracks the beaux quartiers were expanding on the extensive
plain of Monceau, devouring its cornfields spangled with poppies

                                  155
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


and cornflowers and furrowed by footpaths, where, according to
Adrieu Marx, in fine weather, the Juliets of Batignolles would be
 seen arm in arm with the Romeos of Monceau. Once again the
 Pereire brothers were at the origin of this urban transformation,
 having by now branched off into finance and real estate. They had
 developed the railway network throughout France at a pace and to
 an extent that seriously frightened the French government, who
were worried by their monopoly. Turning towards Britain once
more, they had also come to control the seas, by means of the
Compagnie Générale Transatlantique, the famous ‘Transat’. There
was no stopping the tireless brothers who by now had also set up a
bank to finance new industrial projects, and later an insurance
company. When the 1860 annexation triggered off the most spec-
tacular real-estate activity ever undertaken in the city, they found
themselves involved in the fever almost in spite of themselves: the
Emperor had asked them to create the rue de Rivoli, the hotel and
department store of the Louvre, the Rond-Point-des-Champs-
Elysées, the Boulevard Voltaire in eastern Paris. . .to be followed by
a lighting company for the streets of the capital. It was inevitable
that the brothers should become the promoters of the 17th, their
home territory, so much of which actually belonged to them. After
ten years of preparation, work began around 1875 and soon the plain
was covered with opulent freestone buildings, as shiny and new as
the money of their occupiers. This was where the ‘mushroom aris-
tocracy’, as Zola called them, lived, with plentiful servants and
horses and carriages, which carried them daily to their places of
entertainment, on the Grands Boulevards, on the Champs-Elysées
and in the Bois.
    Entertaining was also done at home: following the patterns of
the waning old aristocracy, the mistress of the house liked to
preside over weekly literary salons attended by the country’s élite
of literati, artists and musicians, many of whom had taken up
residence here too. One such was the fashionable painter Ernest
Meissonier, who had built himself a magnificent hétel on the cor-
ner of rue Georges Berger (then Legendre) and Place Malesherbes
(now Général-Catroux), soon to be followed by two of his disciples
— Edouard Detaille, who settled in luxury next door, at 129
Boulevard Malesherbes, and Alphonse de Neuville at 14 rue
Legendre around the corner. All specialised in military subjects,

                                 156
                         INTRODUCTION


much in vogue in those bellicose times. Two years later the famous
architect Jules Février built a magnificent mansion inspired by the
Chateau de Blois for the wealthy banker of the Comte de Cham-
bord, Emile Gaillard, also on Place Malesherbes. The composer
Charles Gounod shared an hétel on Place Malesherbes with his
brother-in-law, the architect Pigny, while his colleague Gabriel
Fauré, then director of the Conservatoire, lived at no. 154. Guy de
Maupassant lived on Place Wagram and Claude Debussy at no. 10
of the neighbouring rue Gustave Doré. The composer Ernest
Chausson was living at 22 Boulevard de Courcelles when he was
killed in a bicycle accident in 1904, tragically cutting short a most
promising career. Young Proust lived on rue de Courcelles. Other
writers lived here too — Edmond Rostand, who wrote Cyrano de
Bergerac at 2 rue de Fortuny; Alphonse Allais and Tristan Bernard
at nos 7 and 9 rue Edouard Detaille respectively; not to mention
Alexandre Dumas fils at 98 Avenue de Villiers. Actresses and sing-
ers followed suit, among them the legendary Sarah Bernhardt and
the café-concert singer Yvette Guilbert, immortalised by Toulouse-
Lautrec.
    The sculptor Frédérique-Auguste Bartholdi lived heré too, and
it was in the 17th arrondissement, in the workshops and foundry of
25 rue de Chazelles, that he moulded the most important statue of
modern   times, La Liberté éclairant le monde, more      commonly
known as the Statue of Liberty. While travelling in Egypt in 1855, he
had been impressed by the colossal dimensions of the monuments
of Ancient Egypt. His friend Ferdinand de Lesseps was about to
complete the Suez Canal and Bartholdi was commissioned to
make a statue Le Progrés apportant la lumiére a l’Asie (Progress
bringing light to Asia), to stand at the entrance to the Canal.
Bartholdi was disappointed when the project was abandoned due
to a lack of funds, but he took the preliminary sculptures back to
Paris in 1869 and used them for a new project, which would bring
light not to Asia but to the wretched of Europe, who hoped for a
better life in New York and beyond.
   Bartholdi himself made the voyage to America in 1871, aboard
the steamer Le Pereire (!), and chose the site of Bedloe’s Island for
the statue. Building on rue Chazelles began with the hand and
torch, then came the head, which was exhibited on the Champ-de-
Mars during the 1878 Universal Exposition. A huge crowd gathered

                                 157
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


along the streets during the transfer of the head to the Fair. Le Petit
Journal reported on 30 June 1878: ‘A colossal, fantastic head
emerges in the opening of the Arc de Triomphe, while cries of
‘Long live the Republic’ resound in powerful volleys at the far end
of the avenue.’ Viollet-le-Duc, who was in charge of the metal
structure of the statue, had died meanwhile and was replaced by
Gustave Eiffel, who moved to the neighbouring rue de Prony, so as
to be able to supervise the work from close quarters, anxious as he
was about its colossal weight (200 tonnes) and fearing that the lady
might not withstand the violent winds that occasionally sweep
across the eastern coast of the United States.
    On 24 October 1881 the yards at 25 rue de Chazelles were decked
with American and French flags, ready for a ceremony presided
over by the American Ambassador, who inserted the first rivet of
the central pylon. For the next three years rue de Chazelles was the
favourite outing for the inhabitants of the 8th and 17th arrondisse-
ments, who came to watch the progress the lady was making. At
the beginning of 1884 she was all set, towering 46 metres above the
plain of Monceau. On the 4th of July the brass band of Batignolles,
which some 50 years earlier had celebrated the first train journey
ever undertaken in France, came once more to the fore, when it
struck up the American and French anthems on the occasion of the
official presentation of the Statue — a somewhat belated gift from
France to the young republic for its first centennial. The statue was
then dismounted, dispatched to Le Havre, and, after floating for 25
days across the Atlantic, arrived safely in New York.

All the above artists, and many others, convened in the glittering
salons of the Plaine Monceau. Leconte de Lisle and his Parnassien
friends frequented the salon of the Marquise de Ricard at no. 10
Boulevard des Batignolles, while the members of the Academy
were   favoured   by Madame     Aubernon     who   invited   them,   in
groups of twelve, to her weekly dinners on rue Montchanin (now
rue Jacques Bingen). In order to express her respect for such hon-
oured guests, her meals were accompanied by a dish of spinach, a
far-fetched tribute to the green costume of the Académicien.
   Not all the households of the Plaine Monceau could display
such respectability, certainly not that of Emile Zola’s Nana,
                                                                the
laundress’s daughter from the gutter of La Goutte-d’Or, althoug
                                                                  h
                                 158
                         INTRODUCTION


she too was living in a magnificent home, on the corner of Avenue
de Villiers and rue Cardinet. In a fluctuating society, where for-
tunes were made overnight, respectability and thinly disguised
prostitution lived side by side, the latter “advancing, gliding,
dancing with the weight of its embroidered petticoats’. Brief notes
jotted down by Zola in his notebook inform us of ‘very well main-
tained hétels’ in the ‘quartier Haussmann’, in particular on rue de
Prony, with ‘footman, powdered concierge, imposing staircase,
huge landing, couch, armchairs, flowers. . .” Adrieu Marx acqui-
esces when he speaks of the ‘belles petites’ who swoop down on the
new quarters’, adding that ‘face powder has succeeded in replacing
the dust of building plaster’. ‘Semi-senile, debauched males were
ready to abandon everything for an arse,’ Zola jots down in his
notebook. He also speaks of ‘the pack behind the bitch who is not
on heat’, who spends as much as 200,000 francs a year, or, having
recently bought a townhouse, now wants to sell it!
   Around the year 1900 the 17-year-old Colette — Claudine in the
novel — ran into her childhood friend Luce on Parc de Monceau.
The poor country girl had been offered champagne, adorned in
silk undies and stockings and set up by the sixtyish widowed hus-
band of her aunt in a top-floor flat of a gleaming white building on
rue de Courcelles. An enormous lift, lined with mirrors, carried
Luce up to this flat, whose main items were a 1.5-metre-wide bed
and a bathroom ‘paved with tiles, walled with tiles ... glittering,
like Venice, with a thousand lights and more’. Not unlike Nana,
Luce lapses occasionally into her native speech, which Colette
finds ‘priceless’. The seducer, like his forerunners, is depicted as
‘hideous, fat and almost bald. . . he had a bestial look, with jowls
like a Great Dane and big calf’s eyes’.
    Some cocottes, courtesans and demi-mondaines were the talk
of the scandalised town, such as the fiery Andalusian Otero on rue
Fortuny, for whom more than one suitor had given up the ghost
and for whom William II of Prussia had written a play. Others,
such as Louise Delabigne, now Comtesse Valtesse de la Bigne,
knew how to worm their way into society. She too had ruined a
wealthy suitor, but she had the talent and intelligence to know how
to be accepted and became the friend of Manet, Courbet, Boudin,
Alphonse de Neuville and Detaille, which earned her the nickname
‘Punion des peintres. When she first came up to Paris from her

                                1559
                      17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


native Normandy and went on the stage as Hebe in Orpheus in
Hell, a critic said that she was as timid and as red-headed as a Titian
virgin — but it did not take her long to lose both timidity and
virginity nor, for that matter, to leave the stage and sell her favours
elsewhere instead. From the arms of Prince Lubomirski, she flew to
those of Baron Sagan, who financed the glorious mansion Jules
Février built for her in 1876 on the corner of Boulevard Males-
herbes and rue de la Terrasse and was subsequently ruined. It was
her bedroom that served as a model for that of Zola’s Nana. The
highly acclaimed painter Henri Gervex used her as his model for
the bride (!) in his painting Le Mariage civil (at least it was not a
religious wedding), which now hangs in the Salle de Mariage (the
wedding hall) of the Mairie of the 19th arrondissement. Thus
Mademoiselle Valtesse has come down to posterity fortified by the
Third Republic’s attributes of chastity, matrimonial bliss and
respectability. Middle-class morality, to which, after all, a quarter
of France’s households adhered, had the final word!

A decade earlier, far from the limelight of the Plaine Monceau, new
ideas were fermenting in the humbler parts of Batignolles from
which a new conception of painting emerged, which was going to
have an unforeseeable influence on art and lead eventually to a
revolution. A young generation of artists, with little money but
plenty of creative enthusiasm, was eager to shrug off the shackles of
academic tradition and its pompous, hollow search for ideals, and
set out to capture the light in the present moment of daily life. Here,
in the unpolluted neighbourhood of Batignolles, they found the
exceptionally translucid quality oflight necessary for their outdoor
scenes, combined with a homely village atmosphere and cheap
board and lodgings. They liked being close to the railway, the
symbol of modernity, a subject for their paintings in its own right,
and also a means of transport to the countryside, to Chatou,
Asniéres and Argenteuil, where they could experiment with out-
door paintings, producing the treasures that now brighten the walls
of museums and galleries throughout the world. They also liked to
gather at Café Guerbois (on the unlikely site of today’s 9 Avenue de
Clichy) under the inspiring guidance of their elder, Manet.
   Manet had begun to frequent Café Guerbois on the then ‘village’
high street, La Grande-Rue, in 1863, on his way to Hennequin’s,
                                                                     his
                                 160
                          INTRODUCTION


paint and brush supplier, next door. On a Friday night, he would
gather his artist friends — Fantin-Latour, Alfred Stevens, Astruc, the
American Whistler — around two tables to the left of the entrance
and engage in such stimulating discussions that Degas or Renoir
would on no account miss them. The unkempt Cézanne, on the
other hand, shied away from the band. Often when he turned up at
the Guerbois he would sit at a separate table, feeling uncomfortable
with the group ‘who were dressed like notaries’. Monet regretted
being away from Paris so often for, he said, “one came out of these
discussions with a more invigorated will and clearer thoughts’.
What he could not yet have known or formulated was that these
gatherings constituted, in fact, the laboratory of the Impressionist
experience, where the notions of outdoor painting and of colour
and light were discussed and confronted. As such the Café Guerbois
could rightly claim the honour of being the birthplace of the
Impressionist movement. At the time it was, for want of a better
name, labelled I’Ecole des Batignolles, but soon the bourgeoisie,
expressing their derision through the mouths of critics, gave the
members of the movement the tag of ‘Impressionists’.
   Camille Pissarro was another member of the group; as was Fréd-
éric Bazille, whose potential was snuffed out with his premature
death, aged 29, on the battlefield of Beaune-la-Rolande in the Loiret
in the 1870 war. A major painting of his, Réunion de famille (1867),
brings out the spirit of comradeship within the Batignolles group.
Bazille, a head above the rest of the group, is standing in the centre
by his easel, showing his latest work to Astruc and Manet (it was
actually Manet who painted Bazille’s face). Alfred Sisley can be seen
on the left, and Monet standing on the stairs, while their musician
friend, Maitre, is at the piano. A work by Fantin-Latour, l’Atelier a
Batignolles (1870), now hanging in the Musée d’Orsay, also brings
out that spirit. This was Manet’s studio at 81 rue Guyot (now
Médéric    and   Fortuny),   in the Plaine    Monceau    rather   than
Batignolles, but that was before the speculation of the 1870s and
Manet must have paid very little for this old house in the
countryside. Besides, Manet was of bourgeois origin and socialised
with both the Plaine Monceau crowd and his more modest fellow
artists. It was on rue Guyot that Manet painted some of his most
famous masterpieces — Le Déjeuner sur ’herbe, Olympia, Le Fifre. . .
Some critics having detected a Spanish influence in these earlier
                                  161
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


works, referred to him sarcastically as ‘Don Manet y Courbetos y
Zurbanan de los Batignolles’. In Fantin-Latour’s Un Atelier Manet
is seen painting his friend Zacharie Astruc. A statue of the goddess
Minerva symbolises the café — and neighbourhood — of La Nouvelle
Athénes (see chapter on the 9th arrondissement), the international
capital of art. The Oriental porcelain on the left is a reminder of the
Impressionists’ interest in Japanese art.
   Zola and Nadar, staunch supporters of the movement, also
attended the Friday night gatherings at Café Guerbois. Nadar had
lent the group his studio on 35 Boulevard des Capucines for their
first exhibition in 1874, while Zola, after Manet’s exclusion from the
 Salon in 1866, had written on 7 May: ‘Since nobody else is saying
this, Iam going to say it, lam going to shout it. 1am so certain that
Monsieur Manet will be one of tomorrow’s masters that I believe I
would have struck a good bargain had I the means today to buy up
all his paintings. Manet’s place is marked in the Louvre, like
Courbet’s, like the place of every artist with a strong, implacable
temperament.’ And when Manet was eventually exhibited at the
Salon, Zola said: ‘Do you know what effect Manet’s paintings
produce in the Salon? They simply burst the walls. All around them
are displayed the sugary sweets of the artistic confectioners in vogue
. . gingerbread men and women made of vanilla cream.’ In return
for this support Manet invited Zola over to rue Guyot where he
painted the writer. The portraits hung in his home in Médan until
his death in 1905, when his wife gave them to the Louvre.
   When, in 1874, Stéphane Mallarmé moved to no. 89 of the new
rue de Rome, on the western and right side of the tracks, it was the
proximity of the Lycée Condorcet, where he had been appointed as
an English teacher, that had determined his choice rather than
social considerations. By then his painter friends had migrated to
the more central Nouvelle Athénes café at Place Pigalle, in the
culturally ebullient 9th arrondissement. When the celebrated
Tuesday gatherings began to be held in Mallarmé’s home a few
months later, l’Ecole des Batignolles had been officially renamed
Impressionist, following their first exhibition, which happened to
take place the same year. Fridays now replaced Tuesdays and were
devoted mainly to poetry, predominantly symbolist. All these
gatherings were part of the same phenomenon — the younger
generation, be they writers, painters or musicians, were reaching

                                 162
                         INTRODUCTION


out and groping for modernity and belonged to one and the same
world: hence Mallarmé’s portrait by Manet and Mallarmé’s
Prélude pour un aprés-midi d’un faune set to music by Debussy.
