20th Arr: Belleville and Ménilmontant

            BELLEVILLE AND MENILMONTANT

This walk to the northern part of the 20th arrondissement will take
you to the quintessentially Parisian villages of Belleville and Ménil-
montant, the respective birthplaces of Edith Piaf and Maurice
Chevalier. With so many high-rises around, the two singers would
find it hard to recognise the streets of their childhood and we in the
late 20th century have to rely on our memories of old French films
to recreate that fast disappearing world.
   If you want to combine this walk with a plunge into present-day
ethnic Paris at the end, you should start out early on a Tuesday ora
Friday morning so as to wind up later at the open-air market on
Boulevard de Belleville.

We start at Métro Télégraphe at the top of the hill and walk along
RUE DU TELEGRAPHE named after the telegraph installed by
Claude Chappe in September 1792 just south of the site of the main
gate of the Cemetery of Belleville, a spot he had chosen for his first
experiment because of its notable altitude (128.5m). France was
engaged in a patriotic republican war against the monarchies of
Europe anda successful conclusion of Chappe’s experiment would
allow the capital to communicate with the provinces. But the sans-
culottes, suspecting Claude Chappe of communicating with the
royal family incarcerated at the Temple, proceeded to wreck his
brilliant invention and Chappe had to run for his life. He waited
for the people’s fury to abate before trying out his invention again
on the 25th of the following July, when he sent a telegraph to
Ecouen, covering the distance of 35.5 km. Communication with
Lille was successfully established soon after, which enabled Paris to
be informed instantly of the capitulation of the Austrian garrison.
The connection with Lille was transferred to the northernmost hill
of Montmartre, while Strasbourg, lying to the east, was connected
with Belleville.
                                 287
                     20TH        ARRONDISSEMENT




                                     kF-\
                                     %
                                 gy CHEVALIER
                            <2
                        a Q <iNE ie)
                                         oo     oe
                         iS         oe




   The cemetery of Belleville did not exist at the time and rue du Tél-
égraphe ran along the beautiful estate of Ménilmontant, Le Saint-
Fargeau, whose landlord, Louis-Michel Le Peletier, was assassinat-
ed at the Palais-Royal for having voted for the death of the King, as
mentioned above. When the estate was parcelled up, the municipal-
ity of Belleville bought a share of the land and opened a cemetery in
1804, after the closure of all the cemeteries of Paris. This is a small,
intimate place which boasts few celebrities, except however for
Léon Gaumont, the early promoter of motion pictures who, at the
dawn of the 20th century, offered the poor inhabitants of Belleville
an escape by means of his “usine a réves’ (‘factory of dreams’).

Continue past the reservoir of Belleville, which stands on the site of
the actual mansion of Saint-Fargeau, le Grand Chateau. Turn left
into rue du Borrégo and right into Passage Gambetta. Gambetta
is honoured amply in these parts because he was the deputy of

                                         288
Belleville during the troubled times of 1870, hence also the Place
Gambetta in front of the Mairie, the hub of the arrondissement.
The Bellevillois had gone all out to have him elected in 1869, and he
in his turn stood up at the National Assembly the following year
and announced eloquently: ‘We declare that Louis-Napoléon
Bonaparte and his dynasty have ceased forever to reign over
France!’ As the war degenerated, however, Gambetta was
reproached for his lukewarm~ attitude and lost the initial
enthusiastic support of Belleville.
   Passage Gambetta provides a rare example of modern urban
renovation in good taste, blending discreetly into aleafy, traffic-free
environment. The old lampposts have been preserved, adding a
charming touch to the serene alley.

Continue along rue du Borrégo and turn left into RUE HAXO.
On your left is the church of Notre-Dame-des-Otages, behind

                                 289
                    20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


which, at no. 85, once stood a café-concert. In May 1871 it was
converted into the headquarters of the Belleville section of the
Commune, where 52 hostages were massacred by the Communards
on 26 May, as reported on p. 268 — not that the hostages were
necessarily enemies of the Commune, but their assailants were too
excited to bother to find out. As it happened, 11 were Jesuit priests
and 36 were Gardes Républicains. After an exhausting uphill
march in quick time from the prison of La Roquette, from where
they had been snatched, the churchmen hindered further by their
skirts, the hostages arrived on rue Haxo where an enraged crowd,
most of them women, were waiting, baying for blood. Insulted,
jostled, beaten by the mob, they entered the courtyard dishevelled
and haggard and before the order of execution could be read from
the balcony, a crazed 18-year-old woman pulled the trigger of her
gun and shot down the Abbé Planchat, the founder of the youth
club of Charonne. This was the signal for the carnage to begin. An
onlooker who protested against the savagery was pushed among
the ranks of the victims before he had time to retract; so by mistake
was one Communard. Following the bloody week of May 1871
Dumas fils wrote: ‘the women who followed the red flag were hags
with the appetites of tigresses and vampires.’ Even the Commune
leader Jules Vallés, condemned the massacre of rue Haxo and the
shrew who had instigated it. Yet he had genuinely sided with
Belleville, proclaiming: ‘I had resolved to live among these people
and to choose this dark corner as my motherland.’
   The Jesuits bought the site the following year and built on it an
oratory in memory of the victims, which they replaced first by a
chapel and in 1936 by the present church (open on weekday after-
noons only). They also founded a charity, l’Oeuvre des Otages, to
bring the Gospel to this accursed neighbourhood through social
and educational work with children.
    In the second half of the 19th century, a prestigious establish-
ment was situated east of rue Haxo. It was named Le Saint-Fargeau,
after the former estate of the Le Peletier. It had an artificial lake, an
island and a guinguette and was a favourite place for functions and
an attraction for pleasure-seekers. It was also a gigantic establish-
ment —with grounds extending roughly from Passage des Tourelles
to the Avenue Gambetta and as far as rue de Belleville — enabling
Belleville to uphold its tradition of fun on a large scale (and also to

                                  290
                 BELLEVILLE    & MENILMONTANT


provide space for political meetings held by the likes of Gambetta
and Jules Ferry). People came here in such great numbers that the
Paris transport network, in those days the Omnibus Company,
decided to extend the line that connected the Louvre and the church
of Belleville as far as Saint-Fargeau. The Company even agreed to
adopt the name of this popular landmark for its new terminus — Lac
Saint-Fargeau — and to display this name on its vehicles, providing
for the celebrated establishment further publicity; in exchange for
which the Saint-Fargeau lent the company some office space free of
charge. Thus the horse-drawn omnibus that plodded up the hill,
then trotted downhill jauntily, was the ancestor of the Métro
Levallois-Porte des Lilas, now line no 3. Today the lake has
disappeared both in fact and in name, and also from Parisian
memory. Who now remembers that up until World War I, people
came here for the boating and fishing, or that Stendhal, George
Sand, Alfred de Musset and Alexandre Dumas would cross the
entire city to enjoy a bucolic meal on the enchanting shore of the
lake of Saint-Fargeau?

Retrace your steps on rue du Borrégo and turn left into rue de la
Duée, named after one of Belleville’s water courses. To the right,
the Passage de la Duée is the narrowest alley in Paris — an 0.80-m
crevasse — and is not devoid of shabby charm. Rue des Rigoles
(‘rivulets’), just beyond it to the left, is another reminder of the
waters of Belleville.
   Retrace your steps and turn right into the Villa Georgina, filled
with flowers and birdsong and with the inebriating smell of honey-
suckle. Retrace your steps and turn left into Passage des Saint-
Simoniens which leads to the pleasant Square de Ménilmontant,
once the property of the Saint-Simoniens. The drab block of flats
overlooking the garden was erected here in the 1960s in place of the
lovely house of the Saints-Simoniens, surrounded at the time by a
neat vegetable garden, a magnificent fruit orchard and lilac trees.
   In 1832 the 36-year-old Prosper Enfantin, the son of a wealthy
banker and an alumnus of the prestigious Ecole Polytechnique
which still trains France’s topmost mathematicians and engineers,
renounced the privileges of both birth and personal merit and
retired with forty disciples to this water-blessed spot. He had
inherited the house from his father who, like other bourgeois of

                                291
                     20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


the time, had built himself a country retreat in hilly Belleville.
Inspired by the doctrine of the philosopher the Comte de Saint-
Simon, this bunch of enlightened idealists wished to promote the
notion of justice and brotherhood through a life of simplicity,
close to the soil. So as to ensure brotherly cooperation and mutual
aid among the members of the group, they wore red waistcoats
that buttoned at the back, along with white trousers and purple
tunics. They also grew venerable beards and accompanied their
garden labours with chants about equality and the rebirth of anew
man, which they sang to the music of their friend, the well-known
composer, Félicien David. Overflowing with the milk of human
kindness, they threw open their property to the public on Sundays,
many of whom came to scoff at those rich Daddy’s boys with their
ridiculous attire and dainty white hands playing at ploughmen.
    The police, on the other hand, did not find them at all amusing
but a cause for great concern. Alarmed by their eccentricities, by the
subversive ideas they peddled and, above all, by the fact that they
allowed women in as fully-fledged members of the human race,
they accused the brotherhood of causing an outrage to public
 decency. The following December each member of the sect was
 sentenced to one year’s imprisonment anda fine of100 francs. Their
 pleasant house was put on sale and a beautiful experience was
 nipped in the bud. The doctrine lived on, however, thanks to the
 intellectual level of its disciples, and had a great following through-
 out the 19th century. Their adherents included such sympathisers as
 Pereire, Victor Hugo and even Napoléon III (!) who, unlike his wife,
 had a penchant for the socialist ideal. In view of the other Utopian
 communities that developed into more threatening political forces,
 perhaps the police forces of Louis-Philippe had a point after all.
    Once released, Prosper Enfantin travelled to Egypt where he
 stayed for four years. Here the brilliant engineer came into his
 own, befriending Mehmed Ali, viceroy of Egypt, and conceiving
 the idea of the Suez Canal, a project which he did not live long
 enough to carry out, but which would be taken over by his disciple,
 de Lesseps.

Exit the gardens into RUE DE MENILMONTANT and turn
right. Continue to the corner of rue des Pyrénées. Two blocks
down rue de Ménilmontant, on your left, a provincial red-tiled

                                  292
                 BELLEVILLE     & MENILMONTANT


roof of a one-storeyed house contrasts with the anarchical
concrete towers of the arrondissement. It is the gatepost to a quiet
side street, appropriately named rue du Retrait where, at nos. 29/
31, Maurice Chevalier was born on 12 September 1888. At present
this is a vast empty building-site, where another concrete tower
will soon protrude into the sky. No sign is left of the world of
honest workmen among whom Maurice grew up.

Turn right into RUE DES PYRENEES, the main thoroughfare of
the 20th arrondissement. The street was opened by Haussmann to
offer its more privileged residents a leafy and airy environment,
but, like elsewhere, it was also built to give the police forces quick
access into a troublesome area. Walk up to PLACE GUIGNIER,
whose pink and white houses, shady trees and subdued light grace
it with provincial charm, especially on market days (Thursdays
and Sundays).
    Retrace your steps and turn right into Cité Leroy, a character-
istic, humble dead-end alley. Walk to the next alley, Villa de
YErmitage, a lovely nook where wild flowers mingle with vines.
Turn left into rue de PErmitage which will take you back to rue de
Ménilmontant.
    From the corner of rues de PErmitage and Ménilmontant you
will enjoy a sweeping view of Paris with the Tour Saint-Jacques
rising ahead against the sky and, to its left, the bright blue piping of
the Centre Pompidou. This will give you a measure of the distance
the inhabitants of Belleville had to cover before 1635 in order to
attend mass at the church of Saint-Merri (next to the Centre
Pompidou) and, especially, of the climb back home up the steep
hill, shivering on a cold winter Sunday or slipping on the ice. Not
until 1635, at long last, were they allowed to build themselves a
parish church (on the northern side of rue de Belleville, in today’s
19th arrondissement).
    Continue downhill along rue de Ménilmontant. On your right
is the Cité de l’Ermitage, a surviving pocket of old Belleville which
has preserved its cobblestones, bungalows, flower blossoms and a
touch of the old atmosphere.
    Turn right into RUE DES CASCADES, whose name brings to
mind once more the abundance of water that once blessed Belle-
ville. As you walk down the steps and ramp at no. 13, exquisitely

                                  293
                     20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


fragrant with lavender, you will reach a well restored inspection-
hole shelter — le Regard des Messiers — a vestige of the days when
the aqueduct of Belleville supplied water to the city. Another such
construction — le Regard de la Roquette — is situated at no. 41. In
the 17th century endless law cases were brought against the
religious community of La Roquette for its excessive use of the
hill’s water. A final shelter (regard) is located on the corner of rue
de Savies, le Regard Saint-Martin. It was used by the congregation
of Saint-Martin-des-Champs which harnessed the water of a local
spring, known as la Fontaine de Savies. The legend of the holy man
sharing his coat with a pauper is carved on the wall above the door
but is barely recognisable. The monks also built a small aqueduct
which they connected to the main aqueduct of Belleville. It was in
fact the congregation of Saint-Martin that set out to harness the
water of Belleville back in the 13th century and supply the Marais
area, including the royal residence of Saint-Pol, a century later.
Today, after a wet spell, you may still hear the happy trickle of
water.

Continue into RUE DE SAVIES - so called after the early name
of the village of Belleville. Plunging downhill, its bumpy paving
may not make for an easy walk but it is certainly picturesque. Note
the two old houses at nos. 42 and 44, which seem about to collapse.
In 1951 Jacques Becker chose this street as the location for some of
the scenes of Casque d’Or, featuring the legendary Simone Signoret
(see above).
    Ahead is rue de la Mare (‘pond’), which led downhill to a pond.
Today it leads to the church of Notre-Dame-de-la-Croix, which
boasts a splendid Cavaille-Coll organ and superb acoustics, and
which overlooks the charming Place Maurice Chevalier to the west.
If you have explored the street all the way down, retrace your steps
and turn left into Cité A. Loubeyre, across rue des Couronnes, then
up the steps to Passage de Plantin, a pocket-size alley, bordered by
cosy, little houses, all huddled up together and drowning in won-
derfully untidy vegetation. On rue du Transvaal turn left and
immediately left again into Villa Castel — if unlocked — the back-
drop for some scenes of another French classic, Francois Truffaut’s
Jules et Jim. Nothing much seems to have altered since the 1950s and
somebody has even hung up a string of colourful electric bulbs

                                 294
                 BELLEVILLE    & MENILMONTANT


among the trees, as if to echo a 14th-of-July celebration by René
Clair or Jacques Tati.
   Back on rue du Transvaal turn right and left onto RUE DES
COURONNES where, roughly on today’s no. 45, was a well-
known cabaret, le Pistolet. On the night of 20 October 1721, the 28-
year-old Louis Dominique Bourgogne, better known as the notor-
ious bandit Cartouche, was surprised here while sound asleep by
the police who had found his remote hiding place thanks to the
denunciation extorted from his accomplice Duchatelet. To secure
the capture of this most dangerous enemy of society, at once elus-
ive and ubiquitous, who had been giving the authorities the slip for
several years, 30 soldiers were sent to Belleville. Duchatelet showed
them the way and disclosed the passwords. The unsuspecting
tavern owner showed them into Cartouche’s room, where he was
pounced upon, tied up and whisked off. A brief trial ensued, after
which Cartouche was brought to Place de Gréve (now Hotel-de-
Ville) on 28 November and put to death by quartering.
    Continue to the junction of rues des Envierges, de la mare, des
Cascades and Levert, a countrified spot with one-storeyed houses, a
garden wall overflowing with Virginia creeper and an old-time
tabac. Turn left into RUE DES ENVIERGES and walk into the gap
between no. 25 and 27. You will penetrate a patch of genuine wood-
land, from which wafts the exquisite fragrance of untamed nature.
