14th Arr: Overview

   THE 14TH ARRONDISSEMENT
1AM bosorsersrcemnss — a railway station, an unsightly high-
rise, a sprawling stretch of drab, anarchical townplanning, whose
undefined borders have enabled enterprising real-estate agents to
extend its myth well into the 14th and even 15th arrondissements.
The historical Montparnasse, however, the one where the myth was
born, was no more than a street junction on the border of the 6th
and the 14th arrondissements,     the Carrefour Vavin, at Métro
station Vavin, where the Boulevards du Montparnasse and Raspail
meet.
    In earlier times there was a mound of rubble on this site, the
result of years of intensive extraction of stone from the area’s
quarries, with which a good part of Paris was built. Poetry-loving
students liked to come here from the nearby Latin Quarter to re-
cite their favourite poems or romp about. They nicknamed the
mound Mont Parnasse in honour of the celebrated abode of the
Muses in Greek mythology. In the early 18th century Louis XIV
planned to complete the Grands        Boulevards,   the semicircular
promenade that bordered Paris to the north, and extend it to the
Left Bank, where it became known as the Boulevards du Midi
(south). The scheme was only carried out in 1760, however, at
which point the poetic mound was levelled and the muses forsaken
for the next 150 years. During that period the area changed little.
Because of their tutelage to Rome, the abbeys of Saint-Germain-
des-Prés and Sainte-Geneviéve had maintained their independ-
ence from the central royal authorities and prospered on their
extensive fertile grounds south of the Seine. The city, therefore,
developed to the north and it was only after its annexation to Paris
in 1860 that the new 14th arrondissement began to take part, timid-
ly, in the urban development of Paris.
    The semi-rural atmosphere and the fresh air attracted artists,
and Balzac, who lived on the site of the present no. 1 rue Cassini
between 1829 and 1834, praised the quality of the area’s cherries.
Likewise, Chateaubriand stayed at no. 88 rue d’Enfer (now Avenue
Denfert-Rochereau) in 1826, and described the house at length in
his Mémoires d’outre tombe. The Passage des Arts, opened in 1839 at

                                 29
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Plaisance, and rue des Artistes, opened in 1853 near Parc de Mont-
souris, also point to the early presence of artists in the 14th. Sculp-
ture, a more prestigious form of art than painting in the 19th cen-
tury, was particularly in demand when the fashionable cemetery of
the south, le Cimetiére du Montparnasse, was opened in1824. Many
sculptors, among them Francois Rude, Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux and
Antoine Bourdelle, came to live here and flatter the vanity of their
fellow mortals by providing them with flamboyant sepulchres.
    The area was largely covered with cornfields, fruit orchards, vine-
yards and kitchen gardens. Before 1850 a few windmills still stood
out against the horizon. Milk, butter, cheese and eggs could be
bought directly at one of the local dairy farms. A local goatherd
could even be seen milking his goats at his customers’ doorsteps,
while wine was bought in casks from the wine grower. This semi-
rural life, with street vendors crying out their wares, colourful
markets, a weekly bird-market at Place Denfert-Rochereau, annual
fairs, street organs and street performers, was punctuated by the
sound of church bells, for the better part of the neighbourhood was
the property of religious orders whose beautiful grounds and the
fragrance of their vegetation enhanced the appeal of the area to
artists and writers.
    The availability of vacant sites, where vehicles could be stored
and horses stabled, also attracted the more pragmatically-minded
transport companies. Trades and workshops connected with trans-
portation sprang up and coachmen would be seen in the streets as
often as nuns. However, the automobile soon rendered the horses
superfluous. On 23 August 1902, the last horse-drawn omnibus was
seen on the Champs-Elysées, plying between Porte Maillot and the
Hotel-de-Ville. Little by little the stables were vacated — a godsend
for the artist community who promptly converted them into
studios.

When, at the dawn of the 20th century, André Salmon and Paul
Fort launched their literary magazine Vers et Prose and urged the
world intelligentsia to join them in Montparnasse and turn it into
an international centre of the arts, they were not particular about
historical accuracy and set up their headquarters east of the
original Montparnasse site, at La Closerie des Lilas, a café situated
on the 6th-arrondissement side of the Observatoire crossroads.

                                  30
                         INTRODUCTION


   Meanwhile, the 14th had entered the 20th century. The city was
gnawing into the countryside, transforming it into a building-site.
Bricklayers, plasterers and house painters filled the local bistrots
and, together with the ever-growing influx of artists, added colour
to the heterogeneous clientele. On 10 July 1913 the section of the
Boulevard Raspail between rue de Vaugirard and Boulevard du
Montparnasse was at long last completed and inaugurated by the
President of the Republic, Raymond Poincaré, a workaholic who
took the opportunity to express his disapproval of the slow pro-
gress of the roadworks. No sooner was it inaugurated than the
wealthy Héléne, the Russian Baroness of Oettingen, and her half-
brother, Serge Férat, moved to no. 278 Boulevard Raspail. These
two lovers of the arts and supporters of the avant-garde literary
review Soirées de Paris, threw open the doors of their new home to
the neighbourhood’s artists, whether Fauves, Cubistes or Futur-
istes, and lavished their Russian largesse on them. “Most of those
who have made or will make a name in painting, poetry, modern
music, frequent this place,’ commented Apollinaire. Among them
were Picasso, Max Jacob, Archipenko, Zadkin, Modigliani and
Kisling. When it was time to leave, the guests would retire to the
new cafés on Carrefour Vavin and carry on their heated con-
versations into the early hours of the morning. After 150 years the
Muses were back at Mont Parnasse.
   All this happened in good time to accommodate the human tide
that was streaming from far and near into this Promised Land of
freedom of expression. No wonder so many of them were destitute
Jews fleeing either persecution in Eastern Europe or the smothering
restrictions of a fossilised ghetto life. And no wonder they took up
residence in the cafés of Carrefour Vavin, where they found shelter,
heating and electricity and a cup of café creme that could be bought
on credit, or perhaps exchanged for a painting. Here they found a
secure haven, surrounded by acosmopolitan collection of outsiders
like themselves and all of them too absorbed in artistic creation to
bother about social or racial idiosyncrasies. Western Europeans —
Germans, Scandinavians and English — mostly went unnoticed
(though Zadkine did refer to the ‘English Quarter’), except on the
occasion of Mrs Pankhurst’s visit to Montparnasse, when they gave
the celebrated suffragette a rowdy welcome. There were also
newcomers from Central and South America, even from Japan.
                                 31
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


   But predominantly they came from Eastern Europe — Russia,
Poland, Lithuania, Romania — Jewish, more often than not. Those
who would eventually ‘make it’ in Paris — Chagall, Soutine, Kisling
or Zadkine, to name but a few — came to be known as I’Ecole de
Paris — not a very appropriate name for a highly individualistic
band of artists who shared a common destiny and a common
lifestyle by force of circumstances, rather than a common concept
or form of art. They were joined by their fellow-Jew Modigliani, an
Italian, who, together with Picasso, Apollinaire and other friends
from the artists’ quarters of Bateau-Lavoir, had descended the
slopes of Montmartre — by now too touristy and commercial for
their taste — crossed the Seine and taken up residence in the 14th
arrondissement, in search of authenticity. Max Jacob did not share
their enthusiasm for the new mecca and scribbled on the wall of his
Montmartre room ‘ne pas aller a Montparnasse’; he was nonethe-
less very often seen there in the company of friends, unable to resist
the lure. As a newly-converted         Roman   Catholic, however,   he
would afterwards go to confession. Guillaume Apollinaire had no
illusions about the durability of the area’s atmosphere and pre-
dicted that the days of Montparnasse would be over ‘when Thomas
Cook comes along with his caravans’.
    Russia’s conspiring revolutionaries too set up their headquar-
ters in the 14th arrondissement. They too needed cheap lodgings
and there were plenty of small printing-houses around for their
revolutionary press. Besides, nobody bothered them in the cafés of
free-for-all Montparnasse. Trotsky was a regular at la Rotonde,
across the Boulevard, in the 6th, where he struck up friendship
with Diego Rivera, thanks to whom he moved to Mexico when
exiled by Stalin. Rivera’s gigantic murals in Mexico City, repres-
enting the Mexican people’s fight for freedom, were tinged by their
friendship. Lenin, however, was seen in the cafés less often than
legend has it — he was too busy researching at the Bibliotheque
Nationale and preparing the new destiny of his homeland to hang
around in the cafés of Carrefour Vavin. His main distraction was a
game of chess with his mother-in-law in the tiny two-room flat she
shared with him and with his wife at 4 rue Marie-Rose, now a
museum (by appointment only. Call 01 42 79 99 58)



                                  32
                           INTRODUCTION


World War I interrupted the show — there were no more gather-
ings in the home of Héléne d’Oettingen and Serge Férat and no
more fancy-dress balls at Kees Van Dongen’s place on Avenue
Denfert-Rochereau. Fujita was no longer seen wearing his Greek-
style, hand-woven tunic with which he hoped to conjure up
images of ancient Greece, nor Max Jacob in his morning coat (a
present from his tailor brother in Quimper), bowler hat and
monocle. The café terraces were deserted.
   Yet the war had begun in frenzied jubilation. Filled with patriot-
ism, the entire population of the 14th arrondissement had stream-
ed into the streets and the artists, in particular, had packed into
Carrefour Vavin. The euphoria reached fever pitch on 2 August
1914, when the troops, glittering in their dashing uniforms and
plumed helmets, and elated by the fulsomeness of their welcome,
paraded through the Boulevard du Montparnasse, heading for the
Gare de lEst and a four-year inferno. Within a matter of days, the
enthusiasm had abated and the people had trudged back home.
Night after night the arrondissement was plunged into pitch dark-
ness and eerie silence prevailed. Even rue de la Gaité suspended its
activities. This street, devoted, as its name suggests, to merry-
making, had been the arrondissement’s centre of entertainment
since the beginning of the 19th century. Until World War I it was
even known as rue de la Joie. There were expensive restaurants and
cheap guinguettes; the flow of wine; the smell of mussels, potato
chips and waffles, even the smell of cooking inside the theatres and
music-halls, where the working-class spectators did their own
cooking while waiting for the show to begin. This did not prevent
the bourgeois from rubbing shoulders with them, especially at
weekends, when everything was packed full.
   This was also a street of vice. With the opening of the Gare du
Montparnasse, many a wretched girl, driven out of Brittany by
poverty, was beguiled into worse misery by such pimps as the main
character of Charles-Louis Philippe’s novel Bubu de Montparnasse.
For the Montparnasse railway station was, and still is, the gateway
to Brittany, hence the numerous fish restaurants and créperies in
the 14th arrondissement.
   But now that war had broken out the music-halls and theatres
had closed down and the streetwalkers slackened their pace.
The streets were empty, the men had gone to the front. The

                                 o3
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


international community of Montparnasse had embraced the
French cause and was also drafted. The German colony had packed
up and discreetly cleared out of the Dome. Only vagabonds and
unfit artists such as Soutine, wrecked by poverty, and Modigliani,
ravaged by tuberculosis, alcohol and drugs, had remained behind,
often ashamed to be seen in public. It soon became clear that the
war was not going to be a walkover. By December rue de la Gaité
had settled down for a long conflict and decided it might just as
well resume the revelling — a judicious decision for the soldiers on
leave. Winters were harsh. The occupants of converted stables and
other makeshift shacks suffered horrendously from the cold (—9°C
in 1917). Old people and young children died of cold and hunger,
among them Diego Rivera’s son. Fujita’s first wife, Fernande,
remembered how she had burnt several of Modigliani’s paintings
in order to keep the fire going. On 23 March 1918 Big Bertha went
into action. Between March and August her wayward shells hit
Paris blindly, causing the deaths of 256 Parisians. The 14th arron-
dissement was her target several times, in particular on 11 April,
when a shell hit the well-known maternity hospital Baudeloque on
Boulevard du Port-Royal, killing 20 mothers, babies and mid-
wives.
   With peace restored the frantic show resumed with an explos-
ion of activity never witnessed before. Montparnasse, heedless of
darker days to come, entered those roaring years, that crazy decade
of self-delusion, with a determination to have a wild time. Fernand
Léger, a contemporary of that decade, perceived and grasped this
state of mind: ‘Man, exasperated, tense, immobilised for four
years, can lift his head at last, open his eyes, relax, regain his taste
for life. Wild, dancing, spending, frantic that he can now, at last,
walk straight, shout, scream, waste.’
   At night, while the genuine 14th frequented rue de la Gaité and
its traditional French places of pleasure, such as the Théatre du
Montparnasse and the Bobino music-hall, the sophisticated set
vibrated to the sound of new rhythms — foxtrot, Charleston and
later jazz. There were new establishments in the vicinity of Carre-
four Vavin, but it was the Jockey, which opened in 1923 at the
corner of rue de Chevreuse and Boulevard du Montparnasse (in
the 6th arr.) that stole the show. There was nothing glamorous
about its cramped premises, a Wild West saloon of sorts, with

                                  34
                          INTRODUCTION


figures of cowboys and Redskins on the front, yet wealthy, trendy
Right Bank bourgeois squeezed up against local bohemians in an
attempt to dance to the music of an ex-cowboy pianist, two guitar-
ists from Hawaii or simply a phonograph. There were no social
barriers here and no affectation. Cocteau, Kisling, Pascin, Hem-
ingway, Fitzgerald. . . all the celebrities of Montparnasse frequent-
ed the Jockey. Twice a night a bob-headed brunette, known as
Kiki, would electrify the assembly with her black hose and garters,
her stentorian, husky voice and her saucy songs.
    Montparnasse even boasted the first institutionalised bordello
on the Left Bank, the Sphinx on Boulevard Edgar-Quinet. In lux-
ury it was a match for the Chabanais in the 2nd arrondissement,
the mecca of the crowns of Europe and heads of state. The girls
at the Sphinx were selected by the Madam, Marthe (“Martoune’)
Lemestre, at the Folies-Bergére and enjoyed excellent working
conditions and social privileges, notably an annual three-week
holiday on the French Riviera. For this was a progressive establish-
ment with liberal views. Kisling came here to look for models and
left his pictures on the walls, a gift to the place that had taken care
of the artistes of Montparnasse. With its lavish setting, muted
atmosphere, gorgeous girls and exquisite champagne, the Sphinx
was so in vogue that during the 1937 World Fair it welcomed as
many as 1,500 clients, among them quite a number of couples.
However, in 1946 all the bordellos (maisons closes) of France were
closed down by law.
   La Coupole was to prove a less ephemeral enterprise. Its in-
auguration ceremony      took place on 20 December        1927 amidst
heavy drinking (the date of the 2oth is said to have been chosen for
the pun on vingt and vin, and because the figure 20, so they
claimed, ‘dispelled all melancholy’). The art critic André Warnod
recalled how he had returned home on all fours to avoid tottering
on the slippery ice... For some reason La Coupole was to over-
shadow the neighbouring cafés of Carrefour Vavin and has
remained the tourists’ mecca to this day. The founders of La
Coupole, René Lafon and Ernest Fraux, started the new establish-
ment as an act of revenge and defiance against the Dome from
where they had been fired. Determined to outdo their next-door
rival by hook or by crook, they went all out to create something
colossal. Supported by 32 columns 5 metres high, furnished with

                                  35
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


hundreds of metres of tables and benches, La Coupole employed
450 people — among them doormen in dashing garnet-coloured
uniforms — and seated 600, which made it the largest eating-place
in France. A huge restaurant with an open ceiling provided an
extra attraction in warm weather and there was also a dance-hall
with a full-size orchestra. The famous Art Deco glass cupola had
nothing to do with the name, which was inspired by the neigh-
bouring Déme and Rotonde. The cupola was added only four
years later and in any case soon disappeared behind plaster. Every
‘Montparnos’ frequented La Coupole — Picasso, Chagall, Soutine,
Man Ray, Josephine Baker. . . to debate or meditate, and especially
to see and to be seen in the most extravagant attire on this focal
stage of the Crazy Years. Thus, no sooner had he arrived in Paris
than Charlie Chaplin rushed over to La Coupole. And if Salvador
Dali defined Montparnasse as ‘the navel of the world’, La Coupole
was unquestionably the navel of Montparnasse, At present La
Coupole is surmounted by a block of offices. The murals of Othon
Friesz and Fernand Léger have been cleaned up and even the Art
Deco cupola has been stripped of the plaster and revealed to view.
It is now part of the Flo chain and serves the same mass-produced
menus as its other sister brasseries. Although it is still packed out,
the magic spell is broken and it is questionable whether an Orson
Welles would still appreciate it. Today people go to La Coupole to
eat, hundreds of mouths munching away in an eternal hubbub.

Some of the old-timers did not join in the festivities of the Twen-
ties. Guillaume Apollinaire, who had recovered form his wounds
at Verdun, succumbed instead to the Spanish influenza, together
with 20 million other fellow Europeans. Ironically, he was buried
on 11 November, while Paris was celebrating the Armistice. Modig-
liani passed away a year later, on 24 January 1920, followed by his
companion Jeanne Hébuterne, who, in her sorrow, threw herself
out of the window of their room while pregnant with their second
child. Red Russians had also disappeared from the scene, having
returned to their motherland to build a new society. Their place
was taken by White Russians and another wave of Russian Jews.
The German colony made a discreet comeback and resumed their
seats at the Déme as inconspicuously as they had vacated them
four years earlier. The German art dealer Kahnweiler was also

                                  36
                         INTRODUCTION


back, having spent the war in Switzerland, and tried to reassemble
his old artists and to save from the wreckage whatever paintings he
could. Once more foreigners from all corners of the world congre-
gated in Montparnasse, and now there were many more of them.
Exasperated at their presence, the artist Guy Arnoux stuck a
French flag over the door of his studio on rue Huyghens and a
plaque reading Consulat de France.
   The lead role this time went to the United States of America,
whose children strode in with flying colours. While Europe was in
a shambles, the United States asserted itself as the predominant
power of the world. Some of its wealthy nationals, such as the
golden couple the Fitzgeralds, came over ready to paint the town
red. However, the discerning pair chose to stay at the Ritz and
came down to Montparnasse only for the fun. The less rich, such as
Hemingway and Dos Passos, also had their fling. With the franc
down and the dollar up they had never had it so good. Besides,
there was no Prohibition in Paris!
   This ‘lost Generation’, disorientated by an absurd war and a
world that had lost its meaning, hoped to find solace in decadent
Paris, away from the rigid code of behaviour of puritanical Amer-
ica. Nowhere could they find the same degree of freedom as in
Montparnasse. Outside this unique pocket of bohemian extrava-
gance, French social life was just as regimented — albeit by a some-
what different code of behaviour — but the expatriates knew and
cared little about mainstream French life. Although France could
boast as many as 80 feminist associations after the War, Victor
Marguerite caused no small scandal when his novel La Gargonne,
the story of a single mother of perfect moral integrity, was publish-
ed in 1922 and he was stripped of his Légion d’honneur. America’s
Protestant expatriates did not see this side of France, and, like the
Jamesian hero, Strather, a generation earlier, believed that in this
sensual, Roman Catholic society they could give themselves over
to pleasure with no sense of guilt or sin. Woman was instrumental
in this quest, as expressed in Man Ray’s photograph of the woman-
cello, and Alice Prin, Man Ray’s mistress and better known as Kiki,
embodied this female ideal.
   After running away from her bakery apprenticeship mie she
was only 14, she drifted into nude modelling (to the horror of her
mother), alcohol and cocaine. One winter night during the War,

                                 o7.
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


shivering with cold and with nowhere to sleep, she fetched up with
a girlfriend at the wretched artists’ quarters of La Ruche, deep in
the 15th arrondissement. Soutine offered them his hospitality at 2
am and virtually burnt every inflammable item in his possession to
keep them warm. Ever since that day Kiki claimed to have had a
crush on Soutine. Fujita experienced similar heroic generosity on
the part of Fernande on his first visit to her, on a bitingly cold night
during the War. In this case it was a genuine Louis XV chair, a gift
from her father, that ended in the flames. Fujita was to marry the
kind-hearted Fernande a couple of months later. When Kiki died
at the age of 50, an alcoholic and a drug addict, abandoned by her
former friends who had become rich and famous, Fujita was the
only one to accompany her on her last journey to the poor people’s
cemetery of Thiais. Nonetheless, several wreaths were deposited
on her grave, each bearing the name of one of Montparnasse’s
cafés — her ‘family’ paying her their last tribute.
   In her heyday the fiery Kiki, everybody’s model and at some
time everybody’s mistress, was the Queen of Montparnasse. She
was that archetypal woman, sexually free, yet full of mystery, offer-
ing herself with childish ingenuousness, yet forever elusive. Man
Ray won her heart while they were out at the pictures. A long-
lasting love affair ensued, full of drama and volcanic passion — even
pistol shots —as befitted Montparnasse. Man Ray immortalised her
in L’Etoile de Mer, the first surrealist film, where she is seen with a
rose between her teeth, and 300,000 copies have been made of the
photograph taken from the film. Back in New York he had become
acquainted with the Dadaists — Picabia and Marcel Duchamp —
and he arrived in Montparnasse on 14 July 1921 to join their move-
ment, the only American to do so. In their derisive, provocative,
anarchical way, the Dadaists too were trying to cope with a shat-
tered world. By adding a moustache to the delicate face of the
Mona Lisa or exhibiting a toilet seat, or a urinal under the title
Fountain, Marcel Duchamp wanted to shock the bourgeois and
pull the rug from under the hordes of pretentious poseurs who
purported to support the arts. Man Ray, once settled in Montpar-
Nasse, set out to photograph all its celebrities. In his tiny premises
on rue Delambre, behind the Déme — a single room which served
as living quarters, studio and dark room — they posed for posterity
and immortalised in black and white the golden days of Mont-

                                  38
                          INTRODUCTION


parnasse — while Kiki, stretched on Man Ray’s bed, waited for them
to leave, impatient to be left alone with her lover.
   Whereas pre-war days had been times of struggle and of gen-
uine creativeness, post-war Montparnasse turned art and pleasure
into an industry. In this the naive tourist was much to blame,
raising the bids on questionable ‘modern’ art, and playing into the
hands of shrewd profiteers. “. . . Butterflies from the world over...
beating against its [Montparnasse] window panes in search of a
flicker of genius’, unaware that real genius had meanwhile migrat-
ed elsewhere — Picasso to the bourgeois rue de la Boétie in the 8th,
Chagall to the residential Passy in the 16th, Fujita to a hétel partic-
ulier. Matisse and Soutine had left Paris altogether and settled in
the sunny south...
    But another creative movement emerged in Montparnasse,
bringing abouta revolution in the arts. In1924 André Breton, aclose
friend of Marcel Duchamp and a Dadaist himself, founded the
Surrealist movement and produced its first official publication,
Littérature, in collaboration with Philippe Soupault and Louis
Aragon. The other members of the literary branch of the move-
ment, among them Jacques Prévert and Robert Desnos, had their
phalanstery at 54 rue du Chateau, a seedy, rundown part of the
14th, by then no longer the countrified neighbourhood where Le
Douanier Rousseau, in order to make ends meet, taught solfége
and drawing to the children of its concierges and shopkeepers. The
premises themselves were actually comfortable and pleasant, al-
most elegant, thanks to the private income of one of the members,
Marcel Duhamel. The surrealists spent their time here eating and
drinking, reading and composing poetry, listening to jazz and mak-
ing love. The girls were picked up among the admirers of the move-
ment on the terraces of Montparnasse, but the scandalised, petit
bourgeois neighbours earnestly believed that the place was abrothel.
    Like their Dada predecessors, the Surrealists reacted to an ailing
age. Max Ernst, Juan Miro, Salvador Dali participated in the move-
ment and, under the influence of Freud, tried to enter the realm of
dreams and the unconscious. (Like Breton they wanted to find the
beauty hidden beyond reality and to reconcile reality and dreams.)
To achieve this they experimented with different odds and ends,
substituting hair combs and bits of string and straw for paint-
brushes. In between times they experimented in automatic writing

                                  32
                    14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


which was supposed to replace conscious reflection even in one’s
sleep, and were amazed when the poet Robert Desnos would fail to
be woken during those sessions. . . However, in 1945, when Desnos
was lying on his deathbed, sapped by typhus in Theresienstad con-
centration camp, on the eve of its liberation by the Americans, he
revealed that he had been cheating all along.
   André Breton was notorious for his dogmatic politics and
violent behaviour and became ‘the terror of Montparnase’. He
abhorred the place and generally stuck to his home on rue Fon-
taine in the 9th arrondissement, at the foot of Montmartre (al-
though he did move to 33 rue Delambre in 1921, for a year). When
the cabaret Le Maldoror opened on Boulevard Edgar-Quinet,
using the title of Lautréamont’s venerated work as its name, a
sacrilege in the ghastly environment of Montparnasse, Breton felt
himself justified in storming the cabaret with his disciples, who
wrecked the premises before the police could be called. “Anti’-
everything and intolerant of anyone who did not fall into line with
his own convictions, he did not hesitate to sabotage the work of his
own friends, especially the painters, who, being less dogmatic and
more independent-minded than the literary set, were more likely
to be ‘excommunicated’ by him. Thus Juan Mird and Max Ernst
aroused his anger by doing the sets for Diaghilev’s Romeo and Juliet
—a capitalistic enterprise. Again he called on his followers to wreak
havoc during the performance. The group was eventually expelled
from the theatre and on their way out were successively punched,
one by one, by Boris Koshno, Diaghilev’s secretary. André Breton
spent so much energy picking fights, falling out with friends and
‘excommunicating’ members from the movement that by the end
of the decade the split was inevitable. In 1991, 87-year-old Naville,
the last surviving Surrealist, recalled how back in 1928 Breton had.
called him ‘a boa-constrictor’ and ‘an eminent reptile’ because he
did not share Breton’s political views. The Chilean architect and
painter Matta recalled having been excluded from the movement
because of his love of mathematics, while Dali was excluded for
having described Hitler as ‘an erotic hermaphrodite’. . .

For the American colony, this fool’s paradise was to end on 24
October 1929, when Wall Street crashed. Bank cheques could no
longer be expected to arrive and US nationals had no alternative

                                 40
                          INTRODUCTION


but to pack up and return home. The economic crisis in France did
not start until 1932, and even though people could no longer afford
the follies of the Twenties, the terraces of Carrefour Vavin re-
mained crowded until the declaration of war on 3 September 1939.
A new couple was emerging, at the Dome this time, Jean-Paul
Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir. In La Force de l’Age de Beauvoir
wrote, referring to the Déme, ‘I have the sense of being part of a
family and that protects me against depression.’ Its three separate
halls were now divided up among three different communities —
Europeans, Americans      and French. The terrace, however, was
shared by les Démiens, which included everyone. Among the
Europeans the German community was pretty conspicuous. The
German forces of occupation followed from 1940 on, and as a
result Simone de Beauvoir left. With Sartre taken prisoner in Ger-
many, she found she could no longer bear the place: ‘The Dome is
noisy; lots of uniforms.’ Besides, the Vavin Métro station closed
down and remained so for the duration of the war. Moving a few
stations further north on the Clignancourt-Orléans line, she land-
ed with some friends at Place Saint-Germain-des-Prés and there
inaugurated a new era. The days of Montparnasse were over.

History, however, never comes to a standstill and in the 1960s a
different Montparnasse emerged further west. Practical-minded
France, impatient to enjoy the new prosperity, was aware of the
economic potential of the neighbourhood, thanks to its railway
station that could link Paris with the south-west and open new
horizons. Leaving nostalgia to sentimentalists, the authorities did
away with the inadequate 19th-century provincial station that led
nowhere except to Brittany, an economic backwater. A new station
replaced it, turning Montparnasse into the gateway to the entire
west and south-west and, beyond the national border, to Spain.
Before long, bulldozers and drills started to extirpate seedy
Montparnasse, levelling Henry Miller’s quartier louche, working
relentlessly and without respite, until 2 am sometimes, according
to exhausted neighbours. Crumbling houses gave way to the third
largest shopping centre in the capital, which has since cluttered the
skyline and the neighbourhood. Since the motive was profit,
environmental and aesthetic issues could not be taken into
consideration.
                                 41
                    14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


   Originally a beautiful spacious garden was planned above the
station, but the addition of a large car park made this technically
impracticable and some scanty vegetation is all that grows amidst
this concrete jungle. However, the poetic name of the garden — Le
Jardin de l’Atlantique (see also the 15th arr.) — has been preserved:
Parisians have been trained in recent times to content themselves
with symbolic names, surreal reminders of a lost countryside.
Thus, the visitor to the Domaine de l’Océan has to summon up an
ocean of imagination and goodwill in order to be spiritually
transported to the shores of Brittany, Vendée or the Pays Basque
and ignore the hideous high-rises all around.
   Meanwhile the TGV train arrived here in 1990, necessitating a
new station, the second one having become obsolete in turn. By
1995 it was used annually by over 50 million passengers. With
Nantes at a mere two hours’ distance from Montparnasse and
Bordeaux only three, there was much business in prospect; build-
ing companies (unaware of the imminent recession) rubbed their
hands, riding roughshod over the protestations of the local people
and provided Montparnasse with 50,000 m’ of office space. With a
21st-century major railway station slapped down in the neighbour-
hood, there was no way the village atmosphere of Montparnasse
could be preserved. With all due respect to Henry Miller’s affection
for the old place, and particularly to the longer-standing residents
who have been evicted from their homes, it must be admitted that
many of these buildings were derelict beyond restoration. What is
less forgivable is the fact that, for the umpteenth time, contem-
porary Paris has failed to ally technological progress with aesthet-
ics and has permitted such an incoherent architectural mess to
come into existence.
    Fortunately, the 14th arrondissement extends way beyond the
vicinity of the station and is, in fact, one of the more pleasant
arrondissements to live in. With a combination of open-air mark-
ets, squares and gardens where old and young converge, it takes
pride in its homely, unfussy atmosphere, prized by environment-
alists and artists. Furthermore, the Cité Universitaire, the univer-
sity’s halls of residence at the southern edge of the arrondissement,
and the proximity of the Latin Quarter to the north, account for
the presence   of students, academics,    intellectuals and profes-
sionals. No wonder the 14th shelters a good number of associations

                                 42
            PLACE    PABLO   PICASSO     — RUE   DAGUERRE


concerned with social welfare, conservation and human rights,
notably Amnesty International; and no wonder so many ex-
students from the 1968 generation, known as soixante-huitards,
came over to the 14th to start their new families.
