14th Arr: From Place Denfert-Rochereau North

    FROM PLACE DENFERT-ROCHEREAU                              NORTH

This walk begins at PLACE DENFERT-ROCHEREAU, a star-
shaped roundabout with seven broad arteries radiating from it,
pleasantly surrounded by greenery and dominated by its famous
lion, le Lion de Belfort, enthroned proudly on his elevated socle in
the centre. The lion is a replica of the one standing in Belfort,
which Bartholdi (better known for his Statue of Liberty) had
moulded in homage to the heroic defence of that city during the
Franco-Prussian   war. The Avenue         (running north) and Place
Denfert-Rochereau bear the name of the Colonel who had led that
resistance, a most convenient fluke, for the avenue was previously
known   as lAvenue    d’Enfer (Hell)! The Third Republic, then
anxious to accommodate the Germans, arranged for the Lion to
face west. When the Germans came back during the last war, they
sent many neighbouring statues to the foundry (including the one

                                    60
         NORTH     FROM       PLACE   DENFERT-ROCHEREAU




                                        JARDIN
                                      MARCO POL! O
                                                     |




                PLACE
         DENFERT ROCHEREAU.
                 pen0/.               PL,
                                  ST-JACQUES
               EDz<




                          Masoud
celebrating the Rights of Man), but the Lion was spared. It seems
that the Germans, awed by the courage of the people of Belfort,
preferred to let matters stand.
  Avenue du Général-Leclerc, running south of the Place, com-
memorates the hero of the Liberation who, having reached the
Porte d’Orléans on the southern boundary of the arrondissement,
entered Paris on 25 August 1944 along its route. On either side of
the Avenue stand Nicolas Ledoux’s toll-gate pavilions, built to em-
bellish the checkpoints of the toll walls where taxes were levied.
Between 1786 and 1860 the walls ran along what were then the
                                      61
                     14TH     ARRONDISSEMENT


boundaries of Paris, in this area the present Boulevards Saint-
Jacques, Raspail and Edgar-Quinet.
   The pavilion at no. 1 Place Denfert-Rochereau,          across   the
Avenue du Général Leclerc, now serves as entrance to the Paris
Catacombs (open daily except Monday, 2-4 pm, Saturday and
Sunday 9-11 am, 2-4 pm. Bring a light, and also warm clothes —
temperature is at a constant 11°C/52°F).

The Paris Catacombs run 20 metres underground, a 1,500-metre-
long maze of galleries padded neatly with the bones and skulls of six
million anonymous Parisians, among them those of Danton and
Robespierre. They were brought to these abandoned quarries to-
wards the end of the 18th century from all the other burial grounds
of Paris, predominantly from the Cimetiére des Innocents near the
market of Les Halles, which by that time had stretched beyond its
capacity. According to medieval traditions, the living should look
Death in the face, hence the implacable inscription at the gate:
                  Arréte! c’est ici Vempire de la mort!
                  Halt! here is the kingdom of death!
   The builders of the Catacombs, with macabre nonchalance, used
the tibia of the deceased to enhance the environment. A rotunda at
the other end of the Catacombs has even been named La Rotonde des
Tibias, itself a source of artistic inspiration to a later generation.
Indeed, on 2 April 1897, at 2 am, a society concert was given here to
an audience ofa hundred appreciative connoisseurs. Eminent top-
hatted artists, writers and journalists, as well as some elegant
feather-hatted ladies gathered in this makeshift ‘hall’, renowned for
its excellent acoustics. Both Chopin’s ‘Funeral March’ and
Beethoven’s ‘Funeral March’ from the Eroica symphony were
performed, overshadowed, however, by the ‘Round of the Skele-
tons’ from Saint-Saéns’s Danse Macabre to which Cazalis contrib-
uted creepy lyrics depicting the white, cracking skeletons hovering
about under their shrouds. Punctuated by the xylophone, the
refrain went as follows:

                           ‘Zig, Zig and Zig,
                           Everyone jigs about,’
News of the scandalous ‘concert’ spread throughout Paris in no
time and the two guards who had been bribed (twenty farthings
                                    62
         NORTH    FROM    PLACE   DENFERT-ROCHEREAU


each) to allow this shockingly immoral happening to take place
were fired at once (but were later re-employed).
   In the more grave times of World War II, the Catacombs
provided an excellent hiding-place for the Resistance.

BOULEVARD       RASPAIL, north of Place Denfert-Rochereau, is
our next destination. At no. 277 can be seen the magnificent
grounds ofa retirement home, of which more later. At no. 261, Jean
Nouvel’s glass tower houses the Fondation Cartier and is an open
wound to all those who cherished the American Center of Paris that
once stood on the site, a charmingly outdated house, built by the
American Welles Bosworth in 1934, and serving the community
with its wide range of cultural activities. By allowing it to be torn
down — despite a lengthy battle to prevent this, supported by in-
fluential figures from the arts world — the authorities have taken
another unforgivable step towards the obliteration of the intensely
cultural past of the 14th arrondissement. In 1992 the red-roofed
home of the American Center was replaced by a towering glass
structure, the new home of the Fondation Cartier for the promo-
tion of contemporary art. The lovely gardens of the old American
Center are no longer used by the public and the historic 200-year-
old cedar tree, believed to have been planted by Chateaubriand,
now stands encased in a prison of glass. Meanwhile the new high-
flying American Center at Bercy, for which this genuine place was
sold, proved a financial fiasco and ended stillborn.


Turn right into rue CAMPAGNE-PREMIERE, once a strong-
hold of the artists’ community of Montparnasse. In 1922, when
Man Ray’s new interest in photography required more space, he
rented a studio at no. 31, a building decorated with impressive
ceramics, which had won a prize in 1911. In December 1923 he
moved from rue Delambre to the Istria Hotel at no 29, so as to live
next door to his studio. He was followed by his close buddy Marcel
Duchamp, who had returned from New York the same month,
and by the latter’s mistress, Thérése Treize. Man Ray also moved in
with his mistress, the celebrated Kiki, the ‘Queen’ of Montpar-
nasse. From here they transported their passionate love affair to
Carrefour Vavin and other Montparnasse haunts, demonstrating
it Montparnasse-fashion with violent outbursts and gunshots in

                                  63
                         14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


the air. Man Ray gave up both the studio and the hotel room in
1929, when he moved to rue du Val-de-Grace in the 5th arron-
dissement.
  The site of no. 17 was used by a riding school until 1914. There
were plenty of horses in the area at the time, since this was the site
picked for their depots by the Paris transport companies, all of
which used horse-drawn vehicles. One such depot was situated on
the vacant grounds of the northern side of the street.
  A one-storeyed house stood until 1936 at no. 14, containing two
shops and some wretched rooms in the attic. The shops — a bakery
and a wine merchant — catered to the depot’s coachmen, especially
the wine shop! However, by 1925 a different clientele took over.
One customer was the celebrated poetess Anna de Noailles, who
liked to mingle with the community of Montparnasse and also to
pose for Fujita. However, Fujita did not keep her as a model for she
would not remain still. One of the attics was occupied by Verlaine
who then let Rimbaud have it. He only stayed here for two months,
a time punctuated, as usual, by fits of violence. The landlord, Ver-
laine, was no example of self-control either and in 1873 spent some
time in prison for having injured Rimbaud! He made good use of
that time, composing a very evocative verse on that seedy room:

             O chambre, as-tu gardé leurs spectres ridicules,
             O pleine de jour sale et de bruits d’araignées. . .
             Oh, room, have you kept their ridiculous spectres
             Oh, full of dirty light and of the noise of spiders. . .
   A narrow entrance at no. 9, paved with bumpy cobblestones
and lined with pot plants, leads to a courtyard with an unexpected
fig tree. Built of materials salvaged from the 1889 Universal
Exposition, the building was divided into more than 100 studios,
responding to the needs of the neighbourhood in those days. Here
only the song of birds interrupts the stillness, and the church bells
chiming the quarters. Among its famous tenants were Rainer
Maria Rilke, Rodin’s then secretary, Modigliani, Whistler and
Chirico, one of the early precursors of Surrealism. When Picasso
and Apollinaire came over to his studio to look at his metaphysical
paintings, they were overwhelmed.
   Modigliani’s cantine was just three houses down the street, at
no. 3, a modest crémerie (dairy), bearing the sign Chez Rosalie,

                                       64
           NORTH     FROM     PLACE     DENFERT-ROCHEREAU


which also served as a restaurant, as was common in those days.
The Italian Rosalie Tobia, Mére Rosalie to the community of
Montparnasse, had begun as a model, one of the Italians picked
up on the ‘fair’ held weekly on the corner of rue de la Grande-
Chaumiére and Boulevard du Montparnasse (see chapter on the
6th arr.). Posing as Venus for the highly regarded Pompier* painter
Bouguereau, she also agreed to work for such fringe characters as
Whistler and Modigliani, portraying less pompous subjects and
for a smaller fee... When cellulite got the better of her, she
switched to the food business and played mother to the poverty-
stricken artists whom she nourished with all her heart. On her tiny,
dark premises below street-level, impregnated with the smell of
onions and garlic, she offered a full, delicious Italian meal for the
modest sum of 2 francs. Kisling, Soutine, Max Jacob, Salmon and
Kiki too huddled on the backless benches on either side of the long
wooden tables of the restaurant for a dish of pasta. Many ate on
credit, others contented themselves with half portions or a filling
minestrone. She was not interested in being paid with the ‘dread-
ful’ paintings of her protégés, as other café owners were, not even
those by her fellow countryman Modigliani, the terror of the place,
always drunk as a lord and creating havoc. When he refused to eat,
she refused to serve him wine: ‘A good-looking boy like you who
does honour to our country!’ When, eaten away by alcohol, he
died on 24 January 1920 at the Hépital Broussais-la Charité (on rue
Didot, in the 14th arr.), the most famous artists and models of
Montparnasse followed his hearse, which was overflowing with
flowers, in a huge procession. At every street junction — all the way
to the Pére Lachaise cemetery in eastern Paris — a policeman was
standing to attention in the shining uniform of the Republic. Thus
in death did Modigliani wreak vengeance on the establishment.

Continue east along BOULEVARD                  DU MONTPARNASSE              to
its junction with Avenue de l’Observatoire. No trace is left of the
Grande Chaumiere, the open-air dance hall that was located on the
site of this block between 1788 and 1853, embellished by clumps of
shady trees and beautiful gardens, as famous as the Bal Mabile off
the Champs-Elysées (Avenue Montaigne). It was started by an
Englishman, Tickson, as a countrified place of entertainment, with
   * Uncreative academic painters in the second half of the 19th century.

                                       65
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


a few thatched huts scattered here and there, hence the name
chaumiére. Later a spacious, two-storeyed house replaced them,
with magnificent gardens and grottos, unique in these parts.
Students and grisettes used to come here, scorned by self-righteous
Parisians, particularly when the polka was danced here for the first
time in 1845. Worse was to come with the first performance of the
daring Robert Macaire, an early version of the can-can, to be
followed by the outrageous chahut. This time the police were sent
over and had it banned at once! Ignoring the ban, Lola Montés
came over with the celebrated clown Auriol to be swept onto the
floor in a wild chahut.
   Le Bullier, at the end of the block, is under the ownership of the
historic Closerie des Lilas, across the Boulevard (see chapter on the
6th arrondissement), but has no past and cannot boast the same
atmosphere. Its name, however, was borrowed from the historic
Bullier, which was situated across the Avenue de Observatoire (in
the 5th arrondissement), on the site of today’s university sports
centre, and was started by Monsieur Bullier. A modest establish-
ment stood here at the time, where he planted lilac trees, after
which the famous Closerie across the avenue was called. Students
and grisettes came here too, as did Béranger, Henri Murger and
Théodore de Banville, while the famous Mogador would dance
under its bright, multi-coloured candelabra — the polka, the waltz,
the mazurka — each vogue giving way to the next. During the
Swinging Twenties, le Bal Bullier exploded with eccentricity, and
when Kiki, the Queen of every ball, made an appearance here,
practically in her most natural attire, everyone was thrilled. She
was not the only one, for during the traditional orgiastic ball of the
Beaux-Arts school, the celebrated Quat-z-Arts, a procession of
students and models made their way from the Beaux-Art School
on rue Bonaparte (in the 6th) to Avenue de l’Observatoire, simi-
larly undressed and brandishing phallic symbols, wrecking café
terraces, in other words, heralding in their own way the coming of
the spring season.
   The Paris Observatory stands at the southern edge of the
Avenue de l’Observatoire, to your right, of which more later.

Continue into BOULEVARD DU PORT-ROYAL, across the
avenue. At no. 123 the Baudelocque maternity hospital occupies

                                 66
          NORTH    FROM   PLACE   DENFERT-ROCHEREAU


the site of the Abbey of Port-Royal, the stronghold of Jansenism
and, as such, the centre of religious and political controversy at the
time of all-embracing absolutism under Louis XIV.
    The original Port-Royal was situated in the Chevreuse Valley
(near Saint-Rémy-lés-Chevreuse, within easy reach of Port-Royal
RER station). Because it was situated in the heart of the country, it
was known as Port-Royal-des-Champs. It was surrounded by for-
ests rather than by fields, however, and these retained the humidity
and rendered the environment insalubrious. It was therefore
decided to transfer the female inmates to a new abbey on the edge
of Paris, on the site of the Hétel de Clagny, once the property of
Pierre Lescot, the architect of the Hdétel Carnavalet and of the
south western wing of the Louvre’s Cour Carrée.
   The Abbey in Chevreuse had been built at the dawn of the 13th
century by the Order of Citeaux and adhered to its regulations for
four centuries. But in 1609 its mother superior, Mére Angélique
(real name Jacqueline-Marie Arnauld) set out to reform the Order,
which substantially increased the number of new nuns. This was
when she added the large red cross to the Order’s white scapular as
can be seen in Philippe de Champaigne’s portrait of her, entitled
Port-Royal, now hanging in the Louvre. It was the mother of Mére
Angélique who financed the purchase of the Hotel de Clagny,
while the construction of the new convent was financed by several
great families of the nobility such as the Guénégaud, the Sévigné,
the Sablé and the Aumont. Angélique’s mother, her six daughters
and six nieces joined the Order and came to live here, while her
eldest son and her youngest one (her twentieth child, the brilliant
Antoine Arnauld) joined the community in Chevreuse. This had
become a hothouse of intellectual celebrities (and as such even
more dangerously influential), known as les Solitaires de Port-
Royal or les Messieurs de Port-Royal.
   It was at Port-Royal-des-Champs that Jansenism had first been
introduced into France during the reign of Louis XIII by the Abbot
of Saint-Cyran, the director of Angélique and her nuns. Although
he was imprisoned by Richelieu, the architect of absolutism who
had smothered all forms of religious dissension, the movement
gained ground among such threatening circles as the Sorbonne
and Parliament, the bourgeoisie and the parish priests. Absolutism
was achieved under Louis XIV, but Richelieu had died without

                                  67
                      14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


extirpating Jansenism from France. It is not insignificant that
some of the defeated rebels of the Fronde* found refuge at Port-
Royal.
   The doctrine of Jansenism had been elaborated by Cornelius
Jansenius from his study of Augustine. Ruling out the importance
of free will, he believed in predestination and in the need of God’s
grace in order to be saved, which would be bestowed only on the
few. This was a pessimistically dangerous view to encourage
among average mortals but it appealed to powerful intellects such
as Pascal and Racine. Racine was educated by the ‘solitary’ gentle-
men of Port-Royal-des-Champs as an adolescent, while 18-year-
old Pascal reverted to them for a metaphysical answer to the
enigma of man’s dual nature, to the contradiction between mind
and heart, in short, to the wretched condition of this monstre in-
compréhensible. It was at Port-Royal that he wrote his Provinciales
in defence of Jansenism whilst launching an all-out, virulent attack
on the casuistic Jesuits,    a menace to Christian morals. He then
undertook his much more ambitious work, an apologia for the
Christian religion, fragments of which have come down to us as Les
Pensées.
   The Jesuits enjoyed the favour of the King, whose confessor,
Pére Lachaize, was appointed from among them. Under their
pressure, Jansenism was branded a heresy and the premises in the
now 14th arrondissement were closed down in 1688 which was felt
as a tragedy by its inmates, but thanks to which the buildings have
survived. Not so the Abbey. In 1705, at the urging of his new con-
fessor Le Tellier, who had replaced the late, amiable Pére Lachaize,
alongside the Archbishop of Paris, de Noailles, and the head of
police, d’Argenson, the King ordered the Abbey of Port-Royal to
be cleared. Four years later, a company of 300 musketeers was sent
over to demolish it and lay waste its cemetery. Relatives were,
however, allowed to recover some of the remains including those
of Racine, even though he had died in disgrace: these now lie at the
church of Saint-Etienne-du-Mont in the Latin Quarter.
   A new era began in 1715 under the Regent. The Jansenist parlia-
ment gained influence, which increased under Louis XV. In 1762 it
was the turn of the Jesuit Company to be eradicated from the
kingdom of France.
           * The princely revolt against Louis XIV in August 1652.

                                     68
          NORTH    FROM   PLACE    DENFERT-ROCHEREAU


   The premises in the 14th arrondissement survived the Revolu-
tion and are today part of the hospital. To the left as one enters
stands the 17th-century chapel where the remains of Mére Angél-
ique have been buried since 1661 (under the floor of the choir).
Behind it, above a flight of steps, a small door leads to a short
corridor and to the 17th-century cloister, an exquisite haven of
tranquillity.

The Cochin hospital, across rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, occu-
pies the grounds of the Capucins’ novitiate, whose head house was
at Faubourg Saint-Honoré.      It was Jean-Francois de Gondi, the
future Archbishop of Paris, who in 1613 laid its cornerstone, boost-
ing its economic    development.       Indeed, the novitiate was sur-
rounded by sainfoin and alfalfa fields, vineyards and a wine press —
a pretty sight.

Turn right into RUE DU FAUBOURG              SAINT-JACQUES. The
street meets the Boulevard Saint-Jacques at PLACE SAINT-
JACQUES, a seedy spot bordered by taverns of ill repute in 1832,
when the guillotine was moved here from Place de Gréve (now
H6tel-de-Ville) so as to make public executions less conspicuous.
For the same reason executions now took place in the very early
hours of the morning — but the mob turned up anyway! In 1836
Thackeray came over to watch the execution of Fieschi who had
made an attempt on the life of Louis-Philippe the previous July on
Boulevard du Temple (see chapter on the 11th arr.). It was the day
of Mardi Gras, and a tide of hideous, drunken, blood-thirsty
revellers in their dishevelled disguise and smeared make-up was
streaming in from as far away as the Champs-Elysées, across the
Seine, then down rue d’Enfer (now Boulevard Saint-Michel and
Avenue Denfert-Rochereau), to these remote parts, ‘shrieking,
jabbering, gesticulating, as the French will do . . . wishing to wind
up the delights of their carnival by a bonne-bouche of a murder.’
Their disappointment must have been great, as Fieschi’s execution
was delayed.
   In 1938, at last, the guillotine was moved to the courtyard of the
prison of La Santé, on the corner of Boulevard Arago and rue de la
Santé. From then on it operated behind thick walls, concealed
from the public eye.

                                  69
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Turn right into RUE CASSINI, an attractive, leafy street, home to
several members of the intelligentsia at some time or another —
Alain Fournier, the author of Les Grand Maulnes, lived at no. 2, the
philosopher Alain at no. 6, the astronomer Camille Flammarion at
no. 16, and Balzac, between 1829 and 1834, at nos 4 to 8 (then no. 1),
occupied a three-room flat on the first floor. Deep in debt, Balzac
often registered under false names, in this case the name of his
sister, Madame Laure de Surville. Among his guests here were Ma-
dame de Berny, his mastermind and friend, who lived round the
corner on rue d’Enfer (now Avenue Denfert-Rochereau) and
George Sand whom he introduced here to the physicist Arago. It
was here that he began his correspondence with Madame Hanska
and wrote three of his masterpieces — Le Pére Goriot, Eugénie
Grandetand La Peau de Chagrin. He also left a written description of
the area, as far as the Luxembourg Gardens, which, he said, was
neither town nor country but an undefinable stretch, already
studded with medical institutions and resounding ceaselessly with
the chimes of church bells. Boules players were also part of the scene
— ‘braves gens qui continuent nos ancétres (‘honest folk who
continue our ancestry’). Today’s stroller will appreciate the early
2oth-century architecture of the street, notably no. 3 with its
concrete bas relief (1903), no. 3bis and its artist studios, nos 5 and 7
(1903-06) and a later house at no. 12 (1929).




                            Boules players
          NORTH   FROM    PLACE   DENFERT-ROCHEREAU


Ahead is the AVENUE DE L’OBSERVATOIRE. On your left, at
no. 61, stands the Observatoire        with its charmingly oversized
dome. This lack of proportions would have been considered out-
rageous bad taste at the time of Louis XIV, when it was built, but
the dome was not there at the time; the telescope was simply
installed on the flat roof of the elegant building. In keeping with
the aesthetic ideal of well-balanced order, the Observatoire was
built on the axis of the centre of the Palais du Luxembourg, with
the Avenue de l’Observatoire providing a splendid new vista.
   The Observatory was founded in the first place to enhance the
prestige of the kingdom. England had just founded its Royal
Society and other European neighbours were following suit. After
the intense scientific activities of the previous century, which both
revolutionised man’s fundamental grasp of the universe and left
him dismayed, the secular authorities, having assimilated the new
order, decided to pursue astronomical investigations. In France it
was Colbert who incited Louis XIV to found the Académie Royale
des Sciences. However, the promotion of science alone would not
have sufficed to induce the prestige-oriented monarch to go to that
trouble. It so happened that astronomy was fundamental to the
determination of a ship’s location at sea, an essential element in
naval battles which could enhance his glory.
   On 7 March 1667 the deed of purchase of a 2.5 hectare plot of
land was signed by the King. This was an ideal spot from which to
scrutinise the skies, outside the city boundary, where nothing but
windmills and church towers obstructed the eye. The building was
entrusted to Claude Perrault (the architect of the Louvre Colon-
nade and brother of Charles, the author of Sleeping Beauty).
   Rue Cassini celebrates the dynasty of Italian astronomers who
were invited to head the Observatoire, above all the earliest and
greatest of them all, Jean-Dominique. Among other contributions
to science, he drew a map of the moon and discovered the division
(now named after him) that separates the rings of Saturn. Another
17th-century astronomer, Jean Picard, made the first accurate map
of France, while the Dane Ole Christensen Roemer, during a visit
to Paris, observed the eclipses of Jupiter from the roof of the
Observatory and discovered that light travels at 300,000 km per
second. Leverrier, director of the Observatory in 1846, discovered
the planet Neptune by noticing the disturbances it provoked on

                                  71
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Uranus. He was also one of the founders of a scientifically based
weather forecasting service in France. In 1854, when the renowned
physicist Arago was director of the Observatory, a larger telescope
with a diameter of 38 cm was installed, topped by the present dome
for its protection. The telescope, still in situ, is used at times for
preliminary observations but the skies of Paris have become too
luminous and in-depth work has to be carried out further away.
This, however, is still the centre for the study of the rotation of the
earth and for the speaking clock, whose accuracy depends on
astronomical factors. The Observatoire can be visited on the first
Saturday of the month by prior arrangement, which requires a
written application in a self-addressed stamped envelope and a
two-month wait! You will be shown round by a professional
astronomer. The lovely gardens, on the other hand, are open to the
public in the afternoons: the entrance is on Boulevard Arago.

Continue along Avenue de l’Observatoire to its junction with
AVENUE DENFERT-ROCHEREAU and cross over. To the
left, at no. 68, the Convent of the Visitation Order nestles amidst
age-old gardens, concealed behind a tall, thick wall. Founded in
1619 on rue Saint-Antoine, the community moved here only in
1841, where it also houses a faculty of comparative philosophy and
a students’ hall of residence. A few steps away is a wonderful arts
and crafts shop selling monastic works from all over France (open
from 1.45 to 7 pm, except Sundays) — liquors, crystallised fruit and
fruit cake, china and ceramics, Provencal skirts, children’s smocks
and toddlers’ rompers, hand-embroidered linen, ladies lingerie.
    Nos 88 and 92 Avenue Denfert-Rochereau, respectively an insti-
tution for blind young women and an old-age home and hospital
for priests, La Maison Marie-Thérése, were originally one insti-
tution, the grounds of which extended all the way to Boulevard
Raspail and included those of the American Center. It was started as
a charity by the very pious Madame de Chateaubriand. Although
she and her husband led quite separate lives he followed her in this
enterprise, but money was short and it was only with the help of
other philanthropists that little by little they could acquire the
entire property. Most help came from Marie-Thérése-Charlotte,
the Duchesse d’Angouléme, the daughter of Louis XVI. The only
royal to have survived imprisonment in the tower of the Temple,

                                  72
          NORTH    FROM    PLACE   DENFERT-ROCHEREAU


she came to be known as ‘Mademoiselle du Temple’. The institu-
tion was to cater for upper-class patients who, through misfortune,
had come down in the world. Many of them were priests. It was to be
referred to as infirmerie rather than hospice so as not to humiliate its
inmates, which speaks of the delicacy of Madame de Chateau-
briand. The domain had a main building and a chapel, and next to
them a little house surrounded by a garden, a farm and a farmyard,
all of which was much to the liking of Chateaubriand, who stayed
here with his wife periodically between 1826 and 1838. In his
Mémoires d’outre-tombe, the better part of which he wrote in this
place, he said, ‘I find myself at once in a monastery, on a farm, ina
fruit orchard and ina park. In the mornings I wake up to the sound
of the angelus; I can see from my window a roadside crucifix ...
cows, hens, pigeons, bees; sisters of charity, convalescent women,
old priests wander among the lilac trees, the azalea, the rhodo-
dendron. . .’ Itwas also during his stay here that Chateaubriand was
arrested for expressing his hostility to the new regime.
   Financial difficulties were never overcome and although the
conversion of the old farm into a chocolate factory did bring in a
respectable income (the factory lasted until 1925!); the running
costs of the establishment were too high and in 1838 the couple had
to resign themselves to selling it to the Archbishop of Paris.
Madame de Chateaubriand came back to die here in 1847, and was
buried behind the high altar of the infirmary chapel. Chateaubriand
was not to join her here upon his own death in 1848; he was buried
in the chapel of the Missions Etrangéres on rue du Bac (in the 7th
arrondissement), where he was living at the time.
   Because of the connection of the Royal Princess with the place,
the chapel also contains some relics of her patron saint, Célestine, as
well as some liturgical clothing embroidered by her mother, Marie-
Antoinette. Chateaubriand’s drawing-room still stands, now the
vestibule of the chapel at no. 88, so do the four-storeyed infirmary
and its chapel at no. 92 and the house facing the front, where he
resided; but little is left of the gardens to which Chateaubriand had
personally contributed: ‘I planted there two cedars of Solomon and
twenty three oak-trees of the Druids’, he wrote in the Mémoires.
Indifferent later generations allowed them to disappear, except for
one surviving cedar, presently maltreated on Boulevard Raspail.
