20th Arr: Bagnolet through Charonne to Père-Lachaise

 FROM BAGNOLET            THROUGH CHARONNE               TO PERE-
                            LACHAISE

Early spring (late April into May) would be an ideal time to explore
these parts, when the lilac blossoms in the rare surviving leafy
enclaves recall a long-gone pastoral life.
   Unlike Belleville and Ménilmontant, which had already fallen
victim to the proliferating industries north-east of Paris in the first
half of the 19th century, the old villages of Charonne and Bagnolet
in the southern part of the arrondissement benefited from a rep-
rieve and maintained their rural nature until their annexation to
Paris in 1860. This will be the territory of our first walk.

Start from PLACE DE LA PORTE DE BAGNOLET on the east-
ern edge of the circular Boulevards Extérieurs, also known as the
Boulevards des Maréchaux after the twenty military heroes they
commemorate. This is a busy junction dense with traffic, but it is
also a pleasant spot of greenery, especially if you look north and

                                  275
                      BD.



              R. P. MOUILLARD

                   R. IRENEE BLANC
                    R. PAUL STRAUSS
                 R, JULES SIEGFRIED




ignore the unsightly blocks of flats behind you. On the left-hand
side, a charming row of terrace houses, standing on a ridge, their
pocket-size gardens lush with bushy vegetation, belies the stereo-
typed image of all you have been told about the infamous arron-
dissement. A substantial flight of steps leads you to a compound of
89 houses called La Campagne a Paris, one of the rare examples of
successful council housing in Paris, where aesthetics and the
environment were given careful thought.
   Although Napoléon III was the first to grasp the importance of
environment as a weapon to defuse social discontent, and contrib-
uted greatly to the embellishment of Paris by way of gardens and
tree-lined avenues, he failed to solve the proletarian housing prob-
lem and swept it under the carpet, pushing the poor further and
further away from the centre of the city, and out of his sight. But
some 50 years later, Paul Strauss took the bull by the horns and set
out to prove that the labourer of eastern Paris was not an unbridled

                                      276
                                       IMP. DES SOUHAITS
                                           IMP. DES CAI IN: SAE
                                       IMP. DE CASTEG Gil 1   ee
                                               IMP. VE RAN




     aa,                                   Imp. de la Confiance
                                       Imp. de Bergame
                                       Imp. Peule
                                    kh
                                    OD Imp. Rolleboise




murderous brute bent on terrorising his social betters, but an
honest citizen — provided he was allotted decent housing.
   The hill on which the houses were built is actually artificial, for
until 1875 this had been the gaping hole of a gypsum quarry,
possibly the last one in Paris. Its owner, unable to find a buyer,
filled it up with rubble from the newly opened eastern section of
the Avenue de la République, Avenue Gambetta, rue Belgrand and
rue des Pyrénées. He planted acacia and plane trees to retain the
soil of the new hillock and gave it the pretty name of |’Ermitage
Gambetta. In 1907 the newly formed philanthropic society La
Campagne a Paris, a subsidiary of a charity founded to combat
tuberculosis, took over the tree-shaded hill and built on it houses.
However, work came to a halt with the outbreak of World War I,
which delayed the completion of the project until 1926.
   The official inauguration ceremony on 20 June was honoured
with the presence of the Mayor as well as Paul Strauss, Irénée Blanc

                                 277
                     20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


and Jules Siegfried, the three promoters of this happy initiative who
are commemorated in the three street names of this housing estate.
Monsieur Sully Lombard, chairman of the society, gave an address
in which he said the site was ‘worthy of being sung of by a Virgil or
a Ronsard. It is enough for us,’ he went on, ‘to look at these 89
houses, to contemplate this little village, in the heart of Paris, this
village where we feel good, despite some of the inconveniences of
the countryside, despite the early morning crowing of the cock, the
inordinate barking of the dogs, the nasal sound of phonographs
which can be heard from the very first summer evenings. It is
enough for us to see this string of houses with their gardens and
flowers, to note the considerable progress achieved in France in the
field of hygiene and social welfare.’ Looking towards the future he
continued: ‘May the whole of France be covered with low-cost
houses and we shall have no cause to envy those ancient times when,
it is said, simplicity of manner reigned, when neither the unwhole-
some thirst for pleasure nor greed had yet consumed the hearts of
men. Isn’t the family ‘cottage’ a guarantee of health, temperance
and morality just as the hovel is a cause of disease, wretchedness and
all the shame that comes from lack of willpower?’
    Their example was not followed and France was not covered
with little cottages surrounded by pretty gardens. Instead, from the
1950s On, a new generation of town planners set out to wreck Paris,
and indeed France at large, by creating dehumanised urban and
suburban ghettos, edgy and ready to explode. But here, as you
stroll through these quiet streets, you will be enchanted by the
unaffected good taste of the houses, where Art Nouveau and Art
Deco have left their subtle mark.

After meandering through rues Irénée Blanc, Jules Siegfried and
Paul Strauss walk down the steps towards the Place Chanute and left
into rue du Capitaine Ferber to PLACE EDITH PIAB, one of
those shaded refreshing spots, somewhat provincial yet so Parisian,
graced with one of Sir Richard Wallace’s fountains, one of Paris’s
trademarks. There is also a sculpture of Edith Piaf here, but it is
stuck to a drab slab of concrete and does justice neither to the
square, nor to Piaf, despite its attempt to convey the extraordinary
expressiveness of her tiny face and hands. Only the faded flower laid
by an anonymous admirer in the singer’s vibrating hands redeems

                                 278
         BAGNOLET     — CHARONNE      — PERE-LACHAISE


the sight. Place Edith Piaf is situated next to the Hépital Tenon,
where Edith was probably born (although some claim she was born
on the threshold of 72 rue de Belleville, as reported above).

Walk down rue Pelleport, past rue des Lyanes. Ahead, at 148 RUE
DE BAGNOLET, lies the lovely garden of the Hospice Debrousse,
ahome for the elderly and the blind opened in 1892, ashrunken rem-
nant of the Orléans’s Chateau de Bagnolet, which, in 1719, became
the property of Marie-Bourbon, Duchesse d’Orléans, wife of the
Régent and the legitimised daughter of Louis XIV and of Madame
de Montespan.
   Having extended the estate, in 1734 she proceeded to build the
gemlike Pavillon de lErmitage in front of you, which had access
through a regal gate. The gate had two oval medallions which bore
the coats of arms of the Orléans family. The Duchess entered her
estate, however, through another gate, which was located beyond
the present Boulevard Davout and was reached by way of the tree-
lined Allée de Madame      (now rue des Orteaux), as mentioned
earlier. Her grandson Louis-Philippe d’Orléans inherited the
property in 1763. Louis-Philippe was a devout man, deridingly
nicknamed le Pieux. Offended by the delicate murals that
decorated the oval vestibule of the pavilion, representing the
Temptations of Saint Antoine, he had them all washed out, leaving
only the hermit intact!
    The Baron de Batz became the landlord of the chateau in 1787 and
it was here that his aborted plot to abduct the royal couple was
hatched. Having got wind of the scheme, the police came to search
the place on 30 September 1793 and arrested those present at the
Ermitage, all of whom ended up on the guillotine, including the
Baron’s mistress Marie Badin de Grandmaison, a former actress at
the Comédie Italienne. The Baron, on the other hand, by a double
stroke of luck, came out of the Terror unscathed, having managed
to slip away when the rescue attempt failed on the Grands Boule-
vards, and happening to be away during the search at the Ermitage.
   The Ermitage Pavilion is the only vestige of that past beauty, a
meagre reminder of the extensive estate. Unfortunately, as often in
Paris, it is locked bolted, depriving outsiders from seeing a lovely
example of an 18-century interior.


                                279
                            rte)



                         Village Saint-Blaise

Turn left into RUE DES BALKANS. Behind the arcades at no. 19
looms the old church tower of Charonne. At no. 13 the old branches
of wistaria, burdened with purple blossoms in early spring, have
become one with the iron railing of the fence and add pleasantly to
the weight of time.
   Rue Victor Segalen has to date preserved its old shacks — a hum-
ble spot yet not devoid of charm with its bits of ceramic decoration
on the corner house of rue Riblette. RUE VITRUVE, at the end of
tue des Balkans to your right, borders a unique enclave, the Village
Saint-Blaise, shining white with the gentrified farmhouses of the
former village of Charonne (the surrounding high-rises must, of
course, be ignored). A charming garden lies at the back of the
houses, boasting bright rosebushes, a soothing fountain and one
ancient tree.
   Rue Vitruve leads to PLACE DES GRES, once the old village
square. As such this was where justice was dispensed by the lords of
Charonne (except for hangings and beheadings, which took place
on rue de la Justice further north, just south of the reservoir of
Ménilmontant). A post was set up here to which the condemned
would be tied with an iron collar, his offence billed on his chest and
back as a deterrent for all to see. Thus the Square was previously
known as Place du Carcan (‘iron collar’) and Place du Poteau
(‘post’). The lords of Charonne were hardly tender-hearted: in

                                   280
          BAGNOLET      — CHARONNE      — PERE-LACHAISE


1770, for having stolen some seeds one night, Louis-Claude Mil-
cent, a poor vine grower from the hamlet of Petite Charonne (near
the present Place de la Nation), was brought here after mass and
tied to the post until 2 in the afternoon. He was then birched and
branded on his right shoulder with the letters GAL, which stood for
galeére (‘galley’). The poor wretch was condemned to the King’s
galleys for three entire years, while his wife was made to watch her
husband being chastised and to pay a fine of three pounds, follow-
ing which she was banished from her village for the three years he
was away. Two decades later, the relentless overlords of France’s
downtrodden peasantry would pay heavily for their historical
shortsightedness. Today a modern sculpture of a couple stands on
the old square, now renamed Place des Grés. Could the artist have
had in mind poor Milcent, the vine grower, and his wife from the
village of La Petite Charonne?

If you wish to be among the last to see the seamier side of old Paris
before it is relegated to the historical archives, and your feet are up
to it, continue    along RUE     VITRUVE       as far as RUE      DES
ORTEAUx, then turn left. To your right, on either side of RUE
DES VIGNOLES — whose name alone evokes the vinegrowing
past — lie several narrow streets, lined with crumbling houses and
hovels, which have retained the exact layout of the vineyards they
have, regrettably, replaced. Here too, concrete is fast devouring the
little crumbling houses, whose ill-fated tenants were poets and
wits. The first alley to your right on rue des Orteaux, beyond rue de
Vignoles, has been dubbed Impasse Dieu, not to mark some
spiritual yearning but just to honour the memory of one of the
inhabitants of Charonne, a certain Monsieur Dieu.
                      A bunch of rascals was quick to give tit for
  IMPAS5 E         tat with Impasse Satan! — first to your left

  SATAN            along rue des Vignoles. And if the parallel
                   Impasse Ranson (‘ransom’), reflects the
presumably shady goings-on in these parts, Impasse des Souhaits
(‘wishes’) and Impasse de la Confiance (‘confidence’, ‘trust’ or
‘faith’), on either side of rue des Vignoles a little further down, add
a touch of optimism to an otherwise desperate world. So does the
happy, sunbathed roof terrace at no. 86 rue des Vignoles, bursting
with flowers among its crumbling neighbours.

                                  281
                    20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Retrace your steps and turn left (right if you have left out the above
detour) into the pedestrian RUE SAINT-BLAISE —a picturesque
sight with its cobbled paving, belly-potted houses and the rustic
church of Charonne beckoning you from the top of the street. As
you make your way up towards it, notice the house at no. 25, once
the premises of a tavern where guests could turn up with their
victuals and do their own cooking. With so much charm, the street
could not have escaped the attentions of trendy Parisians, who
opened various shops and eating places here during the optimistic
1980s, but one café-tabac has survived the clean-up on rue de
Bagnolet to your left. Its dark, warm walls are covered with posters
that look old even when they are not, and among them are two
paintings of the obviously fondly regarded church of Charonne,
across the street. The bakery shop next door, which has preserved
its genuine 1900 decoration, also deserves a glance.

The church of Saint-Germain-de-Charonne is not as old as it looks
and has been largely altered over the centuries, but it has a lovely
antique feel and a harmonious structure, even though only the
lower part of its tower is medieval, dating back to the latter part of
the 13th century. The rest of the church was built in the second
quarter of the 15th century, which is pretty old for Paris, but was
altered several times in the 18th and 19th centuries. It was probably
because of a fire in the first half of the 18th century that the ent-
rance, hitherto located on the western side as customary, was
moved to its present location on the southern side, facing you
charmingly from the top of the hill, as you approach it.
   The origin of the church is so remote as to be shrouded in
mystery. Legend has it that the famous Saint Germain, the Bishop
of Auxerre, to whom were also dedicated the churches of Saint-
Germain-l’Auxerrois, opposite the Louvre in the 1st arrondisse-
ment, and Saint-Germain-des-Prés on the Left Bank in the 6th,
came to these parts in the year 429, during his saintly journey that
took him as far as England, spreading the Gospel wherever he
went. It is here that his first encounter with the six-year-old
Genevieve is said to have taken place, an event that was to
determine the calling of the future patron of Paris. Historically,
however, it seems doubtful that the Bishop should have chosen
such a detour to go into the capital, especially since this spot was

                                 282
  /         ;              Rue Saint-Blaise

particularly steep. And what cause was there for a little girl from
Nanterre, north of Paris, to be visiting these out-of-the-way parts?
    Be that as it may, it is probably thanks to its remote position that
the church escaped the fury of the Revolution and that it has pres-
erved its parish churchyard — the only such case in Paris apart from
the churchyard of Saint-Pierre-de-Montmartre — attributable to
the fact that until 1860 both churches lay outside the city bound-
aries. They were therefore unrestricted by the law of 1804 that re-
quired the closure of all parish cemeteries in Paris. On the very far
left of the churchyard is the sober grave of André Malraux’s two
sons, tragically killed in an accident. Also buried here is the infam-
ous Robert Brasillac, sentenced to death on 19 January 1945 for his
pro-German writings, ‘who had loved Germany.          . .and wished for

                                  283
                     20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


the victory of some of her principles’. Despite protests on the part
of writers Francois Mauriac, Paul Claudel and Paul Valéry,
Brasillac was executed on 6 February 1945.
   Before leaving, walk to the top left of the graveyard for a final
glorious glimpse of the church, hopefully followed by a snapshot —
nobody will believe it was taken in Paris!

Leave the graveyard on its northern side, at the top of the
central alley and turn left into LE CHEMIN DU PARC DE
CHARONNE, a discreet reminder of the fabulous grounds and
the Chateau de Charonne, now totally wiped off the face of the
earth. It is quite extraordinary that after a series of amputations
and mutilations no eye witness left a record of the final demolition
of the building, although it occurred only in the 19th century.
Paradoxically, we do have records of it from the 17th century as
reported earlier (see p. 263). The water reservoir of Charonne is
now situated on its site, invisible behind a solid wall overhung by
green boughs.
   Turn right into rue Stendhal, along the western side of the reser-
voir, left into rue Charles-Renouvier, right into rue des Rondeaux
to its junction with the AVENUE DU PERE-LACHAISE. This is
the main entrance to the Cemetery of Pére Lachaise, the largest
cemetery of Paris and also its largest stretch of greenery. It lies
partly on the site of the Folie-Régnault, one of the three magnifi-
cent domains of the area. But would it have survived had it not
been converted into a cemetery?

With the help ofa leaflet at the entrance, you will find the location
of the tombs you are interested in. Many Parisians like to come to
le Pére-Lachaise for a stroll, and tourists like to include it on their
cultural visits to the French capital. Some visitors may feel uncom-
fortable among the thick forest of forlorn family vaults, bought in
perpetuity, yet now abandoned for lack of caring descendants. It is
a gloomy setting at the close of a late November day, an implacable
reminder in a territory largely taken over by cats of the uselessness
of man’s vanity. With the ever-increasing number of unclaimed
vaults, it has been decided to put them back on the market, to
prevent their dangerous collapse. The remains of their occupants
are piled up in boxes in a secret catacomb under the War Memor-

                                 284
                                       se
                   Saint-Germaine-de-Charonne


ial. Its existence, however, is unknown to most visitors, and its
entrance is barred even to the cemetery’s guards.
    The pompousness of the 19th century has given way in modern
times to a more sober style, even when commemorating the most
tragic events of our century. Hence, the various memorials to the
deportees and Resistance members of World War II, which express
the horror and anguish poignantly but with no florid pathos. A
beautiful piece of mosaic in the memorial to Communist members
of the Resistance brings a patch of colour to the place.      ;
    Naturally Le Pére-Lachaise is a propitious site for those attempt-
ing to communicate with the beyond, whether by psychedelic
means around the tomb of Jim Morrison, or through a trance by the

                                 285
                    20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


tomb of Allan Kardec. Kardec, real name Denizard-Hippolyte
Rivail, was a pedagogue and science teacher who lived in the 19th
century. He was too rational a fellow to be taken in by such non-
sense as turning tables and mediums, ideas freshly imported from
the United States. Scoffing at his more gullible contemporaries, he
said, ‘I’ll believe it when I see it’ — which was precisely what
happened when he eventually agreed to attend a session. He went
on to publish the Book of Spirits using the pen name Allan Kardec.
This was supposedly the name he had borne in the ancient times of
the Druids, when he and the spirit Zéphyr had roamed the forests of
Gaul and picked the holy mistletoe with a golden sickle. Having
exhausted his savings to publish the book, which he claimed was
dictated by the spirits of Socrates, John the Evangelist, Fénelon,
Benjamin Franklin, Hahnemann (the inventor of homeopathy),
Swedenborg and Napoleon, he soon recovered all his expenses,
made a nice profit, and was even showered with glory, his book
having become one of the bestsellers of the time. Today, the book-
shop at 10 Avenue du Pére-Lachaise still carries his works.
   Other visitors more concerned with the life of now and its con-
tinuation focused their attention on the tomb of Victor Noir, the
journalist who on 10 January 1870 was shot dead by Napoléon III’s
cousin Pierre Bonaparte in the latter’s home in Auteuil, in the heat
of a political dispute over the capitulation to Prussia. The murder
was followed by a gigantic funeral, attended by 100,000, and led to
a riot on the Champs-Elysées. A strikingly realistic sculpture of the
man at the moment of his assassination surmounts his tomb: dress-
ed in his morning coat, he lies on his back, his top hat next to him,
where it has dropped off. For some unfathomable reason this
bronze effigy became the object of a fetishistic cult induced by the
belief that caressing it would cure women of sterility. The shiny
patch you may notice around the protruding phallic region of the
bronze sculpture is the result of years of tactile devotion. There was
along-stemmed red rose in the palm ofhis hand on ourlast visit and
a white chrysanthemum in the top buttonhole of his trousers fly.
