20th Arr: Overview

   THE ZOTH ARRONDISSEMENT
1S are des Haies, des Fougéres, des Miiriers, des Amendiers
(respectively the streets of hedgerows, fern, mulberry and almond
trees), Villa des Bruyéres (heather) and Porte des Lilas (lilac) —
incongruous celebrations of nature in the sordid heart of plebeian
Paris of the Industrial Age. To innocent ears the name Belleville
may simply suggest a place of beauty, but to respectable Parisians it
sent a shudder down the spine: ‘the lowest depths of wretchedness
and of hate where ceaselessly seethe the ferments of envy, laziness
and anger.’ Honest housewives of eastern Paris, determined dog-
gedly to safeguard their respectability, protested vehemently that
they were not from Belleville but from Ménilmontant, which was
just a little further south but less squalid in reputation. For Belle-
ville was a troublesome neighbourhood which disturbed the peace
of mind of the affluent and the secure: “We hope that tonight Belle-
ville will be willing to let France sleep, wrote the Moniteur
Universel following the defeat of the Commune. Fortunately, Belle-
ville was tucked away at the easternmost end of the city, clinging to
a steep hill 128.5 metres high, a world apart to the relief of
bourgeois Paris.

And yet, in pre-industrial days this was a land of bliss, invigorated
by fresh air, bathed in sunlight and watered by more rivulets and
springs than the world-renowned hill of Montmartre. Early on,
these waters were discovered by the congregation of Saint-Martin-
des-Champs (see chapter on the 3rd arr.) and were harnessed by
means of an aqueduct, an example followed later by the commun-
ity of Saint-Lazare and later still by the Hépital Saint-Louis (both
in the 10th arr.). In those days Belleville was a land of neat strips of
vineyards clinging to its sunny slopes, of fruit orchards and wild
flowers, of squat farmhouses and adjoining little gardens known as
courtilles. A windmill here and there completed the charming pict-
ure, which extended all the way south to the village of Charonne.
In Réverie d’un promeneur solitaire Rousseau, lover of nature par
excellence, describes with a journalist’s eye a ramble he took on the
afternoon of 24 October 1776 along the paths that ran through the

                                 262
                          INTRODUCTION


vineyards and meadows that separated the villages of Charonne
and Ménilmontant. Even in the 19th century, despite the proxim-
ity of the city, a lyrical poet spoke of the area’s ‘green dress and
crown of lilacs’.
    Nor were these blessed parts spurned by France’s topmost fam-
ilies, not even by royalty. Henri IV honoured the housewarming of
his friend Martin de Bragelogne with his presence and Richelieu
came to visit his friend Barentin in Charonne on several occasions,
notably on 12 July 1636, when the Gazette de France reported: “The
Cardinal Duc is at Charonne, in the house of Sieur Barentin, where
the freshness of the air, the beauty of the air and the good spirits of
the host, well please his Eminence.’ The Chateau de Charonne was
indeed an admirable place, with rolling grounds beautified by
fountains, pools and cascading water courses fed by natural spring
water through a sophisticated piping system.
   When Mazarin accompanied the 14-year-old Louis XIV here in
1652, he had other considerations in mind than pastoral recreation.
Below, to the west, at Faubourg Saint-Antoine, a battle was raging
between the rebellious princes led by Condé and the loyalists head-
ed by Turenne, an episode known in history as La Fronde. From
this vantage-point, Mazarin believed the young King would
receive an edifying lesson in government and learn to draw imper-
ative conclusions for the future.
   There was also the Chateau de Bagnolet. At the time of Louis
XIV the lady of the manor was his aunt, the Duchesse d’Orléans,
wife of Gaston, Louis XIII’s brother. In the early 18th century the
estate went to the Regent’s wife, the legitimised daughter of Louis
XIV and of the Montespan. She was so fond of the estate that she
was willing to pay three times their value for the adjoining
grounds, thus becoming the owner of a huge domain, which she
soon set about remodelling. In order to bypass the cumbersome
high street of Bagnolet; full of bustling taverns and crammed with
wine-laden carts, she opened a beautiful, broad avenue shaded on
either side by two rows of trees, and named it PAllée de Madame
(now rue des Orteaux). But although the Duchess avoided the
common herd, she could not altogether escape their indiscreet
attentions, and soon her headdress was doing the rounds of the
village and became the latest fad among its maidens. In 1763
Philippe d’Orléans bought the adjoining property from his
                                 263
                    20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


neighbour Pinseau, who himself had only recently purchased it
from Jean-Baptiste de Sade, father of the more notorious Marquis.
   Properties were acquired and dismantled lightheartedly in care-
free 18th-century society and a few years later the same Philippe
d’Orléans had his estate chopped up and sold off. One of the
beneficiaries of the operation was the Baron de Batz-Laumagne,
the faithful royalist who, on 21 January 1793, waited for the royal
tumbril on the corner of rue de Cléry and the Grands Boulevards
(see chapter on the 2nd arr.) in a vain but heroic attempt to abduct
the King and save him from the guillotine. It was in this house that
the plot was prepared. Some time later the relentless Baron tried to
release Marie-Antoinette from the Conciergerie, but this attempt
failed too. All that is left of this past beauty is the 18th-century
pavilion, le Pavillon de ?Ermitage, now part of a hospice of the
Assistance Publique.
   Another mansion stood in magnificent grounds further north,
the Chateau de Saint-Fargeau on the heights of Ménilmontant,
now in the north of the arrondissement. This was the home of the
renowned Le Peletier family and was named after their estate in the
Yonne. At the time of the Revolution, its owner, Michel Le Peletier,
discarded the privileged life he was born into and became a keen
supporter of the Revolutionary cause. Elected to the Convention,
he voted for the death of Louis XVI, for which he paid with his own
life only eight days after the execution of the King: in the evening of
29 January 1793 he was assassinated in the basement of a café in the
Galerie Valois in the Palais-Royal. The motherland mourned him,
honoured him with a grand national funeral in the Panthéon and
even adopted his daughter, but the magnificent estate of Ménil-
montant, together with its French gardens and ornamental pools,
was parcelled up and sold, while the chateau — like so many others,
alas — was razed to the ground. All that is left are a few venerable
trees that cast their shade on the shrunken plot of land that became
in 1808 the little cemetery of Belleville.

Throughout the 18th century the area was sought after by Parisians
from all walks of life. While the bourgeois built themselves country
retreats, the workmen from the Temple quarter and the craftsmen
from Saint-Antoine would have to content themselves with a day’s
outing to one of the area’s open-air taverns where, seated at a rough

                                 264
                          INTRODUCTION


table under leafy bowers, they would quench their thirst with a glass
of guinguet, a sour wine which had the advantage of being cheap.
Eventually the taverns came to be known as guinguettes, the most
famous of which was Ramponeau in Belleville, or more precisely
at La Courtille — the neighbourhood around the toll barrier on
the eastern fringe of Paris. As early as the 16th century the meaning
of courtille, originally a walled-in property, had extended to be
synonymous with guinguette, and because so many such establish-
ments flourished around the barrier, where they were exempted
from tax, it eventually lent its name to the neighbourhood. Thus, in
the first half of the 17th century a contemporary claimed that ‘to see
Paris without seeing La Courtille was like seeing Rome without the
Pope.’
   Ramponeau, the ‘Prince’ of the Courtille, founded his establish-
ment in 1750. In no time it gained such fame that the 18th-century
chronicler Louis-Sébastien Mercier claimed that it was ‘more fam-
ous than Voltaire’. Bourgeois, tarts, soldiers and pimps, everyone
went to Ramponeau for a bit of fun, or ‘ramponner as the expres-
sion went. During the Restoration Papa Dénoyez’s establishment
became the new mecca of pleasure, a gigantic place that could seat
2,000. ‘One can dance there, dine, make love, swing, spin out love’s
sweet dreams and sup most pleasantly,’ according to an 1828
guidebook.
   At dawn on Ash Wednesday, a haggard, drunkard mob of
Mardi Gras revellers would arrive at Dénoyez in their dishevelled
fancy-dress costumes of Pierrot or Harlequin, having spent a
boisterous night at the Opéra, the Variétés or the Ambigu on the
Grands Boulevards. Here they would warm up with a bowl of
piping hot soup before engaging in the traditional frenzied run, a
human avalanche that burst through the toll barrier and swept
down Boulevard du Temple to Place du Chateau-d’Eau (now
République). Some were on foot, others clung on to vehicles —
thousands of carriages, coaches and carts of different shapes and
sizes, all joined in the frenzied descente de la Courtille. All of them
were wild, vociferous and obscene, hurling eggs and bagfuls of
flour at one another.
    On Ash Wednesday 1832, at the break of day, a fabulous
glittering silver barouche, drawn by six horses, emerged out of a
whirlpool of swirling crowds and pulled up in front of Dénoyez.
                                 265
                    20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


An immensely tall, red-headed stranger alighted, sporting a black
frock coat, sky-blue trousers and a top hat tilted over one ear. With
him was a bunch of gay dogs, hangers-on who took advantage of
his providential eccentricities. Indeed, Milord d’Arsouille, real
name Charles de la Battut, the illegitimate son of a French émigrée
and of a wealthy English chemist who bought him the title of
Count, had gained notoriety in all the pleasure quarters as an in-
corrigible, extravagant dandy. Upon arrival at Dénoyez, he
showered champagne on all and sundry, along with food, glasses
and dishes, even chairs. Having exhausted his normal ammunit-
ion, he sent gold coins pouring down through the first-floor win-
dow, anticipating the outcome with glee, as he had first taken care
to ‘fry’ the coins in a pan. The frantic mob accordingly burnt their
fingers as they pounced on the gold, and in their anger promptly
responded by sacking the place. This clearly did not put much ofa
dent in the finances of Papa Dénoyez— upon his death in 1837 it was
discovered that he had left a hoard of one and a half million gold
francs! Not so Milord d’Arsouille, the life of the party since 1832,
who was soon ruined, unsurprisingly, which marked the end of the
descente in 1838.

The fun would soon stop altogether, and the unspoilt era in the
history of Belleville was about to close. The rural suburbs of Paris
would soon be jostled into the Industrial Age, their countryside
wrecked and their age-old social stability destroyed. If Charonne
to the south was spared for a while and remained a wine-growing
village for another generation, Belleville, lying north, was doomed:
destitution crept insidiously up its slopes, cleared them of their
vineyards and gardens and turned the hill into a nauseating mire,
its rivulets into a smelly gutter bordered by hovels, a nest of social
unrest. Political militantism followed suit and while the National
Guard of Belleville had supported the ultra-conservative Charles X
in 1830 against the forces of the Revolution, by 1848 Belleville had
shifted its loyalties and sided with the Revolution.
   The final blow was dealt in 1860 when the villages of Charonne,
a section of Bagnolet, Ménilmontant and Belleville were annexed
to Paris as a new arrondissement. The Mayor of Charonne had
sensed the disastrous outcome of the annexation in 1859, when the
decision had been made, and addressing his local councillors

                                 266
                          INTRODUCTION


claimed that ‘for the suburbs the era of primitive happiness was
over. . . their balance will soon be upset.’ Indifferent to history and
to human ties, the administrative machine sliced implacably into
rue de Belleville, the village high street, splitting the village and
dividing its 70,000 inhabitants, relegating the north with its
church to the 19th arrondissement, the south with the Mairie to the
2oth. And as the cost of living rose, due to the new taxes imposed
on them as residents of Paris, ever-growing waves of hungry out-
siders crammed into Belleville, trying to make a living in its work-
shops (mostly mechanics, but also leather and later clothing).
   Unlike La Villette further north, which was taken over by full-
scale factories, resulting in the enslavement of the workforce, most
 of the Bellevillois worked in family-size workshops, admittedly on
 dilapidated premises and under makeshift roofs, but with an
 independent boss at the head of the tiny nucleus and at least the
hypothetical prospect that the apprentice might become the boss
himself. Thus was forged the free-spirited Bellevillois character,
which embodied self-dignity, proletarian pride and solidarity. No
wonder the First International opened up three sections in
Belleville in the 1860s and the Communist party found a fertile
field for new recruits here. In short, just as the Faubourg Saint-
Antoine had provided the fuel of the French Revolution, Belleville
provided that of the insurrections of the second half of the 19th
century, for the simple reason that, with the swelling of its
population, Paris was pushing its rejects further east.
    On 28 January 1871, Thiers’s freshly elected government, which
was sitting in Versailles, capitulated to Prussia. Promptly 80% of
the companies of the 20th arrondissement joined the ranks of the
Fédérés and sewed the emblematic red band to their trousers, thus
marking their allegiance to the Commune. They had become hard-
ened to street riots (after all the Prussian war had been provoked
by Napoléon III as an outlet for the all too recurrent riots), but
now they were part of a universal cause and stirred by a lofty ideal:
‘The world has its eyes riveted on us,’ uttered a passionate, lyrical
orator. ‘From the heights of Belleville the lights of democracy and
socialism shine down into the depths of Paris.’ This was not the
Belleville of terror as perceived by western Paris, but noble Belle-
ville, the beacon of the city. One wallowed in sentimental brother-
hood, especially with Montmartre, the other pole of the Commune

                                 267
                     20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


(see chapter on the 18th arrondissement). The Times correspond-
ent was amused by the demonstrations of effusion of the National
Guard, ‘in which the French liked to indulge when they were not
shooting at one another.’
   These did not last long: like all civil wars, the Commune turned
into unspeakable butchery. More than 100,000 men encircled
Belleville for the final assault of 22 May. More than 100 shells fell on
Belleville per minute while its inhabitants cowered in the cellars.
Whipped up to a fury, the Bellevillois clung on to their hill, pursu-
ing a losing battle against all odds. As an ultimate gesture of
desperation they climbed down the hill, stormed the prison of La
Roquette on the edge of the 11th arrondissement and took hostage
52 of its inmates — among them 11 Jesuit priests — irrespective of age,
health or political hue, if any. Trudging uphill two by two, the
victims were led to 85 rue Haxo, a former cabaret turned head-
quarters of the Ménilmontant-Belleville section; for their mock
trial and consequent execution, attended by a delirious mob who
turned the verdict into a lynching.
    The reprisal of the Versaillais was terrible. Withdrawing from
central Paris to the cemetery of Pére-Lachaise, the Fédérés stood
their ground heroically, taking shelter in some of the vaults, but
were dislodged tomb by tomb till finally they had their backs
against the eastern wall of the cemetery. The carnage wreaked in
rue Haxo was now matched by the vengeance of the Versaillais,
except that they disposed of greater means — 147 men, women and
children were lined up and shot in front of the cemetery wall. They
were given no sepulchre; instead they were thrown into acommon
pit, together with 871 fellow Communards who had been shot in the
vicinity. The cherry trees of the Pére-Lachaise were yielding their
fruit and the fighters’ sweethearts picked some for their lovers to
wear behind their ears, bright red like the Commune. It was in their
honour that Le Temps des Cerises, the beautiful song written three
years earlier by Jean-Baptiste Clément on the hill of Montmartre,
became the hymn of the Commune. The last barricade fell on 12
June on the corner of rues Ramponneau and Tourtille. Only one
National Guard had been left to defend it.

The 20th arrondissement was not to take part in the recovery of
France and her march towards prosperity. Into this seedy neigh-

                                  268
                          INTRODUCTION


bourhood streamed the persecuted and destitute of faraway lands
— Jews from Eastern Europe, Armenians, Greeks and Turks who
made a meagre livelihood in the clothing workshops, and also
leather, especially shoes. Bellevile became the centre of the shoe
industry and the main supplier of the elegant ladies of the beaux
quartiers. It was in Belleville that the celebrated platform shoe, the
rage during World War II, was invented.
   Somewhere in this cesspit, on 19 December 1915, Edith Gassion
— better known as Piaf (French slang for sparrow) — was born.
Whether she was actually born on the threshold of 72 rue de Belle-
ville, which makes a romantic life story, or more prosaically in the
arrondissement hospital, Hépital Ténon, does not alter the fact
that she grew up on the streets of Belleville and that she embodied
the very essence of plebeian Paris, with its caustic wit, razor-sharp
repartee, cocky humour (gouaille) and that special accent de Belle-
ville, often identified as truly Parisian, somewhat like the Cockney
of London. But, whereas the Cockney’s rebellion against his plight
took the form of humour, often self-targeted, the Bellevillois pro-
claimed his freedom and independence from the rooftops. Edith
learned her trade on the kerbs of Belleville: ‘My music school is the
streets.’
    Edith’s father had been a street performer too, a true Bellevillois
who claimed to have refused to barter his freedom for a comfortable
position with Barnum: ‘A man from Paris can’t be bought .. . you
keep your money and [ll keep my freedom.’ Edith followed his
typically Bellevillois example: ‘No one pushes me around, I’m free,
I work when I want to.’ The fact that Edith was named after the
English nurse Edith Cavell, who had been shot by the Germans two
months earlier, also points to the patriotic spirit of Belleville, even
though so much foreign blood had been injected into Belleville
through constant waves of immigration. The ‘truly Parisian’ Piaf
was in fact half Italian on her mother’s side (hence her middle name
Giovanna) and her maternal grandmother may have been a Kabyle,
which could account for the flamenco-like quality in of Piaf’s voice.
Her fellow entertainer Maurice Chevalier, a native of neighbouring
Ménilmontant, had, like herself, a foreign mother: she was Flemish
and came to Paris in the wake of the Prussian war. Yet, Chevalier,
like Piaf, was perceived the world over as quintessentially Paris-
ian. During a tour in London towards the end of his life, a critic

                                 269
                     20TH    ARRONDISSEMENT


described him ‘as undestructible as the Eiffel Tower’, and later the
Times obituary observed: ‘He, too, represented the warmth and the
gaiety of shabby back streets and the heart and soul of the great city.’
   Ménilmontant, however, was not quite Belleville, albeit only a
couple of steps away, but this made all the difference. Maurice was
born there on 12 September 1888, at 31 rue du Retrait. His father
was a drunkard, who eventually walked out on the family, but his
mother, an honest lacemaker, made ends meet as best she could,
intent on safeguarding the family’s respectability, while his elder
brother Paul became his substitute father. Whereas little Edith was
left to her own devices, which meant she could wander off as far as
the raciest parts of Pigalle, Maurice went to school and was expect-
ed to learn a trade like his elder brothers.
    Being a Bellevillois also meant living intensely and passionately
right from one’s guts, as Piaf’s love life exemplified, in particular
her love and loss of the boxer Marcel Cerdan. The latter died in
1953 in an air crash, along with the famous violinist Ginette Neveu.
It was for him that Piaf sang her world-renowned Hymne a
amour,    not from her throat or even her heart, but from the
deepest well of her being.
   The bands of roughnecks of Belleville were also a passionate lot,
not like the cynical pimps of Montmartre and La Chapelle. Here a
man took out a knife for a girl he really cared for. In 1902 the story
of Casque d’Or made the headlines throughout Paris, both east and
west. Two enemy bands of Apaches —a name coined by a journalist
inspired by Dumas’s Mohicans de Paris — sporting their customary
insignia of caps, bell-bottom trousers and polka-dotted scarves,
had taken to the streets that lay between Belleville and Charonne:
les Popincourt headed by the Corsican Leca, les Orteaux by
Manda, ‘Homme!’ The object of their dispute was not territory
buta girl called Amélie Hélie, nicknamed Casque d’Or, witha stun-
ning, golden-reddish mane. The confrontation turned into a full-
scale pitched battle on rue des Haies, in which neither knife blades
nor guns were spared. To the inquisitive public prosecutor Manda
retorted during his trial: “We fought each other, the Corsican and
myself, because we love the same girl. We are crazy about her.
Don’t you know what it is to love a girl?” Manda was unquestion-
ably a soulmate of Piaf. . Condemned to deportation and hard
labour — Manda for life, Leca for eight years — the two men met on

                                  270
                          INTRODUCTION


the island of Saint-Martin-de-Ré. When finally they spoke to each
other, it was about Casque d’Or. She meanwhile wasted no time
bewailing her unfortunate suitors, but turned for solace to the
world of entertainment and the company of wealthier men. How-
ever, one of Leca’s faithful followers had been contemplating re-
venge and stabbed her one night in the establishment where she
sang. Although she survived, she could no longer perform as a
singer and it is only thanks to her portrayal by the legendary
Simone Signoret in Jacques Becker’s movie that she has not fallen
into oblivion. The real Amélie Hélie ended by marrying an
ordinary workman and died forgotten on 16 April 1933. She was
buried in the cemetery of Bagnolet.
   In 1966, three years after Edith Piaf’s death, Maurice Chevalier
came back to the 20th arrondissement to unveil a plaque over the
doorway of 72 rue de Belleville which reads: “On the steps of this
house was born 19 December         1915 in the greatest destitution
Edith Piaf whose voice would later take the world by storm.’ But
already the world Piaf and Chevalier grew into was receding into
the past.                                                oe
   With economic prosperity boosting her self-confidence, France
was determined to catch up on lost time and replace rickety shacks
with soaring high-rises. Nobody thought the planning through
however, so the relentless bulldozers ploughed through Belleville
and metamorphosed it into a vertical jungle of concrete, obstruct-
ing the horizon, obliterating the picturesque slopes and the quaint
steep flights of steps at the bends of cobbled alleys. Those early
high-rises of the Cité des Fougéres, built back in the late 1950s, are
already threatening to collapse. . .
   Gone was also the spirit of Bellevile. New waves of immigrants
now crammed into the new anarchical high-rise towers, coming
predominantly from the south — Black Africans, as well as North
Africans (both Arabs and Jews). The Titi parisien (‘Parisian ur-
chin’) was gradually pushed out, together with the old bistrots and
workshops, and couscous became the daily fare around Boulevard
de Belleville.
   However, tucked away behind leafy, pocket-size courtyards or
gardens, some vestiges of the past remain, so far overlooked by
developers, and sometimes still occupied by the last survivors of
pre-war Belleville. Of late they have attracted the eye of a new
                                 a7
                     20TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


generation of ecologically-minded Parisians on the look-out fora
morsel of greenery. Among them are many artists — 400 in all —
grouped in an association which opens its doors to the public on
specific days and tries to salvage what is still left of old Belleville.
Some of these hidden havens conceal enough charm to persuade
even the occasional celebrity to move to the 20th arrondissement.
Most Parisians, however, still perceive it as remote and unappetis-
ing.

Not so the dead. From the start, those very proper Parisians, who
when still alive had taken up residence on the opposite side of the
city and would have never set foot in these accursed parts, were
ready to pay astronomical prices for a share in the most prestigious
cemetery in Paris, le Pére-Lachaise, a spectacular necropolis, basic-
ally constituting the only museum the 20th arrondissement has to
show for itself. Here the last two centuries of the history of France
and Paris are on display and the ghosts of Tout-Paris enjoy the
setting of the largest garden in the capital — 44 hectares — rising
above the world of the living to the west, on a lofty hill and that
much closer to heaven. . .
   In order to make a commercial success of the venture, the 19th-
century bourgeoisie had to be persuaded to allow their remains to
be transferred to the eastern edge of Paris — not yet a place of evil
reputation but certainly remote. The Prefect of the Seine Frochot
resorted to an astute promotional campaign which, by playing on
vanity, naturally worked: by putting up for sale in perpetuity land
grant property, he was sure to arouse         interest among    self-en-
grossed Parisians, and by setting prices so high that only the upper
crust could afford them, he made the new cemetery both desirable
and fashionable (one of the rare fashions that have not worn out in
nearly 200 years!). And when Frochot further transferred to this
site the remains of glorious past celebrities — notably those of the
medieval lovers Abélard and Héloise and those mistaken for La
Fontaine and Moliére’s — Everyone was taken in by it, including
Frochot himself, who rests in division no. 19, Brogniart, the archi-
tect of the new cemetery and of the Paris stock exchange, and
Godde who built the cemetery gate. Jacques Baron, the previous
owner of the 17-hectare grounds of the cemetery also lies here, and
at a very high price: the poor man, who had been squeezed out of

                                  272.
                           INTRODUCTION


his grounds by the hard-bitten Frochot for a pittance, had to pay
300 times the amount for his own little plot of 5 square yards!
   Balzac, who had buried here his characters, was brought here in
his turn, despite his biting account of the place and of its clients:
   This is a disgusting comedy! this is once again Tout-Paris
   with its streets, its signs, its industries, its hétels; but seen
   through the wrong end of the spyglass, a microscopic Paris,
   reduced to the small dimensions of shadows, of larva, of the
   dead, a human race that has nothing great left but its vanity.
                                                             Ferragus

Or as Georges Brassens put it summarily in one of his songs:
                   Les gens avaient a coeur
                   De mourir plus haut que leur cul.
                   People had set their hearts
                   On dying higher than their arse.
   Both had in mind the extravagant monuments erected for the
dead in a delirium of self-aggrandisement. The best artists of the
day, the very same who were commissioned to embellish Paris —
Percier, Fontaine, Viollet-le-Duc, Garnier, Visconti, Davioud —
were now recruited to inflate the egos of the deceased and build for
them bombastic mausoleums.
   The Jews were also allotted a sector in the new cemetery, since
they had been emancipated during the Revolution, but the Mus-
lims were only granted a section in 1856 by Napoléon III who was
seeking a rapprochement with Turkey. The defeated Commune was
also granted a share at Pére-Lachaise, though more reluctantly. In
1883 the Third Republic, by then secure in its victory, could afford
the magnanimous gesture of offering the working classes this trag-
ic wall as a shrine to mourn their frustrated ideals. They called it Le
Mur des Fédérés.
    The cemetery of Pére-Lachaise has been extended several times
since it was first acquired by Frochot on behalf of the city of Paris
in 1804. Part of the site was in the 15th century the splendid prop-
erty of a wealthy spice merchant, Régnault de Wandonne, who
himself had bought the grounds from the Bishop of Paris, the own-
er of large stretches of land on the periphery of the city, notably the
entire area of today’s 8th arrondissement. In 1430 Régnault de

                                 273
                                                (;ge
                                               IZ %


                                                  a
                                                Fe,
                                              \ a
                                                nd




                          Le Pére-Lachaise


Wandonne built himself afolie (from feuillu meaning leafy, not the
18th-century meaning of a frivolous monument).
    The estate was still known as La Folie-Régnault two centuries
later, when the Jesuits bought it as a country retreat from their city
dwelling on the busy rue Saint-Antoine. They renamed it Mont-
Louis, in homage to the Sun King who had given the Jesuits his full
support and had chosen his own confessor from among their
ranks, the Reverend Father Francois d’ Aix de la Chaize — hence the
name Pére-Lachaise given to the estate later. The Jesuits did not
sustain their influence over the licentious Louis XV and were
expelled from France altogether in 1763, following which the
Mont-Louis was bought up by private people and fell eventually
into the hands of the Baron family.
    It would be impossible to list the celebrities who rest here —
Chopin, Piaf and now Yves Montand are certainly among the

                                 274
          BAGNOLET      — CHARONNE      — PERE-LACHAISE


favourites, as well as Jim Morrison, whose fans — the sort that make
respectable middle-class people shudder — used to gather around
his grave for psychedelic and other uplifting ceremonies, until a
closer watch was recently put on the site. The Anglo-Saxon com-
munity pays its respects to Oscar Wilde, just as frowned on in his
day. Some visit Isadora Duncan’s grave, fewer Sir Richard
Wallace’s. Distinguished representatives of the fine arts and
science, music and dance, literature, architecture, the stage and the
screen, the armed forces and politicians are gathered here under the
shade of 12,000 venerable trees, alongside more ordinary Parisians.
