17th Arr: La Plaine Monceau

                    LA PLAINE MONCEAU

In the latter part of the 19th century a colossal amount of the cap-
ital’s wealth — usually freshly piled up — was concentrated in the
area north of the Rotunda of Parc de Monceau, known as La Plaine
Monceau, our next destination. Art and letters soon gravitated to
and were nourished by it. Despite his immense popularity and
wealth, the painter Meissonier was shrewd enough to sum up the
artist’s position in society: “The artist must stay in his studio where
he is King. What has he to do in a world where he is not cared for,
and where his person is used as an ornament and is dished up to
the guests?’

Ledoux’s Rotunda, on the northern edge of Parc de Monceau, is
our starting-point. This is one of the four monuments built for the
toll gates of Paris to have survived (see 12th, 14th and 19th arron-
dissements). It also served as pied-d-terre to Philippe Duc
d’Orléans, the future Philippe Egalité, landlord of the Parc de
Monceau. The Duke occupied the first floor with its commanding
view over the lovely countryside lying to the north, while the
ground floor was allocated to the customs service. All the streets

                                  72
                     LA PLAINE    MONCEAU




that radiate from the Rotunda were eventually lined with affluent
homes. The broad rue de Prony, running to the north-west, be-
came the stronghold of the demi-monde. Kept women were set up
here by wealthy lovers belonging to the monde, who often main-
tained a comfortable respectability (vivre bourgeoisement as the
expression went) within the family fold, just round the corner.
However, the borderline between monde and demi-monde was not
that clear-cut and depended largely on how high one had risen.
   Walk into RUE GEORGES-BERGER which runs at a right
angle from rue de Prony, heading north-east and leading to
BOULEVARD MALESHERBES and PLACE DU GENERAL-
CATROUX on its left. At nos 14 and 10 respectively lived the
Pompier painters Alphonse de Neuville and Ernest Meissonier,
then society’s darlings, now forgotten by most. Both lived in
sumptuous neo-Renaissance palaces, as ephemeral as their fame
and as the ‘mushroom aristocracy’ depicted by Zola. Meissonier’s
dwelling was a colossal, red-brick Italianate palace, extending as
far as the corner of 131 Boulevard Malesherbes and Place Males-
herbes (now Général-Catroux). He wished it to be turned into a
museum, but nobody wanted to preserve this white elephant and

                               173
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


in 1894 it was levelled to the ground, outlasting the painter by three
years only. At 129 Boulevard Malesherbes was the vast dwelling of
their fellow painter, Edouard Detaille, who was popular for his
military scenes. He occupied a colossal studio, with a ceiling high
enough to hold a statue of a mounted cavalry horse.
   Across the Boulevard, at no. 98, stood the sumptuous hétel built
by Jules Février (1876) for the Comtesse Valtesse de La Bigne (the
red-headed Louise Delabigne, of unknown paternity, mentioned
earlier), who, like many other cocottes, had used the stage as a
jumping-off point for her social ascent, aged 15 and freshly arrived
from Normandy. The site she picked out for her sanctuary was not
just any site on the Plaine Monceau but the Place Malesherbes, its
holiest of holies, where she mixed with leading bankers and Rus-
sian princes. Although her home was also the gathering place of
artists, the Countess separated the sheep from the goats, admitting
into her boudoir only those who could afford to keep her. When
Dumas fils asked to see her celebrated bedroom, she replied, “No, it
is not within your means, mon cher maitre.’ And when she made an
exception for Zola, it was merely on professional grounds, for he
was then gathering material for his novel Nana, her fictitious alter
ego. Zola was a reliable reporter, and provides us with a pretty
accurate picture of that sacred place, notably of her celebrated bed,
a gem created by the famous Cain and the focal point of her bed-
room, which can now be seen on rue de Rivoli, at the Musée des
Arts Décoratifs. The Countess may not have allowed her artist
friends into her boudoir, but she willingly posed for them, and can
be seen, for example, under an umbrella, next to Meissonier and
Detaille, in the latter’s painting Le Régiment qui passe.
   Of all the former splendour of Place Malesherbes, no. 1 (no. 100
Boulevard Malesherbes) is the unique survivor, a solitary witness
of a world that is no more. It was built, also by Jules Février, be-
tween 1878 and 1882 for the Baron Emile Gaillard, the banker of the
Comte de Chambord and the Régent of the Banque de France.
Emile Gaillard was also a great art collector, and it was largely in
order to house his collection, which included paintings dating
from the Renaissance, notably portraits of Henri II and Catherine
de Medici and others from the early Flemish school, that he built
himself this neo-Renaissance palace, inspired by the Chateau de
Blois in the Loire Valley. It was furnished accordingly with genuine

                                 174
                       LA PLAINE    MONCEAU


16th-century furniture and served as a backdrop to a scintillating
costume ball which Gaillard lavished on 2,000 guests on 11 April
1885. The next day the press reported: “Two superb halberdiers,
wearing the fleur-de-lys shield of France on their chests, struck the
floor as the guests entered. The buffet was laid in the dining-room,
a superb peacock as its central piece. Monsieur Gaillard was dress-
ed as Henri II, in a purple satin costume.’
   As in the case of Meissonier, no buyer was found for Gaillard’s
palace after his death on 4 May 1904. Neither the state nor the city
of Paris was interested in acquiring the building and turning it into
a museum and its Renaissance contents had to be auctioned off. It
would probably have gone the way of its neighbours if the Banque
de France had not bought it in 1923. Jules Février was duly grateful
and paid the Banka sincere tribute. Naturally, the glamour is gone,
but at least the grand staircase stands, and its fireplace, a replica of
the one in the Doge’s Palace in Venice, has also been preserved.
However, following a bomb attempt in 1985, the premises are no
longer open to visitors.
   On the corner of rue Jacques-Bingen stood an elegant mansion,
decorated with Doric pillars, which was shared by Gounod and his
brother-in-law, Pigny, from 1881 to 1893. Besides his collection of
thousands of musical scores, Gounod set up a wonderful music
room on the premises, 8 metres high, and complete with a genuine
Cavaille-Coll organ!
   Despite the wreckage wrought by insensitive developers and the
passage of time, the Place du Général-Catroux (even the name Place
Malesherbes has not been preserved), remains a haven of green
lawns and shady, century-old chestnut trees, an oasis of tranquillity
at weekends, when little traffic passes through. In spring bright
tulips enliven it, later to be replaced bya blaze of rhododendron and
azalea. The statues of Alexandre Dumas Pére (on the western edge)
and fils (on the eastern edge) grace the square at all seasons, as well
as that of Sarah Bernhardt dressed as Phédre, seated in front of the
Banque de France. The actress is a later addition, a substitute for
Grandpére Dumas, whom Poulbot had commemorated in his
General’s uniform, but who, being made of bronze, was-melted
down by the Germans during the last war. The statue of Dumas Pere
was made by Gustave Doré who, however, did not live to see its
official inauguration on 4 November 1883, having died on 3 January

                                  175
                          ;;QPBs '

               Place Malesherbes (Général-Catroux)

of that year. Young Dumas did not forget him and went all the way
to Pére Lachaise cemetery, to meditate by his grave. Dumas Pére,
the greater of the two writers, has a mass of curly hair and seems to
be in the act of writing; at his feet are three figures, absorbed in
reading his adventure stories, while a splendid d’Artagnan is seated
proudly at the back of the socle.
   Sarah Bernhardt lived here too, just a block away to the west, on
the corner (nos 35/37) of rue Fortuny and Avenue de Villiers, next
door to Dumas’s home at 98 Avenue de Villiers. Her home too was
built by Jules Février, in 1876. Contemporaries declared it to have
been a magnificent dwelling of exquisite taste, with harmonious

                                     176
                       LA PLAINE     MONCEAU


brick and stonework on its facade, and a splendid interior staircase
by Chéret. Here she assembled some magnificent objets d’art and
also had an artist’s studio (she was also a painter and sculptor).
Nevertheless, within a few short years she was ruined and had to
sell her house. The corner house at no. 37 was unforgivably de-
molished in 1960, but no. 35 is still standing. Sarah Bernhardt
moved to 56 Boulevard Pereire — her home during her sensational
success in l’Aiglon, but also during the declining years of her life —
amid an incredible clutter, according to Maurice Rostand (son of
Edmond). Among her medley of bric-d-brac and of genuine
valuables were a monkey and a parrot, sharing an apparently
peaceful existence in the same cage.

Head for RUE FORTUNY. Like rue de Prony, this was also a
preserve of cocottes, among them two of the most notorious in the
city —Geneviéve Lantelme and Caroline Otero — who lived at nos 29
and 27 respectively. Both houses still stand. Whereas Caroline
Otero caused some of her suitors to die of unrequited love, notably
the explorer Payen, who offered her 10,000 francs for one night of
her company, Genevieve Lantelme tragically drowned herself in the
Rhine in 1918. The two neighbours hated each other thoroughly, yet
they shared the same architect, Adolphe Vieil, who, innocently or
maliciously, placed them behind almost twin facades. The street
still has a spectacular array of hétel facades, products of prolific and
creative imaginations. All the building materials then in vogue —
stone, brick, ceramic and wrought iron — participate in this exces-
sive fantasy. Stylistic elements have been borrowed from the past,
from Venice, Florence or Lombardy, from the Loire Valley, from
Byzantium or elsewhere, to create an irreplaceable miscellany of an
exquisitely decadent time. And yet, because the facades have been
kept to the same dimensions and proportions, and because the use
of polychrome ceramics has been repeated all along the street, a
general harmony prevails and makes rue Fortuny an architectural
period piece. Notice the blue and mauve ceramic frieze that runs
along the brick facade of no. 13, once the home of writer Marcel
Pagnol. Edmond Rostand also lived on rue Fortuny, at no. 2, to
which he moved from the corner of rue Alfred Roll and Edmond
Flachat (seen on the previous walk). It was on rue Fortuny that he
completed Cyrano de Bergerac.

                                  177
                    17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Retrace your steps and turn lefton AVENUE DE VILLIERS. No.
43 now houses the Musée Henner in one of the area’s few hotels to
have survived, providing a rare opportunity to see an example of
their interiors, this one dating from the Second Empire. Despite the
misleading name of the museum, the architect Félix Escalier did not
build this mansion for the Alsatian painter Jean-Jacques Henner,
but for the successful portrait painter of the Second Empire,
Guillaume Dubufe, who had his studio here. Henner died in 1905
and in 1920 his descendants bought the mansion to turn it into a
museum for his works, a happy initiative since Henner and the
house were contemporaries and his works blend beautifully into it,
conveying a feeling of historical authenticity even in the artificial
environment of a museum.
  Beyond the museum, on the corner of rue Cardinet, is the fic-
titious site of Nana’s hétel. Thanks to Zola’s description, we can
picture the real hdtel of Valtesse de la Bigne at 98 Boulevard Males-
herbes: ‘It was of Renaissance style, with the air of a palace, an
imaginative layout inside, modern conveniences in a setting of
deliberate originality.” RUE CARDINET        is a typical, quiet, bour-
geois street of the 17th arrondissement, the home of Debussy, at no.
58, where he worked on part of Pélleas and Mélisande. The opera was
received by a tempest of disapproval when it opened at the Opéra
Comique in 1902. Among other things, it was accused of being vapid
and precious! Like the Impressionist painters, Debussy was misun-
derstood by the establishment, and asa studentat the Conservatoire
was reproached for ‘loving music as much as the piano’! On one
occasion his harmony teacher dropped the piano lid on his fingers,
as punishment for having improvised on his favourite chords.

Retrace your steps on Avenue de Villiers and turn left, north of Place
du Général-Catroux, into RUE JACQUES-BINGEN,                 once rue
Montchanin and a stronghold of artists and literati. Among them
was Guy de Maupassant, who lived at no. 10, which has since
disappeared. At the street junction ahead, at no. 22 rue Legendre,
the church of Saint-Charles stands on the probable site of the
former entrance to the Chateau de Monceau, of which nothing has
survived.
   Continue right into RUE DE TOCQUEVILLE, running be-
tween proud, austere, fortress-like buildings, homes of the up-

                                 178
                   EPINETTES    — BATIGNOLLES


and-coming     bourgeoisie   in the 19th century.      The   pleasant
pedestrian section of rue de la Terrasse, to its left, leads to a
different world in RUE LEVIS — a bustling market street, with
colourful food displays and a sunny café terrace.
