14th Arr: Carrefour Vavin to Rue Daguerre

      FROM ‘CARREFOUR VAVIN’ (PLACE PABLO-
           PICASSO) TO RUE DAGUERRE

Our first walk, in the north-western part of the arrondissement,
starts at Carrefour Vavin, the cradle of Montparnasse, now
renamed PLACE PABLO-PICASSO. Try to come here early ona
sunny Saturday morning so as to include both the markets of
Boulevard Edgar-Quinet and rue Daguerre in your outing, but first
sit down for a hot croissant beurre and café creme breakfast on the
sunny terrace of La Rotonde        (in the 6th arr.), to soak up the
subdued atmosphere of Paris as it awakes for yet another busy day.
You can meanwhile recapture the feel of Montparnasse in its
heyday, since all four strongholds of Carrefour Vavin are still there
—La Rotonde, Le Sélect on your right (in the 6th), Le Dome and La
Coupole across the street (in the 14th). Of course today’s Le Dome
—a good fish restaurant, with daily fresh supplies from Brittany —
bears only a faint resemblance to the small establishment frequent-
ed by the expatriates in the 1920s, even less to the scruffy joint it was
before World War I. Then it did not have a terrace, a point that was
immaterial to its clientele of bricklayers and other workmen, who
liked a game at the billiards table. The early artist community of
Montparnasse had no use for terraces either — it was the heated

                                   43
                              14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT




                                       HsCIMETIERE
                                     DE MONTPARNASSE
            \\: DE        N
     PL. DI




                                        a
 LAMPHITREATRE A iEw Ee
             Vg      DE
            5 A>, SEOUL

       YD    NOTRE-DAME
                  DU


                                                   i”
               TRAVAIL                                        PLAC

js
                                                       DENFERT ROCHEREAU   BD. ARAGO

                                                           (a
                                                          &




     premises they were after and, having not a penny to their names,
     they often left unpaid bills or, like Kisling, bartered a painting fora
     drink. Only in 1923, when the Déme was entirely renovated, was its
     celebrated terrace added, making it the most popular café in Mont-
     parnasse, albeit still primarily among those living on a shoestring,
     who could just about afford a café creme anda sandwich. The present
     upmarket Déme has done away with its tabac and has shifted its
     main entrance from the side street, rue Delambre, to the Boulevard
     and has a lush display of oysters on the pavement. Inside, the Art
     Deco setting designed by Slavick creates a warm, comfortable
     atmosphere. The old photos of the Déme’s celebrated patrons that
     now decorate its walls are all that is left of its legendary past.

     RUE DELAMBRE, where the entrance of the run-down Déme
     stood, is our next destination. The modern Déme has actually spilt
     into rue Delambre with its smart fish shop and an additional
     bistrot across the street. At one time or another, several artists lived
     in the street. Tsuguhara Fujita, newly married to Fernande Barrey,
     had his first studio at no. 5 where he installed a bathtub with hot

                                          44
            PLACE   PABLO    PICASSO    — RUE   DAGUERRE


running water and was taken for a tycoon (electricity was not in
common use in Paris before 1920). Modigliani too owned a bath-
tub, and his was made of zinc! Many models‘came over to Fujita to
enjoy this luxury free of charge, among them liberated Kiki who,
ignoring the neighbourhood’s moral scruples, used to pose for
him in the nude and in the courtyard.
   Isadora Duncan stayed for a while at the apartment hotel at no.
9, next door to the Parnasse Bar at no. gbis, which was packed at
busy periods and remained open throughout the night. Opposite,
at no. 10, the tiny Dingo Bar was the celebrated hang-out of expat-
riates and the place where Ernest Hemingway, still an unpublished
writer, first met the already established Scott Fitzgerald in 1925.
Jimmy Charter, the English barman and a former lightweight
boxer, was largely responsible for the success of the establishment,
as he knew how to look after his English-speaking customers and
they followed him from bar to bar. When he decided to cross the
street and work for the Parnasse Bar, it is claimed that the receipts
of his new employers rose sixfold! Man Ray had his first studio at
lHotel des Ecoles at no. 15, now the well-known Lenox, to which
he moved in 1921, when his friend the Dadaist Marcel Duchamp
left for New York. This is where his career as a photographer be-
gan, and where James Joyce, Gertrude Stein, Jean Cocteau and the
others filed in and posed for eternity in black and white.
   But rue Delambre was also French, and specifically Breton,
being so close to the Gare du Montparnasse that linked Paris and
Brittany; and while the expatriates’ presence was ephemeral, the
Breton community has maintained its roots here for over a cen-
tury. At no. 22, for example, is the Breton Mission where one can
learn the Breton language and history, as well as dances and songs.
One Sunday a month its members rally for the fest-deiz (feast of the
day), asserting their ties with the beautiful western province. The
Ti-Jos (‘Maison Joseph’ in Breton) restaurant and créperie, at no.
30, has a pub in the basement, where they serve cider and beer. On
Thursday nights Celtic music is also on the agenda, though usually
Irish!
   The presence of Bretons is even more conspicuous on RUE DU
MONTPARNASSE to your right, which is lined with picturesque
créperies. The street also has a home for elderly artists, at no. 55/57.
It is run by the city of Paris. Its residents are provided with studios

                                   45
                       Rue du Montparnasse

and an art gallery where their works are exhibited alongside those of
younger fellow-artists — a happy initiative, in the right place. At
no. 42 the Falstaff has survived in the Breton heartland and has
preserved its original oak panelling, a rare vestige of old Mont-
parnasse, although today it is just an ordinary beer bar/restaurant.
When ‘Jimmy the Barman’ left the Dingo Bar for the Falstaff in the
late Twenties, his faithful Anglo-Saxon customers followed him,
Hemingway and Fitzgerald in the lead. Jimmy was a good listener,
had good tips on horse racing and knew how to smooth things out.
When one night the six-foot Swede Jorgenson came over to the
Falstaff to beat up writer and publisher Robert McAlmon with

                                 46
            PLACE   PABLO   PICASSO    — RUE   DAGUERRE


whom he had picked a quarrel at the Dingo the night before, it was
Jimmy’s soft talk that got the towering troublemaker to leave
quietly. Both Jimmy and the customers liked the refined atmo-
sphere, which contrasted with the other haunts where there was
more fun and action, but where there was also more noise and
drunkenness: not that one did not drink at the Falstaff, but here it
was serious, heavy drinking. Jimmy ruled that every tenth drink
would be on the house, which seemed to satisfy everyone. As before,
he was responsible for the success of the Falstaff, while its two happy
Belgian owners shared the receipts, and also the same mistress!

Retrace your steps and continue into BOULEVARD EDGAR-
QUINET for a stroll through the colourful market stalls. Before
World War I the market was a spectacle worthy of a medieval street
scene or a René Clair movie: there were sword-swallowers, fire-
eaters, dog-trainers, and carousels whirling to the music of a street
organ. The cries of street vendors mingled with the tunes played by
the band, and street singers would strike up a popular refrain and
the crowds would join in. From time to time a drove of goats or
donkeys passed by on its way to the Jardin du Luxembourg. The
present market has enticing food displays and bright flowers, but it
is somewhat pale in comparison with its former self.
    The prestigious Sphinx, the only bordello on the Left Bank, was
located at no. 31. Having been semi-rural at least until the Great
War, the area lagged behind the Right Bank in matters of
prostitution too, although the opening of the railway station of
Montparnasse in 1840 secured a constant flow of girls from
poverty-stricken Brittany, anxious to learn and ply the trade for a
puny fee. But with the explosion of Montparnasse in the Twenties
there was   also demand     for high-class,    exclusive prostitution,
supplied by the Sphinx. The opening of the Sphinx was marked
with great pomp, invitations having been sent to all and sundry,
singles and couples alike, and everyone was offered champagne as
well as a guided tour of the chromium-plated, air-conditioned
premises — a total novelty — and its magnificent Art Deco bar, a
match for the hitherto unrivalled bar of La Coupole.
   The Cemetery of Montparnasse extends south of Boulevard
Edgar-Quinet, the site of the toll-wall and of the southern
boundary of the capital in 1824, when the cemetary was opened. It

                                  47
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


was therefore known as le Cimetiére du Sud. Cemeteries had been
banned from Paris since the shutting down of the Cimetiére des
Innocents, on the fringe of Les Halles, in 1786, on the grounds that
it presented a health hazard. Three new cemeteries replaced them
outside the precincts of the capital in the early 19th century, Mont-
martre in the north, Le Pére Lachaise in the east and Montparnasse
in the south. The main entrance to the Cemetery of Montparnasse
is at no. 3 Boulevard Edgar-Quinet but we shall enter it later from
rue de Froidevaux. For the time being turn left into rue de la Gaité
(if you have walked all the way down the Boulevard, retrace your
steps one block.)

RUE DE LA GAITE was a mere country lane in the 18th century.
By 1804 it linked the toll barrier of Montparnasse and the village of
Clamart. As at all the barriers in Paris, a cluster of guinguettes
opened here providing locals with cheap, untaxed wine. Thus from
the start, the street was singled out as a place of entertainment.
There was plenty of demand for entertainment in a rural area
which offered none. Indeed, no sooner was the street built, than it
was lined with restaurants, cabarets and theatres at affordable
prices. A popular refrain referred to
               ... un cabaret, barriére du Maine
               Au temps ow le vin se vendait six sous. . .
               . ..a cabaret at the Maine barrier
               In the days when wine was sold for six farthings. . .
And while the rest of the neighbourhood was plunged into dark-
ness at night-time, rue de la Gaité glittered with blazing street signs
and crackled with the noise of the crowds. When in 1840 the rail-
way station brought Brittany closer to Montparnasse, rue de la
Gaité was impregnated with the smell of oysters mingled with that
of potato chips. The poor country girls of Brittany also made the
journey and when they alighted at Gare du Montparnasse in their
picturesque lacy costumes and tall headdresses, they too were
lured by the attractions of rue de la Gaité and soon the area was
riddled with prostitution on a large scale.
   Now that the pleasure business has taken over the street, sex on
rue de la Gaité is no longer spontaneous fun, the pulse of life which
thrilled Henry Miller, but a profit-generating commodity, on

                                   48
            PLACE   PABLO   PICASSO    — RUE   DAGUERRE


display in sex-shops and peep-shows. In the 1980s as many as
eleven sex-shops and three peep-shows were located in this
relatively short street. Exasperated neighbours rallied to put an
end to the crude destruction of their environment and succeeded
in having the shop windows cleared, if nothing else. It is only for its
exciting past that rue de la Gaité is worth exploring today.
   The restaurant Le Richefeu opened in 1802 at no. 1, a huge place
which had three storeys, an additional terrace on top, and also a
garden with a bower. Although the establishment catered to every-
one, social segregation was practised: the higher one climbed up
the building, the cheaper the fare and the worse the service. Thus
serviettes were not provided beyond the first floor, and while din-
ner was served on the first, only cheese and chips were to be had on
the terrace. Nobody seemed to mind, the place was packed and
Monsieur Richefeu made a substantial fortune. At present the site
is occupied by the inconspicuous Café de la Liberté, where Sartre
liked to have his breakfast towards the end of his life, while tourists
were still seeking him out at the Deux-Magots, in Saint-Germain-
des-Prés.
   A popular café-brasserie with six billiard tables stood at no. 6. In
1886 it became a café-concert, the Concert-Gangloff. After the Prus-
sian War and the Commune of 1870-71, when Paris developed an
unquenchable thirst for fun, the Third Republic, born out of the
tragic bloodbath of the civil war of the Commune, provided fun in
plenty, in a bid to secure its legitimacy. Places of entertainment
sprang up throughout the city and competition was fierce. The
Concert-Gangloff could not stand up to the celebrated Gaité-
Montparnasse just a few steps down the road, not even when
experienced professionals took it over in 1896 under the name of
Fantaisies- Montparnasse.
  Turn right into RUE DU MAINE. Henry Miller lived on the
corner house, at no. 1, in 1930, when he struck an advantageous
deal with the Sphinx in which he would write the pamphlets for the
house in return for ‘a bottle of champagne and a free fuck in one of
the Egyptian rooms’. Ahead is Square Gaston-Baty, where child-
ren play around a life-size statue of Soutine by Arbit Blatas. The
sculptor has certainly captured the scowling face and inhibited
posture of this tortured soul who liked to leave chunks of meat and
bloody fowl on his canvases.                        .

                                  49
                    14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


   Retrace your steps and continue along rue de la Gaité. During
the Second Empire, a dance hall was located at no. 15. At that time
regulations placed limits on entertainment so as not to undermine
the theatre. Performers other than theatre actors were not allowed
to disguise themselves, for example, nor to recite texts. At no. 17,
La Comédie Italienne is decorated with characters from the
commedia dell’arte. Its presence here brings a cheerful note to an
otherwise unappetising street and even helps to sustain a glorious
past, when the Italians were the only ones besides the official royal
troupe allowed to tread the theatre boards of Paris.
   Until recently the illustrious Bobino stood at no. 20; it began as
a dance hall too, le Bal des Gigolettes, way back in 1800. When the
old regulations were repealed, the new proprietor converted it into
a theatre (in 1873) and named it Folies-Bobino after a member of
the modest Théatre du Luxembourg, which had opened during the
Restoration near the Luxembourg Gardens. Pantomime, juggling,
acrobatics and conjuring were the only forms of entertainment
tolerated at the time and the regulations required that they be
preceded by a an outdoor parade, a street performance involving
farcical characters such as Palliaci and Harlequin (as on the Boule-
vard du Temple in the uth arrondissement). The clown who
played Palliaci in the Parade was nicknamed Bobino, and in 1830
the Théatre du Luxembourg was renamed after him. It so happen-
ed that the theatre was demolished towards the end of the Second
Empire, just before the new Bobino was built on rue de la Gaité,
but no connection between the two has been established.
   The Folies-Bobino began unpromisingly, and only got worse
when the obnoxious Richain took it over in 1894. Rude and miser-
ly, he drove away both audience and performers. In 1896, the
reporter of l’Art Lyrique related how his talented artists, disgusted
at being maltreated, badly paid — if at all, and performing to
‘widowed’ seats, had quit. “The great attraction is the patron of the
establishment himself!’ he added. ‘This person, whose preten-
tiousness can only match his incompetence, seemed like a bear ina
cage, threatening to bite everyone, but chickening out as soon as
anyone approached to ask him why he was so insolent. This man of
rare imbecility must have received plenty of “kicks up the arse”
during his managerial and cabaret existence, as it is the only phrase
he seems to know.’

                                 50
           PLACE   PABLO   PICASSO    — RUE   DAGUERRE


   In 1912 the Bobino opened a new chapter. Its new impresario,
Montpreux, was a congenial person, the opposite of Richain,
massive, red-faced and jovial. Everyone liked him. Spectators and
critics came back to watch a programme drawn from the reper-
toire of classical theatre coupled with café-concert variety enter-
tainment. Some excellent and renowned artists performed here,
their names now forgotten, except for Mistinguett. However,
according to one contemporary, the Bobino was an obsolete and
shabby place — “a sort of barn with paintings that had been washed
out by the water of the sky’. Its seats were like armless, legless
cripples and its curtain a rag that descended in front of its red-
nosed audience, a common crowd by all accounts.
    In any case, Montpreux had stepped in too late: for a while now
the people of Paris had been under the spell of the cinema, still
admittedly in its infancy and yet to become a talkie, but which
already promised a thrilling, novel voyage into a land of dream-
generating illusions, a means of transient yet total escape, of total
disconnection from reality. One by one the glittering palaces of
pleasure, the pride of the Belle Epoque, yielded to the inexorable
advance of the usines a réves (“dream factories’). Between 1910 and
1920 two thirds were turned into picture houses; those that, like the
Bobino, put up a heroic resistance, obtained a lease of life until at
best 1930, when the talkies finished them off.
   The Bobino was fortunate to be bought up in 1926 by the giant
Lutétia-Empire, which already owned as many as 15 picture houses
in the city. The company decided to turn their new acquisition into
a music hall and perpetuate old traditions. The Bobino was entire-
ly renovated, sumptuously padded with red velvet and trimmed
with gold. Huge mirrors multiplied the enchantment. However,
the old structure was maintained and that was heart-warming. The
new directors made sure that the quality of the show would equal
that of the premises and hired the best artists such as Mayol, Yvette
Guilbert, Damia ... and also a young beginner by the name of
Fernandel. All to no avail.
   In the early 1930s, when the Bobino was about to surrender to
the all-devouring cinema and to bear the inevitable prefix Pathé,
the celebrated Goldin Mitty came to the rescue, putting on stage
for the first time such performers as Charles Trenet, Tino Rossi
and Edith Piaf, and turning it into one of the most reputable
                                 51
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


establishments of the capital. For the next few decades all the
celebrities and stars of la chanson francaise would appear on its
stage — Yves Montand, Jacques Brel, Léo Ferré, Mouloudji, Juliette
Gréco, Les Compagnons de la Chanson, Barbara — and of course,
Georges Brassens who made it his home. While the Olympia on the
Grands Boulevards (see chapter on the 9th arrondissement) was
associated with Right Bank entertainment, the Bobino was assoc-
iated with Left Bank nonconformity, even though many artists,
including Piaf, sang in both. It was here that she gave her last heart-
rending performance, on 13 March 1963, six months before her
death, aged only 48, wrecked by alcohol and drugs.
  However, with the close of the 1960s, the last decade when
French culture maintained its own identity, the great Left-Bank
talents vanished, followed in 1971 by the unfortunate, sudden
death of its brilliant impresario, Vitry. This time the enemy was
perhaps even more implacable than the cinematography. A new
tidal wave of world culture swept over Paris, carrying away the
outdated chanson francaise. In 1984 the century-old Bobino was
torn down and was replaced by a noisy disco-nightclub — the Wiz—
where porn and violence were confused with modernity. But,
strangely, the younger generation did not show up. So the prem-
ises were given their old name again and a practical new manager
turned them into a multi-purpose establishment. At present the
Bobino is once more the home of singers and other performers,
but in a totally remodelled environment devoid of a soul. Was it
necessary to do away with the old historical place? Those of us who
had spent some of our best nights in Paris in the old Bobino have
remained inconsolable to this day.
    At no. 26 stands La Gaité-Montparnasse, an elliptically-shaped
structure, built with the stones retrieved from the temporary
International Theatre of the 1867 Universal Exposition — a rare old
shrine to have survived the last war as a café-concert, largely thanks
to the revival of the music hall during the Occupation. It was reg-
ularly packed with happy, noisy, working-class people, who would
do their cooking inside the hall and dine there during the long
intervals. Shopkeepers with their wives and children occupied the
stalls at 1 franc a seat; hatless milliners and workmen in canvas
overalls would sit in the circle, the neighbourhood’s rowdiest
urchins and louts, in the gods, expressing their displeasure with

                                  52
                       Thédtre Montparnasse

catcalls and whistles and by bombarding the stage with orange
peels. Well-known figures could be seen in the audience too, en-
joying the genuine atmosphere. Frangois Coppée and Lenin were
among them. The shows were of varied quality but some note-
worthy artists performed here too, such as Mayol, Fréhel (the pre-
war equivalent of Piaf) and writer-performer Colette, freshly
divorced from Willy. In 1945 a new era began on the Left Bank and
the premises became home to an avant-garde theatre, which
enjoyed the collaboration of Jacques Prévert, Harold Pinter and
Roger Blin. The miracle is that somehow it has survived to this day.
  Another shrine still stands across the street at no. 31, on the
corner of rue Larochelle, the Théatre Montparnasse, the earliest of
Montparnasse’s theatres. When it opened in 1772 it was called La
nouvelle troupe comique du Mont-Parnasse and staged the usual
repertoire derived from the commedia dell’arte. When a new owner
took over in 1779, the troupe hoped for a better future but the
Comédiens-Francais, always lobbying against potential rivals, had
the official inauguration cancelled. However, this being a sub-
urban theatre, outside the city boundaries, the troupe was not
actually banned.

                                 53
                    14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


   In 1819 it was placed, like all the suburb theatres, under the
authority of Pierre Seveste. Seveste, the grandson of the grave-
digger who had buried Louis XVI after his execution (see chapter
on the 8th arrondissement), knew where the King’s remains had
been laid and could help Louis XVIII to identify them. Louis
XVIII, the late King’s grateful brother, rewarded him for this with
the unusual privilege of giving him authority over all the suburban
theatres, a privilege which was handed down through the family.
The quality of the show left a lot to be desired, but this did not
bother the unsophisticated audience, who turned up with a cab-
bage stew, which they simmered over the stove before the show.
   In 1888 the famous André Antoine took over the theatre every
Friday, the closing day of his own Théatre Libre in Montmartre,
and catapulted it into the limelight, where it remained well into the
1950s. Gaston Baty, Louis Jouvet and Sacha Pitoéff were among its
collaborators, and its productions of Cyrano de Bergerac and La
Dame de chez Maxime’s constituted historic landmarks on the
Paris theatre scene.
   The Casino-Montparnasse at no. 35/37 opened in 1911 only, but
despite the growing competition of the film industry, it played to
packed halls for about 15 years. Maurice Chevalier, Mistinguett
and Damia all performed here till the 1930s, when, however, even
Fréhel could no longer draw the public who was queuing up for the
first talkies in front of the ever-growing number of cinemas. In
1933 it was converted into a cinema in its turn. The revival of the
music hall during the last war restored it temporarily to its old
vocation, which was sustained for a while after the war by a short-
lived miracle — the success of Francis Lopez’s operetta, La Belle de
Cadiz, with Luis Mariano in the lead role. On the night of the
premiére, 13 November 1945, the hitherto totally unknown young
tenor from Bordeaux (who had also designed the costumes and the
sets) received an ovation that verged on delirium. His suave voice,
caressed and stirred the female members of the audience and swept
them off their feet. Overnight he became the Parisian Valentino.
As he soared to sudden, dizzying fame, he carried along with him
both Francis Lopez and the theatre where the miracle had taken
place. For two full years La Belle de Cadiz was performed to a
packed theatre and extra chairs even had to be borrowed from
neighbouring cafés. However, while Luis Mariano maintained his

                                 54
            PLACE   PABLO   PICASSO    — RUE   DAGUERRE


career to the last, the theatre could not repeat this feat. Today a
characterless cinema complex stands here, bearing the functional
name l’Espace Gaité, in keeping with the neighbourhood’s recent
facelift.

Continue into RUE VERCINGETORIKX, diagonally to the right.
Nothing is left of the days when Gauguin lived on the second floor
of no. 6 (1894) with his Indonesian mistress, Annah la Javanaise.
He decorated his studio to look like a Polynesian cabin. On the
glass entrance door he painted a palm tree with a Tahitian beauty
underneath. Above the door he wrote: Ici l’on aime... Gauguin
was at the peak of his fame, and was paid homage here by the likes
of Edvard Munch and Strindberg. Even Degas deigned to come
down from Montmartre to pay his respects, diluted, however, by
scathing remarks about the futility of travelling in search of what
can be found back home. In 1970 this historic landmark gave way
to a Sheraton hotel (now Le Méridien). The glass entrance door
with its soporific images of sunwashed islands had already been
smashed accidentally in 1910, while it was being transported to the
art dealer Paul Rosenberg, to whom the landlord was about to sell
it.
   It was not just no. 6 but the entire seedy neighbourhood that
went — together with its share of drugs, admittedly — but also its
population of modest, old-time locals (who are said, however, to
have been rehoused in the area); it was replaced by yet another
example of soulless townplanning.

You will now reach PLACE DE CATALOGNE, the work of the
architect Ricardo Bofill. The place has been singled out as one of
Paris’s achievements of the last 20 years, and as such it was proudly
shown to the Prince and Princess of Wales during their official visit
to Paris in November 1988. If you see it floodlit at night, it certainly
looks impressive, enhanced by the tilted round centrepiece with a
sheet of water gliding over it and producing an enchanting
shimmering effect. Not so during the day, when this jerry-built
construction shows signs of premature old age. Rue Vercingétorix
continues under an archway across the roundabout, which leads to
the traffic-free Place de Séoul (also known as Colonnes) and Place
del’ Amphithéatre, respectively to your left and to your right. Place

                                  55
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


de Séoul is actually quite impressive when its curved glass facades
catch the sun’s rays or glitter in the night. The artistic intentions of
Bofill cannot be underestimated; with a respectful nod to the
Classical masters, he has integrated their heritage into our present
age and his own personal style. However, despite the overall unity
of the complex, it stands in a landscape of desolate cement, merely
adding to the overall prevailing architectural mess.

Ahead is the solid, unpretentious church of Notre-Dame-du-
Travail, looming out of the past, overlooking a newly laid-out
garden and a fortress-like block of flats. As ifin a desperate attempt
to neutralise the disastrous effect, the bloc has been painted pink
and an extensive strip of puny-looking trees and bushes has been
planted in front of it — enough to make the artists’ community of
Montparnasse turn in their graves!
    A red-roofed house has somehow survived left of the church,
probably because it adjoins the church. In front of the house, an
old shady tree and a few benches from another time have also been
left in peace. The church itself is worth a visit — it has more to tell
you about genuine Paris than many of the better known monu-
ments and is a very original piece of architecture.
    The opening of the railway station in 1840 and the annexation of
the area to Paris in 1860 brought about a rapid growth of the pop-
ulation and the necessity to provide it with a new place of worship.
The parish church built in 1848 on the neighbouring rue Texel
proved too small. Even with its new extension in 1865, it could not
contain the ceaseless flow of newcomers to this neighbourhood of
Plaisance, which by then numbered 35,000 inhabitants. Needless to
say, Plaisance was poor and Abbot Soulange-Bodin had his hands
full trying to bring some light to the destitute, sickly and young who
were left wandering about on the streets. The new church was there-
fore dedicated to Our Lady of Work, so as to restore dignity to the
labours of man (and at the same time give credibility to the fight
against idleness and crime). It was to be inaugurated in 1900, so as to
coincide with the Universal Exposition, on whose building site
many of Plaisance’s inhabitants had been working. The Abbot thus
wished to pay homage to the previous 1889 Fair, which celebrated
man’s faith in work and progress, as symbolised by the Eiffel Tower,
and asked the architect Astruc to convey this spirit of modernity in

                                  56
             PLACE   PABLO   PICASSO    — RUE   DAGUERRE


 the new church: “The Church had to remind the worker of his
 factory so that he should feel at home, in his customary environ-
 ment, surrounded by iron and wood, the materials that his hand
 transforms every day. . . But the House of God, ifit reminded one of
 the factory and workshop where the workman laboured all his life,
 also had to bea feast for his eyes anda solace for his body. . .so that
 his eyes could bathe in the light and his lungs could breathe deeply
 the pure air.’ Hence, the metal framework of the nave, made of 135
 tonnes of iron and steel, a surprising sight as one walks in. These
 were salvaged from the gigantic Palais de] Industrie which was built
 for the 1855 World Fair and replaced by the Grand and the Petit
 Palais for the 1900 Fair (see chapter on the 8th arr.). Abbot
 Soulange-Bodin also managed to salvage for his church a bell taken
 from the defeated Sebastopol by Napoléon III in 1854. Oflate a local
 artist has decorated the walls with delicate painted flowers, which
 blend in beautifully with the metal framework, softening the atmo-
 sphere without spoiling its stark character. A few highly symbolic
 works of art are interspersed here and there, striking in their beauty
 or deeply felt emotions, notably a Pieta. The church also takes pride
  in its beautiful organ, which in 1985 replaced the old Cavaille-Coll.
- The new instrument allows for 150 combinations of sound and is
 enhanced by the excellent acoustics of the building.
    Another survivor from the past is an antiquated boulangerie at
 no. 105 rue Vercingétorix, on the corner of rue Grégovie, Le
 Moulin de la Vierge (the Virgin’s mill), dating from 1907. Candy-
 coloured angels float in a candy-blue sky of an optimistic ceiling,
 while traditional French bread and other appetising savories are
 on display in the window, side by side with American brownies.

 Retrace your steps on rue Vercingétorix and turn diagonally right
 into rue Jean Zay, then right into RUE FROIDEVAUX. To any
 Parisian the rue Froidevaux’is associated with the Cemetery of
 Montparnasse, the eternal home of many of France’s intellectual
 and artistic elite, also celebrated by Georges Brassens in La Ballade
 des Cimetieres.
    Before it was confiscated during the French Revolution to be
 used for the burial of unclaimed bodies, the cemetery’s grounds had
 belonged to the Christian Ordre de la Charité — their one-time
 windmill still stands within the cemetery’s precincts (in the 9th

                                   57
                         14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


division), the only windmill to have survived in the 14th arrondisse-
ment. Its sails have long gone, but there is talk of fixing new ones. In
the early 17th century, when the rubble mound of Montparnasse
was still in existence, the jolly youths of the Latin Quarter who used
its lofty position to recite verse would wind up at the windmill to
feast on home-made galettes (pancakes), washed down by cheap
wine. The windmill was frequented by the students well after the
mound had been levelled and into the 18th century and it is claimed
that Voltaire was among the merry band. Voltaire was a student at
the Jesuit Collége de Clermont (now Lycée Louis-le-Grand), whose
hang-out was this mill, the Moliniste, whereas their opponents, the
Jansenists*, gathered at the Trois-Cornets mill, on the corner of the
present rue Raymond-Losserand and Avenue du Maine.
   It was a business-minded miller who first had the idea of selling
galettes to his customers while they were waiting for their corn to
be ground, a gimmick that caught on throughout the Paris area. In
no time many of its windmills had taverns, the most famous being
the Moulin de la Galettte in Montmartre, immortalised by Renoir.
Now birds come in spring to nest in this ivy-covered vestige, while
dozens of cats roam here all year round.
   As you wander through the cemetery (maps are available at the
entrance gate), you will come upon familiar names — Jean-Paul
Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, of course, Tristan Tzara, Zadkine,
Soutine, Pascin—as well as their 19th-century elders, such as Sainte-
Beuve, Maupassant, Baudelaire. Baudelaire was deeply rooted in
Montparnasse. Convinced of the futility of travelling and of the
potentialities of an experience right at home, he announced his
intention to inscribe on the front of its station, ON NE PART PAS
(CONE DOES NOT DEPART).Montparnasse brought him back into
its fold, although no tombstone bears his name: he lies next to his
mother and stepfather, Général Aupick, under the name of the lat-
ter who, even at present, when turned into a marble statue above the
grave, seems to overpower him. Renowned musicians lie here too —
César Franck, Camille Saint-Saéns and Clara Haskil among others.
    Those who promoted the works of writers and artists also rest
here, publishers such as Messieurs Hachette and Larousse, Hetzel
who published Jules Verne, the famous art dealer Pierre Loeb,
   * Followers of the Dutch theologian Cornelius Jansenius (1585-1638) who
believed in predestination and denied free will.

                                        58
            PLACE   PABLO    PICASSO    — RUE   DAGUERRE


and also the promoter of the French language, Littré, who left a
monumental dictionary. The sculptors who embellished the area
and its cemetery are buried here too — Bourdelle, Rude, Houdon,
Bartholdi, Brancusi — and Henri Laurens, who composed his own
epitaph for his tomb by way of a statue entitled /’Adieu! An early
Cubist work by Brancusi, Le Baiser (1910), stands here too,
celebrating the final victory of love over death — which explains,
perhaps, why it surmounts an unoccupied tomb.
   The tomb of the Russian Alexandre Alekhine has occasionally
drawn chess fans for a game in the shadow of the Grandmaster. The
presence of Pierre Laval, the High Commissioner for Jewish Affairs
under Vichy, who was executed during the Epuration, jars among
these creative minds and may be seen as an insult to such occupiers
as Robert Desnos who died in deportation in 1945. From his
elevated position in the central roundabout, Eternal Sleep, frozen
into the stone, watches over the past community of Montparnasse.

Back on rue Froidevaux, turn right into rue Boulard and left into
RUE DAGUERRE, an exciting spot for lovers of lively village
atmosphere: a colourful display of the bounties of France — her
cheeses, meat, fish and bread, a riot of fruit and vegetables, en-
hanced in autumn by an extraordinary array of mushrooms and in
spring by bunches ofwild daffodils. Easygoing shoppers and packed
crowdsat the café tables that spill into the street are part of the show,
enlivened by the cries of street vendors and occasionally by buskers,
a vestige of happier days. At present a threat hangs over the scene,
for rue Daguerre has been eyed by real-estate developers who have
bought the old lavoir (wash-house), now the picturesque covered
part of the market, in order to replace it with yet another modern
block, complete with a car park which will of necessity wreck the
pedestrian precinct. Many of the street’s shops have meanwhile
been franchised, which prompted neighbours in 1988 to found an
association, Les amis de la rue Daguerre, to promote both the street
and its varied population of craftsmen, shopkeepers, intellectuals,
artists, young and old, all of whom have been honoured by the film
director Agnés Varda, herselfa long-time inhabitant of the street, in
her film Daguerréotypes. Rue Daguerre is a perfect place to stop for
lunch, before resuming your afternoon walk, preferably before 1
o'clock, when the market closes till 4 pm.
