17th Arr: Place des Ternes to Boulevard Berthier

                 FROM PLACE DES TERNES TO
                   BOULEVARD BERTHIER
A sunny Saturday morning is an exquisite time for a stroll in the
area of Ternes. If you reach PLACE DES TERNES by Métro, you
will be greeted as you come out of the station by Hector Guimard’s
vegetal, green archway, standing out against a blue sky, and by four
green flower stalls disposed around the traffic island, bursting with
dazzling colours.
    Head north along AVENUE DE WAGRAM. As you cross
Boulevard de Courcelles on your right, you will catch a glimpse of
the Sacre-Coeur. A pleasant arcade at no. 67 bis, on the left-hand
side of the avenue, leads to rue Poncelet (rue des Dames prior to
the 1860 annexation, when the name could not be confused with
rue des Dames in Batignolles, these being two separate suburbs).
The arcade is no longer as countrified as it was when Dumas fils
used it in his comedy l’Ami des Femmes, in which the heroine, the
adulterous Madame Simerone, escapes the vigilant eyes of the
detectives hired to unveil her goings-on, through 67bis Avenue
Wagram, then emerges on rue des Dames (now Poncelet). Turn
left into RUE PONCELET and continue beyond the street junc-
tion of rue Saussier and rue Leroy, where it becomes a picturesque
pedestrian market, overflowing with an abundance of flowers and
mouth-watering food — seafood, meat, fowl and game, cheeses and
wines, vegetables and fruit — all of which mingle with the smell of
freshly baked bread. Lined with old, rustic houses and serving pre-
dominantly old-timers, this spot has preserved the old Parisian
touch that has all but faded away in the last two decades.
   The pedestrian market spills into RUE BAYEN, to your right.
Place Boulnois, to the right again, leads to a small sunny, sleepy
square, shaded by a single tree in its centre. It is a scene out of
provincial times — except for the many parked cars and an incong-
ruous Japanese restaurant.

Retrace your steps and continue along rue Bayen. Ahead, rising
above an arcade, is an elegant facade, dating from 1715, the only
vestige of the former Chateau des Ternes, the grounds of which
                                  165
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


extended from today’s rues Saint-Senoche, Faraday, Torricelli and
Lebon, all the way to rue Jean-Baptiste Dumas (beyond Boule-
vards Pereire), at a time when this was a hunting territory.
   The two brothers Habert arrived from Issoudun at the begin-
ning of the 16th century. Being learned and intelligent, they were
soon introduced into the highest circles and even into the court of
Henri III. Pierre became secretary to the King and was ennobled,
though not granted the right to be master ofa fief, and when in 1548
he bought himself a large farm in Ternes, he was not allowed to add
to it the insignia of the nobility. Confident of the King’s favour,
Pierre overlooked the law and converted the farm into a manor
house with two turrets, a moat and a drawbridge. This aroused
jealousy and scheming against him and his successors — all in vain,
for in 1634, when Pierre’s grandson Isaac was master of the place,
Louis XIII promoted the domain into a fief, which granted him the
privilege of levying taxes on the inhabitants of his estate, a privilege
reconfirmed by Louis XIV in 1661. Habert, however, was then
appointed Bishop of Rouergue (now Aveyron) in the south of
France and, feeling a moral duty to reside among his congregation,
sold up his estate. It is believed that Bossuet resided here soon
after, when he prepared the Oraisons funébres for both Henrietta
Maria of France and her daughter Henrietta of England who died
respectively in 1669 and 1670.
   In the 18th century, when horse racing — the latest English fad —
became the new favourite pastime of the high nobility, the race-
tracks were laid out on the nearby plain of Sablons, securing an
aristocratic presence in Ternes. The great Duc de Montmorency
built himself a magnificent stately home on the edge of the plain,
and in 1776 a belvedere was built especially for the Queen, so that
she could watch the races. The days of the countrified Renaissance
farm turned manor of Ternes were gone.
   The new landlord, Mirey de Pomponne, councillor and secret-
ary to the King, replaced it with a splendid dwelling, as reported by
his contemporary Germain Brice in his Description de la ville de
Paris. Grégoire-Nicolas-René Masse, the next landlord, enlarged
the building, adding a dining-room (an innovation in those days),
a music-room and an orangery. It then passed on to Ange-Laurent
de la Live de Jully, the brother-in-law of both the celebrated
Madame d’Epinay, once the benefactress of J. J. Rousseau, and of

                                 166
         PLACE   DES   TERNES   — BOULEVARD       BERTHIER


Madame d’Houdetot with whom Rousseau had been passionately
enamoured. Madame d’Houdetot actually lived here from 1768 to
1771 and, in all likelihood the nature-loving Rousseau, whose writ-
ings refer to various outlying parts of Paris, frequented this place
after his return from exile in 1767.
   Madame d’Epinay was the companion of Baron Grimm, who
had been Mozart’s benefactor and left this unflattering account of
de la Live de Jully: ‘He was not possessed with much wit, or with
much depth, but he was gentle and amiable in society, rich besides,
an interesting figure, a bit pious, a bit of a musician, a bit of an
engraver; one needs no more to be fashionable in the court and in
Paris.’ But de la Live de Jully was also a great art collector, and had
works by Rembrandt, Van Dyck and major French artists in his
collection.
   In 1771 he sold the house to an American, Richard Codman, who
sold it to yet another American, the Bostonian Robert Lyle.
Owners kept changing during the unsettled times that followed,
but the house and the extensive lavish grounds survived into the
Second Empire, enhanced by a beautiful basin on whose waters
floated genuine Venetian gondolas!
   Today what is left of the grounds is a shrunken garden on rue
Pierre Demours, studded with a few venerable trees, and another
garden beyond the archway, now part of a home for the elderly.
What is left of the Chateau is the only architectural vestige of the
18th century in this arrondissement. It now houses a créche.

Turn left into rue Pierre Demours, which leads to RUE LEBON on
your right, another picturesque street market, though quieter and
less colourful than the one on rue Poncelet. The indoor market of
Ternes, on the right-hand corner has been modernised and has
somewhat lost its soul. Rue Lebon is also lined with solid neigh-
bourhood restaurants, catering for a solid neighbourhood
clientele.

Continue along rue Lebon to your right and across the twin
BOULEVARDS PEREIRE, which commemorate the two pio-
neering brothers of the arrondissement, Emile and Isaac. With
little respect for the past, the municipal authorities have of late
renamed them Boulevards Periere nord and sud (and also added

                                  167
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


an unnecessary acute accent to the brothers’ name). The
boulevards run on either side of the railway tracks they had laid out
around Paris, le Chemin de fer de la Petite Ceinture, now covered
over with stretches of gardens and tennis courts. Continue into
Square Bayen, surrounded by prosperous blocks of flats, some of
which have direct access to the garden, offering the viewer a slice of
life of middle-class Paris.

Retrace your steps and turn right into Boulevards Pereire and right
again into rue Guersant, lined with bourgeois, homogeneous late
19th-century buildings. An iron gate at no. 39 on your left opens up
into la Villa des Ternes, now home to a very select few, but once not
beyond the means of the Montmartrois painter Steinlen. This is an
opulent enclave, lined with substantial houses, varying from the
homely rustic to the exquisitely pompous, underneath the shade of
old trees. A profusion of rambling plants, flower-boxes and flower-
beds complete the picture, while the noise of the outside world has
been shut out. Only the occasional tinkle ofa piano and the song of
birds interrupt the blissful silence. However, if you come at the
wrong time you may find the gate locked, in which case continue on
and turn left into Boulevard Gouvyon Saint-Cyr and on to
Boulevard Pershing. If you are fortunate to get in, you will leave by
way of Avenue des Ternes.

Ahead is the Palais des Congrés dominated by the tall silhouette
of the Concorde-Lafayette Hotel. As for the BOULEVARD
GOUVYON SAINT-CYR, it was opened at the time of Louis XV
and was then known as La Route de la Révolte. In 1750, when the
King had long lost the favour of his people who had once nick-
named him le bien-aimé, extravagant rumours had it that he had
ordered the abduction and murder of children, so that he and his
courtiers could bathe in bathtubs filled with their blood. A violent
riot burst out on the road between Paris and Versailles, as a result
of which this stretch of road was built as a diversion, connecting
Versailles directly with Saint-Denis and Compiégne.

Cross over PLACE DU GENERAL KOENING and walk over to
the little chapel Notre-Dame de la Compassion, standing incon-
gruously on the edge of Paris, wedged between streets of zooming

                                 168
         PLACE    DES   TERNES   — BOULEVARD     BERTHIER


traffic, a surreal environment for a modest house of God. It did not
always stand here, which at least would have justified this location
historically. On the contrary, the chapel was transferred here in
1968 to make room for the Palais des Congrés, the site of the acci-
dental death of Duc Ferdinand, Louis-Philippe’s son and heir to
the throne, which the chapel commemorates. On 13 July 1842, the
Duke was riding his coach from the Etoile to visit his parents in
Neuilly, when the horses bolted. The coachman was unable to keep
them under control and the Duke jumped out of the dashing
coach, slipped on the paving and broke his skull. He was rushed to
Cordier’s wineshop, the nearest house, but died there. Louis-
Philippe ordered the blood-stained paving to be removed and the
wineshop to be replaced by the commemorative chapel. Ingres was
commissioned to design the stained-glass windows and the Baron
de Triqueti to sculpture the Deposition. The recumbent statue is
the exact size of the Duke and the tabernacle was laid on the altar
on the exact place where his head lay when he expired. After the
1870 war and the Commune, the deserted chapel was occupied by
squatters and ransacked by tramps, and would in all likelihood
have disappeared if it had not been listed by the Caisse Nationale
des Monuments et Sites historiques, at the request of the family. It
was restored meticulously and transferred stone by stone to the
present site. Few Parisians have heard of Duc Ferdinand and his
fatal accident, nor have they noticed the tiny chapel when racing
past it heading for the “Periphérique’ (ring-road). Yet the chapel
deserves attention — the primitive austerity of its stark stone walls,
touched by the rays of sun that pierce through the stained-glass
windows, make an appeasing setting for Ferdinand’s tomb.

The PC (Petite Ceinture) bus runs to PORTE CHAMPERRET
and will save your feet for the next section of the walk, an extensive
stretch of often dull, deserted streets, to be undertaken by the tire-
less explorer only, who will be rewarded with exciting examples of
turn-of-the-century architecture, then the homes of artists, sing-
ers, actors and the like.

BOULEVARD BERTHIER was their favourite, although it over-
looked the fortification walls: they liked the fact that the air was
clean and the street was attractive, combining a variety of houses of

                                 169
                    17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


eclectic styles but of a uniform height which presented a pleasing
harmony.
  Notice, for example, no. 93, a brick-and-stone building with
large windows and artists’ studios, once inhabited by Enrico
Caruso. While nos 89 and 85 were built of brick, no. 79 was of stone,
and nos77 and 75 area characteristic blend of stone and brick, much
in vogue at the time. A bright orange brick house at no. 67, across
rue de Courcelles, is decorated with green enamelled ceramics, also
typical of the time, while no. 65, with its pale blue bricks and blue
ceramics, complements it nicely. More artists’ studios follow at nos
63 and 61. No. 51, beyond Place Paul Leautaud, is an unusual house,
all covered with bright green bricks, while no. 49 has an Alsatian-
looking facade and is topped by a cheerful roof garden. Notice also
the blue-and-white ceramic frieze at no. 45. RUE ALFRED ROLL
to your right, displays several interesting Art Nouveau buildings:
nos 14, 12 and 15 with its gorgeous Art Nouveau windows, and
especially the humorous no. 6 with its two monkeys hoisted on top
of its gables!
   Retrace your steps to Boulevard Berthier. All the hétels of the
next block have survived, the first one, no. 33, having once been the
home of Sacha Guitry. Yvette Guilbert’s house once stood at no.
23bis, beyond rue Verniquet, an avant-garde building that many
found shocking. It was demolished in the 1950s, a decade of archi-
tectural wreckage throughout the city. The red-headed landlady in
her green dress and long black gloves, however, lives on thanks to
Toulouse-Lautrec, as emblematic an item of touristy Paris as the
Eiffel Tower.
   Walk into RUE VERNIQUET.A         pretty brick house has surviv-
ed at no. 43, an Art Deco building from 1925 at no. 15 and an Art
Nouveau building at no. 7. Turn left into rue Alfred Roll. The brick
and stone corner house was the home of Madame J. Hatto, a famous
opera singer.

Cross the Boulevards Pereire, where a row of hotels has been pres-
erved on the right-hand side. Between 1836 and 1885 Alphonse de
Neuville had his studio at no. 89 Boulevard Pereire, on the corner of
rue Alphonse de Neuville ahead. Alphonse de Neuville was one of
the prominent painters of the Second Empire and the subsequent
Third Republic. Specialising in military themes, he flattered the

                                 170
          PLACE   DES   TERNES   — BOULEVARD       BERTHIER


national ego of his contemporaries, especially after the catastrophic
defeat of 1870, and was consequently catapulted to fame. The inter-
ior of his studio looked like a military museum and even contained
a stuffed horse. His neighbour at no. 91 Boulevard Pereire, was
Brisson, who had built Alfred Roll’s hétel on the corner of Boule-
vard Berthier and rue Edmond Flachat, to which we shall come
later.
    Continue into RUE ALPHONSE DE NEUVILLE. The entire
block, from no. 15 to no. 3, has miraculously been preserved and
displays a spectacular array of eclectic facades. Note in particular
the beautiful Art Nouveau entrance at no. 15, and no. 3, product of
a delirious imagination with its green dome, its two bombastic
angels perched on the roof balustrade and its glittering gilding.

Retrace your steps and continue into RUE EDMOND             FLACHAT,
whose entire right-hand side has likewise been preserved. The
young Edmond Rostand and his wife lived on the corner of rues
Alfred Roll and Flachat before his plays Cyrano de Bergerac and
l’Aiglon catapulted him to soaring success and into the Academie
Francaise at the age of 33! Sarah Bernhardt had greatly contributed
to the success of L’Aiglon, even though one critic spoke of ‘some of
the worst verses with which French poetry is afflicted’.
   The Belgian painter Alfred Stevens lived at no. 20 rue Edmond
Flachat. He was in great demand for portraits of society women,
which secured hima substantial livelihood. Tristan Bernard lived at
no. 22, a prolific writer, journalist and lawyer, whose humour and
wit still live on. However, it is no. 32, at the other end of the street,
that will capture your attention most, displaying one of the most
fabulous facades in Paris of its kind: its enamelled brick, shining in
different shades of green, is further embellished by magnificent
ceramics. These are painted with ravishing motifs of lemon-tree
branches laden with green foliage, yellow fruit and white blossoms,
running gracefully along the facade against a deep blue back-
ground. Above, graceful irises decorate the pediment of the first
floor window, while a frieze of delicate lilies runs under the roof.
Even the three tiny windows of the attic are decorated with ceram-
ics. On the second floor a lovely seated nude has been carved into
the stone, between the two windows. The symmetry of the facade
has deliberately been broken by the large window on the first floor,
                                   171
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


while two ancient-looking lions flank the entrance door to the
house. How so many miscellaneous elements can fit into this small
facade and still create such a harmonious whole is hard to compre-
hend, but it works.
   No 34, the corner house opposite the Rostands’, isa more modest
neighbour and was once the home of the painter Alfred Roll. Al-
                                           becoming the Rubens of
though he did not live up to his ambition of
the 19th century, he was greatly honoured by the establishment and
was commissioned to decorate the new Hotel de Ville, which re-
placed Boccador’s Renaissance building, burnt down by the
Commune. The house bears a plaque by Chéret, engraved with a
muse holding a palette and painting a picturesque little village
huddling at the foot of a church.
   Avenue Gourgaud, to the left, will take you to PLACE DU
MARECHAL JUIN (previously Pereire), a picturesque round-
about where this walk will end.
