19th Arr: La Villette

                            LA VILLETTE

Our last walk will take us to the newly developed area of La Villette
and its gigantic ‘urban’ park, which, as part of the renovation plan
intended to boost the prestige of eastern Paris, has made a con-
siderable public impact, both nationally and internationally. High-
ly publicised, La Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie has received on
peak days 15,000 and was for a while the second most visited mon-
ument of Paris, after the Centre Pompidou. Ifyou.can make it ona
                                       a crowd of ordinary, genuine
                on a family outing; you may wish to combine your




Make your way to Métro Porte de Panthin, where the main ent-
rance to the Parc de la Villette is located, just on the site where it
stood in the days of the livestock market. Ahead is Girard’s foun-
tain, originally commissioned by Napoleon for Place du Chateau-

he destined for his capital, meant to outshine those of RomerIt was
fed by the water of the new Canal Saint-Martin and loo ed quite

                                   255
                          19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT




 is
    STALINGRAD!   —POTC
                                 QUALDE_    1A___LOIRE




impressive in the intimate Place du Chateau-d’eau of Napoleon’s
days, but no longer so when Haussmann enlarged it to its present
dimensions. Consequently it was replaced by a more spectacular
fountain and became available to decorate the entrance to the new
livestock market, in good timing for its opening (see also chapters
on the 10th and 12th arrondissements).
   Across the street, Dagorno, Le Boeuf Couronné and Le Cochon
d’Or are still holding their own, huddling against one another — a
reassuring presence in a neighbourhood of incessant transform-
ations. Their fare has adjusted to changing times and has been
provided with a new environment accordingly, but some of their
old dishes can still be enjoyed in specially preserved (and more
expensive) areas of the restaurants where time seems to have come
to a stop.

                                      256
                            LA VILETTE



                                                  PORTE DE
                                                  LA VILLETTE




                        Ur"




As you enter the park, notice on either side the two buildings of la
Cité de la Musique, the Music and Dance Conservatory on your
left, the first to move here in 1990, the concert halls and a vast café
of shiny contemporary design on your right. The music museum,
the last of its components, was inaugurated in January 1997.
    Although the Cité dela Musique did not benefit from the grandi-
loquent publicity bestowed on Mitterrand’s other grands projets,
and although it was relegated to the unsavoury north-eastern edge
of the city, a remote terra incognita ignored by Tout-Paris, and
although it turned out to be a laborious venture, both financially
and technically (but then, so were the other projects), this has been
one of the most successful contemporary constructions in the
capital and has brought to the attention of the public an unquest-
ionable young French talent — Christian de Portzamparc — who is

                                 257
                   La Grande Halle de La Villette


fast gaining international recognition. Noted for other music and
dance schools he has designed, Portzamparc has come to be quali-
fied as a ‘musical’ architect who refers to architecture in such terms
as duration and rhythm. Hence the wave-like shape of the long roof
of the Conservatory, evocative of sound waves.
    The first valid appraisal of the Cité de la Musique has to come
from its occupants and it seems that both students and staff are
delighted with their new home. Enjoying the luxury of space, light
and modern technology, as against the cramped, outdated prem-
ises on rue de Madrid in the congested area of Gare Saint-Lazare,
the residents seem more than ready to overlook the drawback of its
geographical remoteness. Besides, many of them reside in the
comfortable hall of residence located on the site.
  Just behind the Cité de la Musique         is La Grande    Halle, a
beautiful iron structure bequeathed by Napoléon III, then the live-
stock auction hall of La Villette. Today it hosts theatre perform-
ances, exhibitions, concerts and other cultural events.
   As you make your way to the Canal de l’Ourcgq, you will see on
your right, on the eastern edge of the park, the metal structure of
the Zénith, the ‘shrine’ of pop music, highly recommended to the
young at heart.

                                 258
                            LA VILETTE


A footbridge will lead you to the new science museum, La Cité des
Sciences et de l’Industrie, a glass-and-steel building, standing on
the site of the old slaughterhouse. La Géode, the ‘Perfect Sphere’ of
stainless steel stands next to it, inside which you can embark on a
three-dimensional sensory journey. The submarine l’Argonaute,
anchored close by, will give you the feeling of being leagues under
the sea. Once the pride of the navy in Toulouse, rather than let it
die when it went out of service, it left Toulouse in spring 1986 and
after a six-month voyage by way of Gibraltar, up the Atlantic to Le
Havre and down the Seine, it arrived the following October at the
Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, its new home, where an official
inauguration ceremony honoured it on 8 February 1991. The
science museum, to our mind, embodies the prevailing confusion
between culture and gadgetry. The proliferation of the latter is
such that one wonders what the visitor can retain from a brief visit,
for example to the exhibit called Explora, which skims over the
entire story of mankind, both on earth and in space. Another
section, the Inventarium, has the merit of offering children tactile
pleasures and a profusion of buttons to press. Children also enjoy
the Cité des Enfants, basically a sophisticated playground where
fun is meant to be educational. As in the theme gardens outside,
everything here seems to have been thought out, leaving little
room for spontaneous play. Perhaps this is the deep meaning
behind the new concept of ‘Parc Urbain’ as the Parc de la Villette
has been dubbed. . .

Having scoured the Museum, you may now wish to explore the
grounds, which are divided into thematic sections. However, you
will not find here any of the intimacy of les Buttes-Chaumont — the
future as seen at La Villette seems bleak and uninviting and you
may feel no urge to rush into it.
    You may decide to end your visit with a walk along the Canal de
POurcq and the Bassin de la Villette. Their junction with the
Canal Saint-Denis affords a charmingly outdated picture of the
latter, on your left.
    Continue on the eastern bank of the Canal de l’Ourcq; along
QUAI DELA MARNE until you reach the drawbridge of Crimée.
In 1885, when    the bridge was        built, Paris   marvelled   at this
ingenuous hydraulic system which required a mere 4-kg weight to

                                 259
                      19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


set the bridge in motion. Today one marvels at the antiquated
aspect of this last remaining drawbridge in Paris and at the very
fact that it has survived amidst high-rise towers.
    If you like market scenes and have come here ona Thursday ora
Sunday morning, cross the bridge for a visit of the bustling Marché
de Crimée. As you cross the bridge, there stands on quai de la
Loire, on your left, the last surviving warehouse of a vanished past.
An identical building faced it until recently on quai de la Seine, the
home of hopeful young artists until a fateful day in 1986, when a
mysterious fire all but consumed it. The blackened skeleton re-
mained standing for several years, thanks to the combined energy
of locals and artists, who hoped the building would be restored and
its artistic vocation maintained. Eventually, however, it was torn
down, going the way of so many others.
    Ahead is PLACE DE LA BITCHE and the church of Saint-
Jacques-Saint-Christophe, which was built in the early 1840s by
Lequeux, also the architect of the suburban church of Batignolles.
The market is held on PLACE             DE   JOINVILLE,     behind the
church, and with its predominantly North African and Black
vendors and buyers reflects on the ethnic evolution of the area.
   Retrace your steps and continue walking on QUAI DE LA
SEINE, along the Bassin de la Villette. In pre-industrial days
jousts were staged here in summer and Russian-style sleighs used
to glide on its ice in winter. Of late the Bassin de la Villette has been
restored again to recreational activities, such as motorsailing and
pyrotechnic laser displays, as befitting modern times.
   Continue to the footbridge. From here you can see Nicolas
Ledoux’s Rotonde de la Villette, one of the four surviving monu-
ments he built between 1784 and 1787 to embellish the toll gates of
Paris. Seen from here, you will be able to appreciate his talent,
particularly at sunrise or sunset, when the rotunda glints in the
sunlight and its beautiful sandstone turns pink. At night, when
floodlit against the dark, infinite sky and shimmering in the water,
it is simply bewitching.
    Continue to Place de Stalingrad at the end of the Bassin de la
Villette. It commemorates the Russians’ decisive victory over Nazi
Germany, an appropriate name in what used to bea stronghold of
Communism until recently. Rue de Flandre and Avenue Jean
Jaurés both fork out from here, once the highways that led

                                  260
                            LA VILETTE


respectively to Flanders and Germany. Behind the Rotunda is the
elevated Métro line, which runs along the site of the old toll walls.
Its vibrations actually damaged the Rotunda and necessitated its
restoration before it could be turned into the archaeological
department and Museum of Paris. It now houses the city’s under-
ground finds and also organises temporary exhibitions.
