16th Arr: Overview

   THE 16TH ARRONDISSEMENT
  Paris is the capital of France and the 16th arrondissement is
  the capital of Paris.
                                                       Victor Hugo


Ey Parisians would agree with the comment of Victor Hugo,
himself a resident of the arrondissement: to most Parisians Le
seiziéme — the mere sound of which evokes opulence and privilege —
is a soulless, boring residential area. True, much of it has gradually
been taken over by embassies, banks, multinational companies,
Arabian sheikhs, ‘show-biz’ stars and many parvenus. In this age of
easy money, it comes as no surprise to learn that dubious deals are
contracted on the sumptuous Avenue Foch and its environs and
that drugs and high-class prostitution lurk about in the neigh-
bourhood too. As a result, the Avenue Foch, once the home of
Fernandel, Marcel Pagnol and Maurice Chevalier, has lost some of
its aura and now ranks only third in the property market, behind
the Avenues Gabriel and Raphaél. However, it is largely thanks to
the above-mentioned establishments and residents that some of
France’s architectural heritage here has escaped demolition, since
only they can afford to settle in the area’s hétels particuliers. Many
Parisians scoff at the ‘pointed’ accent of the inhabitants of the 16th
and their ‘British’ air. They ignore its bustling neighbourhoods, its
exceedingly interesting Art Nouveau and Art Deco architecture
and its score of museums. They also look down on the area’s
nouveaux riches, who can boast neither pedigree nor education,
whereas, in point of fact, both blue blood and culture have been
entrenched here for centuries.

Like all the outlying parts of Paris, this was a rural area before the
Revolution, whose country folk clustered around the villages of
Auteuil and Passy and the borough of Chaillot, cultivating small
market gardens. Vineyards climbed up the sunny hillside, sloping
down towards the Seine (hence rue des Vignes and rue Vineuse),
whilst windmills stood up against the horizon of the plain of Passy
(hence rue de la Tour, which commemorates an old windmill and

                                 112
                          INTRODUCTION


was known in the 18th century as rue du Moulin-de-la-Tour). But
the area also had a forest and mineral water, which were to attract
the upper classes and royalty to these western parts well before
their move to Versailles.
   The prehistoric forest of Rouvray (rouvre means ‘common
oak’), which in the days of Gaul stretched all the way to Rouen, was
largely cut down over the centuries for its excellent wood. Parts of
it, however, were preserved by the kings of France as a hunting-
ground for their favourite pastime. Charles X, the last of the Bour-
bon kings, still hunted deer here in the last century. Today’s forests
of Saint-Germain-en-Laye and Marly, the woods of Meudon and
Chaville, as well as the traffic-criss-crossed Bois de Boulogne, are
all remnants of that thick, ancient forest.
    The kings erected splendid hunting lodges befitting their rank,
which often also served as love nests, notably Francois I, who built
a hunting lodge in the Bois de Boulogne on his return from his
Spanish captivity. To protect his privacy, he forbade his courtiers
to settle in the vicinity, but they, resentful at not being able to spy
on his amorous activities, retaliated by naming it le Chateau de
Madrid, a reminder of the King’s humiliating defeat to Charles V
of Spain and his captivity in Madrid. Here Henri II set up Diane de
Poitiers and Henri IV installed Gabrielle, and also, it is rumoured,
a pretty young nun from the Abbey of Longchamp. He later gave it
as a farewell gift to Queen Margot, overjoyed at being able to sever
their marriage bonds. The mansion was bought for a song during
the Revolution by a certain Monsieur Leroy (!) and was demol-
ished soon after.
   Le Chateau de la Muette was also a royal hunting lodge. Its
name may have derived from meute (pack) or mue (meaning the
casting of the horns and, by extension, the place where the stag’s
horns are kept). Originally built by Charles IX, it was totally re-
modelled as a palace by Philippe Delorme for Charles IX’s sister,
Marguerite de Valois (the future Queen Margot). Later it was in
the hands of the Duchesse de Berry, the daughter of the Regent and
granddaughter-in-law of Louis XIV, who hosted glamorous
receptions here, notably one in honour of Peter the Great of
Russia. Knowing her days to be numbered, she was determined to
enjoy them to the full by indulging in revelry and debauchery.
Malevolent tongues, however, claimed that it was precisely her life

                                 113
                    16TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


of dissipation that was the cause of her premature death, at the age
of 24.
   The young Louis XV stayed there next. He would later have
it entirely rebuilt by Gabriel for his consecutive mistresses, la
Duchesse de Chateauroux and Madame de Pompadour. Marie-
Antoinette followed suit upon her arrival in France awaiting her
marriage to the future Louis XVI. After her marriage she liked to
escape from the tedious formalities of Versailles to La Muette and
to the neighbouring pleasure gardens of Ranelagh.
   On 21 November 1783 at 1.54 pm, an astonished assembly of
distinguished gentlemen, among them the Dauphin and Benjamin
Franklin, his guest of honour, watched the first manned balloon
take off from the Chateau de la Muette with the physicist Pilatre de
Rozier and the Marquis d’Arlandes aboard. The Duc d’Orléans
pursued the balloon on horseback as far as he could. After twenty
minutes the balloon, an apparition of azure decorated in gold,
landed on the Buttes-aux-Cailles (now in the 13th arrondissement)
to be greeted by a frenzied crowd who ripped off Rozier’s clothes as
souvenirs. Pilatre de Rozier was sadly to die some time later while
trying to cross the English Channel in the same manner.
   The Chateau de la Muette was considerably damaged during the
Revolution but remained in use until the 1920s. Its owners at the
time, the heirs of the famous piano-maker, Sébastien Erard, un-
able to meet its exorbitant maintenance costs or find a buyer, had
to pull it down. The estate was eventually bought by Henry de
Rothschild who built a new house on the site, now the seat of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD).
   Chaillot too had royal connections. Catherine de Medici liked
to stop at a pavillon on the hill of Chaillot, on the way from her
residence at Saint-Germain-en-Laye to Paris. Eventually she had it
enlarged and embellished. In 1654 Henrietta Maria of France, the
daughter of Henri IV and the widow of Charles I of England, pur-
chased it and converted it into a convent for the Order of the
Visitation, an elegant order of ladies of quality, where she herself
and other princesses would go into retreat. It was here that Bossuet
delivered his famous Oraison funébre (funeral oration) for her in
the presence of the entire court. In 1721, the notorious bandit Car-
touche penetrated into the convent’s chapel with designs other

                                 114
                          INTRODUCTION


than spiritual but, awed by the majesty of the place, he left empty-
handed. However, it seems that virtuous conduct was not always
strictly observed here — in 1800 a 300-metre tunnel was discovered
under the section of the toll walls that ran here, through which
brandy had been smuggled into the convent!
   A little further down the slope was the Couvent des Minimes, a
men’s institution whose members were known as wine growers
and followed the example of Saint Francis of Assisi, leading a life of
humility (hence their name) and strict restrictions. To prevent
unnecessary temptation, a double wall separated their institution
from the female one. A third religious institution was situated in
the Bois de Boulogne, the Abbey of Longchamp, which too catered
for ladies of high rank. Many a princess took the veil, not always
willingly, in the magnificent Gothic abbey lying on the banks of the
Seine.
   Founded by Saint Isabelle, the sister of Saint Louis, the abbey
enjoyed such prestige that Pope Leo X honoured it with a visit in
1521 and named it after its founder, ‘Isabelle the Blessed’. Saint
Vincent de Paul, who was born some fifty years later, found less
 sanctity in the place and complained about the nocturnal encoun-
 ters between nuns and outsiders, often friars and even confessors.
 Some parlours, he said, were equipped, contrary to regulations,
with grilles or windows ‘which present imminent dangers to vir-
gins consecrated to Jesus Christ’. By the time of Louis XV, the
elegant ceremonies of Holy Week had become a veritable extrava-
ganza, when all the upper set paraded here in their plush attire,
celebrated actresses competing with ladies of fashion, young
beauties with their wealthier elders. Men as well as women would
ruin themselves in order to outshine their fellow beings on the
promenade of Longchamp. On one occasion an Englishman
turned up in a silver coach studded with precious stones!
    The abbey was gone with the Revolution but the upper set have
continued to parade in their best attire, congregating around the
racetracks that were set up in the 19th century, a natural substitute
for the house of God in a hunting area where horses were in plenty,
and at a time of frenzied Anglomania. Today they attend the flat
races of Longchamp and the obstacle races of Auteuil, especially on
the occasion of the Prix Diane-Hermés at Longchamp, and the
Steeplechase at Auteuil, which both take place in June.

                                 115
                    16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


Nature also endowed these parts with mineral spring water, as can
be seen from the street names rue des Eaux, rue de la Source, rue
de la Cure, rue La Fontaine (originally named after a fountain in
Auteuil, and not after the famous fable writer who had, indeed,
sojourned in Auteuil). Louis XIII came to Auteuil already as a
child, as reported in the diary of his famous physician, Androuet,
and Richelieu even built himself a country home in Auteuil: le
Chateau du Coq, so called after its weathercock. It was later used as
a love nest by Louis XV who came here under the transparent guise
of Le Baron de Gonesse. The entire literary set of 17th-century
France found peace and quiet in Auteuil too — Moliére, Racine, La
Fontaine, La Bruyére, among others; above all Boileau, who spent
more than 20 years in a humble one-storeyed house on the site of
the present 26 rue Boileau, away from the city hubbub, which he
vividly described in Les Embarras de Paris.
    It was the waters of Passy, however, rather than those of Auteuil,
that turned the neighbourhood into a fashionable spa, with the
additional attraction of being so close to Paris. Discovered in the
middle of the 17th century by the Abbot Ragois, Madame de
Maintenon’s confessor, they were immediately praised by the Paris
 Faculty of Medicine, and in the 18th century taking the waters in
 Passy, conveniently located between Paris and Versailles, became a
 favourite pastime. All the nobs of society gathered in Passy, espec-
 ially at the Chateau de Passy, the home of Farmer General (tax
 collector) le Riche de la Popeliniére, a lover of the arts who ent-
ertained such literary and artistic figures as Diderot, Rousseau,
Marivaux, La Tour, Chardin and Rameau, as well as most foreign
ambassadors, the Scottish philosopher David Hume and the
English historian Edward Gibbon.
   The gatherings in the home of Madame Helvétius in Auteuil
were more intellectual, bringing together the greatest minds of the
Age of Enlightenment — Diderot, d'Alembert, André            Chénier,
d@’Holbach and Turgot. They called their circle La société d’Auteuil,
while their admired hostess was known as Notre-Dame-d’ Auteuil.
Many of them ended on the scaffold, the Revolution not being
particular about the victims’ ideological loyalties, but Madame
Helvétius managed to save her neck. The Americans John Adams
and Thomas Jefferson were also guests at her home, not to men-
 tion Benjamin Franklin, France’s darling and Madame Helvétius’s

                                  116
                          INTRODUCTION


close friend. Turgot described him as the great citizen of the world,
‘qui arrache la foudre au ciel et le sceptre aux tyrans’ (‘who snatches
the lightning from the heavens and the sceptres from the hands of
tyrants) — the tyrant in this case being George III of England. The
reference to the lightning was a tribute to Franklin’s invention of
the lightning conductor. As a matter of fact, it was in the 16th
arrondissement, on the site of 62 rue Raynouard, that he carried
out his first experiments.
   Writers and artists continued living in the 16th after the Revolu-
tion. Musée Balzac on rue Raynouard is located in one of the
novelist’s homes. He moved there in 1841 as ‘Monsieur de Brugnol’,
a name borrowed with minor alterations from his housekeeper
Louise Breugiol, to elude his creditors. The house had a second
entrance on rue du Roc (nowrue Berton), enabling him to slip away
should his creditors find his whereabouts after all. Rue Berton is
the continuation of Avenue Marcel Proust, a reminder of another
novelist who was born in the arrondissement and lived here his last
few years, under duress, his uncle’s centrally located flat on
Boulevard Haussmann having been put up for sale. Proust had
hoped his move to 44 rue Hamelin in the remote 16th would be
temporary, but he was too ill to make another move.
   In 1885 the Goncourts started a literary salon, Le Grenier, at 67
Boulevard de Montmorency, where some of the most prominent
writers of the time met — Zola, Maupassant, Théophile Gautier,
Daudet and others and where they set up the Académie Goncourt,
of which more later.
   Cultural brilliance continued after World War I, when a scintil-
lating circle gathered around the Princesse de Polignac, née Win-
naretta Singer. The door to her music room on Avenue Henri
Martin was open as much to promising talents as to wealth and
lineage. Eric Satie was received with open arms when he arrived
every week, always in his pince-nez, always carrying an umbrella,
always in the same dusty or drenched shabby suit, having walked 11
km (7 miles) from his grotty lodgings in Arcueil, south of Paris, to
the sumptuous mansion on Avenue Henri Martin. Chanel was not
allowed in, however. When asked why she never invited-Chanel,
Winnaretta answered, ‘I never entertain my tradespeople.’ This was
probably just a sally of envious spite — after all, Winnaretta herself
was the daughter of the Singer sewing-machine manufacturer and

                                 117
                     16TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


was titled only through marriage, while Chanel’s salon was frequen-
ted by the same musicians as her own, notably Ravel, Stravinsky,
Cole Porter, the Groupe de Six and Jean Cocteau.
   Many writers had their homes in the 16th — Feydeau at 60
Avenue Foch, Mauriac at 38 rue Théophile Gautier, James Joyce at
no. 34 rue des Vignes, André Gide on Villa de Montmorency and
Victor Hugo at 24 of the avenue that now bears his name. On 27
February 1881 an immense crowd gathered in front of his house to
celebrate his eightieth birthday throwing flowers to the writer who
thanked them from his balcony.

The annexation of the 16th arrondissement to the city in 1860
inevitably led to its urbanisation. Dramatic changes occurred once
Haussmann sliced it lengthwise, by way of rue Michel-Ange and
Avenues Mozart and Paul Doumer. Likewise, with the opening of
the circular railway around Paris, la Petite Ceinture, the Bois de
Boulogne was severed from the city, and although Napoléon III
had it landscaped with winding alleys, lakes and waterfall, the den-
sity of traffic passing through it was from the start too high. At the
time this was largely compensated for by the ravishing spectacle of
carriages parading along the Allée des Acacias carrying such cele-
brated demi-mondaines       as Hortense Schneider, Pomaré,         Cora
Pearl and the famous actress Rachel, who was called to order for
riding in a carriage too similar to the one used by the Empress!
