14th Arr: Ferdinand-Brunot to Parc Montsouris

          FROM PLACE FERDINAND-BRUNOT                 TO
                PARC DE MONTSOURIS

The last walk explores the south-eastern parts of the arrondisse-
ment, the richest in bucolic pleasures. We start from its adminis-
trative and social centre, PLACE FERDINAND-BRUNOT and
Square de l’Aspirant-Dunand, in the heart of the arrondissement,
opposite the imposing Second Empire Mairie. The court house,
the music and dance conservatoire, the swimming pool, open-air
market (Tuesday and Friday mornings) and an annual flea-market
                                  74
    PLACE   FERDINAND      BRUNOT     — PARC   DE   MONTSOURIS


held in spring, all congregate around this ‘village green’ where
toddlers, retired old-timers and boules players spend timeless
afternoons in a quintessentially ‘14th’ atmosphere that is both
Parisian and provincial.

Rue Mouton-Duvernet, running between the two squares, will
take you to the AVENUE DU GENERAL-LECLERC. The porch
at no. 19, across the avenue to the left, reads Villa Adrienne — a
gateway to another world: an enclave of solid, sizeable provincial
houses, brushed by the branches of venerable trees, is tucked away
behind this porch, but a footstep away from the busiest street in
the arrondissement! Each house bears the name of one of France’s
great writers or artists — Racine, Corneille, Moliére, La Fontaine,
Watteau, Delacroix, Poussin, Lully and Berlioz — as befits this
culture-conscious arrondissement.
    Back on the main street, the Hospice de La Rochefoucauld at
no. 15 is a rare and beautiful example of the architecture of the last
years of the Ancien Régime. It began as a philanthropic establish-
ment for patients who had held respectable offices — churchmen,
magistrates, officers — but had no private incomes, and bears the
name of the Vicomtesse de la Rochefoucauld, although she had in
fact donated only a small amount of money towards it. The real
honour should have gone to the zealous Pére Gérard, a member of
the charitable Order of Saint-Jean-de-Dieu, but hers was an emi-
nent family and a prestigious name. In the early 19th century it
became a home for the aged as it still is today. The gardens, how-
ever, were drastically reduced with the advent of the railway track
of the Ligne de Sceaux (now Ligne B of the RER) and the opening
of the Avenue René Coty.

Retrace your steps and turn left into rue Sophie Germaine, then on
to RUE HALLE with its enchanting crescent of quaint, hetero-
geneous houses, each with its miniature garden. Wander also into
Villa Hallé, on the left, a secluded, narrow cul-de-sac overgrown
with bushes and creepers and lined with rural-style houses. Rue
Hallé has always been a favourite among the artist community.
The war widow Mary Reynolds moved to no. 24 in 1920. A staunch
supporter of the Surrealists, she became the mistress of Marcel
Duchamp, who kept many of his belongings here. As well as her

                                 75
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Surrealist friends, the painters Georges Rouault and Fernand Léger
used to visit here.

Turn right into rue d'Alembert and right again into RUE DE LA
TOMBE-ISSOIRE. It runs into rue d’Alésia, a picturesque junc-
tion, thanks to the presence of the provincial-looking restaurant,
Le Moniage Guillaume, displaying an old tiled roof and nestling
behind a cluster of shady trees. The chanson de geste, Le Montage
Guillaume, relates the story of Guillaume d’Orange who came to
the rescue of the besieged Parisians and slit the throat of the Sara-
cen chef, the ferocious giant Isoré. According to oral traditions, his
tomb, which was located around here, was 15 feet long. Historians
disagree on the origin of the name La Tombe-Issoire, but one
theory suggests that Issoire and Isoré are one and the same.
   Continue along rue de la Tombe-Issoire and turn left into Villa
Seurat, a leafy nook full of twittering birds and artists’ studios, one
of which was once occupied by Henry Miller, the most illustrious
of his Parisian homes.
  When Miller arrived in Paris in 1930, all he had was a toothbrush,
razor, notebook and a pen, plus a walking stick from Mexico. And
he dida lot of walking indeed, probably more than most ofhis fellow
Americans. He met Anais Nin, the Hungarian photographer Brassai
and the American writer Michael Fraenkel, who offered to lodge
him in his home on Villa Seurat. There Miller wrote the first pages
of Tropic of Cancer, which in the novel becomes Villa Borghese,
while his benefactor, Fraenkel, becomes Boris. Having spent time in
Dijon and Clichy, Miller moved back to Villa Seurat in 1934, on the
very day of publication of Tropic of Cancer. He settled at no. 18, this
time as a full paying tenant. Among his neighbours were Soutine
and Jean Lurgat, whose brother André had built nos 1, 3, 4, 8, 9 and
11 of the alley; but it was at his studio that people gathered — Blaise
Cendrars, Anais Nin, Brassai and Lawrence Durrell, who wrote of
‘The heat and the fury of the days of the Villa Seurat. The good
glasses of wine and the pleasant madness of typewriters.’ Miller,
Durrell and Anais Nin decided to start a publication. Their friend
Alfred Perlés was chief editor of the Booste, published on behalf of
the American Country Club. It now became La Revue Officielle de la
villa Seurat, with Anais Nin as its society columnist, Durrell as the
sports columnist and Henry Miller contributing a fashion column.

                                  76
     PLACE   FERDINAND       BRUNOT     — PARC   DE   MONTSOURIS


   Discovering a new passion for astrology, Miller covered one of
his studio walls with pictures from his astral theme and also scrut-
inised Jupiter — supposedly his lucky star — from the roof of his
house. One night he was so absorbed in his observations that he
went flying through the air, crashed through the skylight and land-
ed two floors below. The fact that he escaped with minor cuts and
bruises proved, so his astrologer friend Moricand said, that Jupiter
was protecting him.
   Miller loved the ugly, morbid rue de la Tombe-Issoire, which
was falling into ruins in its pre-gentrification days, a street of fairy
tales and perfect in its obsolescence. He wished it always to remain
so and that none of its houses should be repainted. Modern-day
Paris has paid little heed to his heart’s desires and has gentrified all
his favourite streets. Besides, World War II was to chase Miller
away from Paris, first to stay with Lawrence Durrell in Greece, then
back to the United States.

Continue along rue de la Tombe-Issoire, then left into rue Saint-
Yves, which leads to Parc de Montsouris. Take RUE NANSOUTY
along the western border of the gardens, the boundary of the most
exquisite oasis in the arrondissement, where rows of quaint houses
of eclectic styles nestle among a luscious vegetation of ivy, Virginia
creepers and wistaria. Flower boxes add a cheerful note to the
windows, while at night the light of the lampposts bathes the street
in a romantic glow. Needless to say, the artist community spotted
this nook. Georges Braque lived at no. 6 of the street that bears his
name. Others contributed to it their architectural talent: Zielissky
who built the house at no. 8 rue Georges Braque and Guggenbuhl
who designed the one at no. 14 Square de Montsouris.

Continue along rue Nansouty and turn left into BOULEVARD
JOURDAIN.       At no. 19 is the main entrance to the Cité Univer-
sitaire, the oldest university campus in Paris, or, more accurately,
its gigantic hall of residence since, although it has libraries, theatres
and sports facilities, no teaching is offered here.
    The Cité Universitaire was founded in 1920 by the French indus-
trialist Emile Deutsch de La Meurthe, in memory of his wife. The
idea of creating a students’ village in the spirit of the medieval
‘Collége des Nations’, which clustered around the Sorbonne (rue

                                   Th
                     14TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


des Anglais, rue d’Ecosse and rue des Irlandais in the Latin Quarter
are reminiscent of them), had already been in the air towards the
end of the 19th century, but it took the devastation left by World
War I to promote the ideal of universal brotherhood and to
accelerate the need for such a foundation. The League of Nations,
for instance, was founded at that time. Conveniently, the demoli-
tion of Thiers’s fortifications, which had proved useless in modern
warfare, left some vacant space on the southern edge of the 14th. To
this was added a section of the wasteland that encircled Paris
beyond the walls — la zone — hitherto occupied by Russian and
Spanish refugees, as well as gypsies and ragpickers and their medley
of shacks, hovels and caravans. The foundation Emile et Louise
Deutsch de La Meurthe — seven houses with picturesque, medieval,
gabled roofs — was completed in 1925 and inaugurated ceremon-
iously on 9 July in the presence of the President of the Republic,
Paul Doumergue.
   Among the different buildings you will come to, the following
are worth your attention: La Fondation Hellénique with its Ionic
columns (built in 1932); La Maison Internationale (donated by J.D.
Rockefeller Jr, in 1936); the Italian house, with a mural representing
Saint Francis; La Maison de l’Asie du Sud-Est, easily identifiable by
its lacquered furniture and potbellied Buddhas. The Institut
d’Etudes Japonaises is topped by a pagoda-shaped roof and boasts
two murals by Fujita, notably one representing the disembarkation
of the Portuguese in Japan in 1542. Opposite is the pretty Swedish
house, with its whitewashed walls and blue shutters. The Swiss
house was built in 1932 by Le Corbusier, who also painted a fresco
inside and designed the furniture. In 1959 he and Lucio Costa built
La Maison du Brésil. The glass and metal building of La Fondation
Avicenne was built by Claude Parent, and the Institut Néerlandais
(1928-30) by Willem Marinus Dubok. Today 28 countries have
houses here, providing lodgings to students of 122 different nation-
alities, a third of whom are French. Among its past residents some
later attained worldwide fame — Jean-Paul Sartre and Raymond
Barre of France, Senghor of Senegal, Habib Bourghiba of Tunisia,
the Empress Farah Dibah, wife of the Shah of Iran, and Pierre Elliott
Trudeau of Canada. Even the vegetation has been imported from
the four corners of the earth — orange trees from Mexico, weeping
willows from the Caucasus, fir trees from Canada and mulberry

                                 78
    PLACE    FERDINAND     BRUNOT      — PARC   DE   MONTSOURIS


trees from China. During the summer holidays visitors can stay
here at a very reasonable charge (tel 01 45 89 68 52).

Across the Boulevard Jourdain lies the Parc de Montsouris, the
jewel in the crown. This is undoubtedly but a small-scale model of
a London park, but its varied landscape provides a different en-
chantment at every bend, particularly in the early morning, before
the arrival of the crowds, when it seems to belong to no one but
yourself. In the afternoon it can be packed, noisy and dusty. The
babble of children is often drowned out by the brass band. The
musicians look good in their immaculate uniforms, but the effect
is totally marred by the tinny sounds they produce, consistently
out of tune. The audience, however, seems quite satisfied with the
noise — they are after all getting a free concert. Then, every half
hour on Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday afternoons, an old-
fashioned bell summons the children to a magical performance of
the modernised puppet theatre, which has recently replaced the
traditional Guignol. The very young, however, do not notice any
changes and they babble over with the same torrent of emotions as
their parents did.                                        :
   The restaurant next to the bandstand draws the better-off Paris-
ians, who come from all over the city to enjoy the view and an
open-air meal. Wedding receptions often take place here in sum-
mer, especially on Saturdays, the day chosen for most marriage
ceremonies. Several brides can then be seen simultaneously in
different parts of the park, their endless white skirts sweeping the
rolling lawns, solemn grooms by their side, while a bunch of
relatives surrounds them in their Sunday best, posing in front of
some romantic statue for commemorative photos.
   Parc de Montsouris was laid out by Napoléon III’s landscape
gardener Alphand on the site of four unused quarries. Work began
in 1867, but it was an arduous task to transform this wasteland into
magnificent gardens and took 11 years to complete (obviously the
Prussian war and the Commune had also caused a delay). During
the official inauguration ceremony, the guests discovered that the
little artificial lake had dried up, owing to some technical fault. In
his despair, the engineer who had conceived the lake committed
suicide. The lake soon after filled with water and now hosts various
colonies of wildlife and one pair of swans.
