15th Arr: Montparnasse to La Ruche

         FROM MONTPARNASSE               TO LA RUCHE

Although its own residents appreciate living in the 15th, with its
ample amenities, the visitor is less likely to find charm in its
cityscape of nondescript blocks of flats, some of them a downright
eyesore. Indeed, you are not likely to come across a fellow sightseer
on the streets of the 15th, nor to remember your excursion here as
one of the highlights of your visit to Paris. Nevertheless, for the
social observer of contemporary Paris the 15th may present special
interest, as it was here that the transformation of the old Parisian
way of life was largely enacted. Here Parisians first withdrew from
the streets, relinquishing them to cars and to transients and shift-
ing the action instead to isolated, standardised dwelling units.
Here too anarchical concrete made its first appearance in the
19608, since when it has spread like cancer into the rest of Paris.
   However, there are still some pleasant streets and squares and
hidden nooks which have survived discreetly in the shade of non-
descript constructions; and the abundant food displays on some of
the streets are always a heart-warming sight. So if you have time to
spare and the sun is out, why not come and see how middle-class
Parisians live today?

Starting on the corner of AVENUE DU MAINE and BOULE-
VARD DU MONTPARNASSE, at the north-eastern tip of the
arrondissement, our itinerary includes the museum of the Institut
Pasteur (open only 2-5.30 pm; closed weekends, holidays).
  At 21 Avenue du Maine, nestling at the foot of the Montparnasse
tower, isa lovely leafy alley, dipped in limes and crumbling under its
rambling creepers — who knows for how long? Property developers
rubbed their hands when the owner of the alley died, presuming,

                                 94
                  MONTPARNASSE           — LA RUCHE




                            R. SANTOS-
                            DUMONT




rightly, that owing to the exorbitant death duties levied in France
the inheritors would not afford to keep the place. But they were
thwarted when the City of Paris asserted its pre-emptive rights, for
no better reason, however, than to carry out a real-estate operation
of its own! As matters stand at present, the unfortunate historic
alley, once frequented by Picasso, Braque, Modigliani, Soutine and
Fernand Léger, and now one of the loveliest oases in the arron-
dissement, may well be disfigured by the time you arrive.

Retrace your steps and take RUE ANTOINE BOURDELLE on
your left. At no. 16, the one-time home of sculptor Antoine Bour-
delle narrowly escaped demolition when it was turned into a

                                    95
                     15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


museum, Musée Bourdelle. In 1929 the sculptor’s widow, gener-
ously backed by the art patron Ernest Cognacq, succeeded in buy-
ing up the premises so as to preserve her husband’s heritage and
offer it to France; but the state simply rejected her donation! So did
the City of Paris, which, however, revised its opinion 20 years
later. . . Yet Bourdelle was one of France’s major sculptors, quali-
fied by Rodin as ‘a scout of the future’ (hence his contribution to
the stunning avant-garde Théatre des Champs-Elysées in the 8th
arr.). Indeed, unlike academic sculptors and their moralising gran-
diloquence and superfluous ornamentation (which Rodin had
already dusted off and replaced with sensual energy) Bourdelle
opted for a rigorous structure and a powerful rhythm, in keeping
with his peasant origins. The artist’s goal, he felt, was to capture the
whole and recreate it — which set him miles ahead of the dogmatic
approach of most of his contemporaries. No wonder his war mem-
orial, which, rather than flatter heroic patriotism, expressed the
terror and despair of the fighters, displeased the general public.
The great philosopher Bergson admired his approach and his
artistry: “What strikes me as soon as I look at one of your works is
that each part seems to contain the whole. Isn’t that the mark of
perfection?’
    Antoine Bourdelle was also one of the prominent teachers at the
celebrated Académie de la Grande Chaumiére and left a deep
impact on Montparnasse’s artists, who, though freshly arrived
from Eastern Europe, were labelled ‘l’Ecole de Paris’, for lack of a
better name. Some of them preferred to come and work here, in his
studio, on what was then known as Impasse du Maine, notably
Léon Indenbaum who described Bourdelle as ‘a great master’, ‘a
marvellous teacher’. Indenbaum was never so encouraged as
when, one day, having examined his work, Le Petit Patre, the
master turned to the class and said: ‘Monsieur Indenbaum évolue’
(‘Monsieur Indenbaum is developing’). A happy atmosphere
reigned in the studio, where the Russian students would sing songs
of their homeland. Twice a week Bourdelle would come to check
their progress and for a long while listen to the nostalgic melodies
behind the door before entering.
   Bourdelle settled down on these premises in 1884 upon his
arrival in Paris when he was 23, and remained here for the rest of
his life, until 1929. At first he worked and lived in the same studio,

                                  96
                   MONTPARNASSE        — LA   RUCHE


but gradually he acquired the neighbouring studios, where he
installed his family whom he had brought from the countryside;
this accounts for the heterogeneous charactet and miscellaneous
layout of the museum. His apartment and his studio have been left
as they were and are sheer delight, but the extension added in 1961
to mark the first centenary of his birth — a gigantic hall where some
of his monumental sculptures are on display — is not an architec-
tural success. Another extension was added behind the old studios
by Christian Portzamparc (the talented architect of the Cité de la
Musique at la Villette). Here are exhibited various studies, among
them   for the above-mentioned         1870 war   memorial     entitled
Montauban. Other sculptures are scattered about in the attractive
setting of the gardens, and it is mainly in the intimate and serenely
charming back garden that you should seek them out.
   When Bourdelle moved to Impasse du Maine in 1884, it was just
a little alley with a couple of studios submerged in lush gardens.
Beyond were cornfields and vineyards. After all only 24 years
earlier the toll gate of Maine was still standing here, marking the
boundary of Paris, a neighbourhood of pleasant guinguettes where
Parisians came to relax on Sundays over a pint of cheap wine.
Today Bourdelle’s exquisitely outdated oasis is situated just next to
the entrance to the tunnel of Avenue du Maine with its endless
flow of zooming, whizzing traffic, an isolated survivor among the
surreal concrete chaos of contemporary Montparnasse.

Continue along rue Antoine-Bourdelle and turn left into rue
Falguiére, which commemorates another prominent sculptor and
teacher of Bourdelle. Cross the Boulevard Pasteur and continue to
the second alley on your right — the celebrated Cité Falguiére, the
home of many an artist during the heyday of Montparnasse. Today
it has little to show for itself but in the early days, when its houses
were freshly painted pink, it looked pleasant enough to be known
as La Villa Rose. Besides, living at the Cité Falguiére was consid-
ered a social promotion in comparison with the remote artists’
quarters at La Ruche. When the Hungarian sculptor Joseph Csaky
(Szeged) left Budapest for Paris, he had not a penny to his name
and had to make part of the journey on foot. Upon arrival at the
Gare de l’Est he was fortunate enough to meet a kind-hearted
stranger who saw him safely to Cité Falguiére, his contact address

                                  97
                      15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


where two of his friends were living: ‘A pleasant, black-bearded
gentleman, seeing I was lost, led me into a pit and paid for my
ticket: for the first time I was taking the Métro. We got off at
Pasteur station. My guide pointed out a sign: “Cité Falguiére.’ Like
everyone else, however, Csaky had first to content himself with La
Ruche. Exceptionally, Soutine is believed to have started out here,
in a corrugated iron hovel into which Modigliani crammed his
volumes of poetry. All this is difficult to verify, since the artists kept
moving about and settling in one another’s lodgings. Lipchitz was
definitely living at the Cité Falguiére at the time and it seems that
he introduced the two painters to each other. Between 1912 and
1913 Modigliani shared a house here with Fujita, Modigliani on
the ground floor and Fujita above. This was a time of destitution,
of unpaid bills, of migration from one address to the next.
Modigliani, always penniless, ended up by being kicked out by the
landlady, Madame Durchoux, a good lady who often turned a
blind eye to the non-payment of rent, but whose patience, too, had
its limits. Spending nights on the public benches of Paris, soaked in
alcohol and drugs, was Modigliani’s habit, but he needed a place to
work, so he moved his belongings to another artists’ refuge on 216
Boulevard Raspail in the 14th arrondissement (no longer in exist-
ence). It was at the Cité Falguiére that the Romanian sculptor
Brancusi initiated Modigliani in the art of sculpture. A generation
earlier Bouillot had done the same for Gauguin. Bouillot was living
at no. 4 and Gauguin came to see him from the corner house of 74
rue Falguiére, his home between 1877 and 1880.

Continue along rue Falguiére, turn right into rue Vigée-Lebrun
and right again into RUE DU DOCTEUR ROUX fora visit to the
museum of l'Institut Pasteur at no. 25.
    Like Musée Bourdelle and other museums, this was the private
home of Louis Pasteur, where he lived his last seven years. It had
been allocated to him by the Institute, and was donated by his
daughter after his death to be converted into a museum. When the
museum was opened in 1935, it was arranged to look practically as
it had at the time of Pasteur, and is therefore an invaluable sample
of a typical late 19th-century bourgeois interior. Only the laundry
room on the first floor was done away with and has been converted
into a science hall (salle scientifique). On display are some of the

                                   98
                  MONTPARNASSE        — LA RUCHE


items that accompanied Pasteur and his collaborators in their
work, and this is a good place to begin your visit in order to retrace
the development of his discoveries. Here you will see, for example,
the first microscope he owned, when he was still a student. It hada
magnification of 800 times — extraordinary for those days, though
perhaps unimpressive in comparison with today’s electronic
lenses which enlarge an image one million times! Ironically,
Pasteur never saw the viruses he was working on and it was only in
1962 that the rabies virus could be seen with the aid of a micro-
scope. Also on display are two large cardboard models of crystals,
cut out and glued together by Pasteur himself for the benefit of
students who were sitting at the back of vast amphitheatres, so that
they could follow his lectures on crystallography — evidence of
Pasteur’s qualities as a pedagogue. You can also see the utensils
Pasteur used for his first pasteurisation and sterilisation experi-
ments.
  While Pasteur’s notoriety is associated with his discovery of the
vaccine against rabies in 1885, one must be aware that he was 63 at
the time and that this was the result of his research in other fields
that had begun in 1848. What the salle scientifique reveals is that,
thanks to his systematically coherent and analytical mind, each
discovery led to the next, each was a link ina chain that was broken
only when he died in 1895. As he himself had said, “Luck smiles on
minds that are prepared.’ Thus his discovery of fermentation,
notably of wine and beer, led to his work on germs, then on animal
diseases and finally human disease, which eventually led to his
research on rabies.
   His work on fermentation had major economic consequences.
In 1857 the manufacturers of beetroot alcohol in the north of
France, unable to account for the inconsistent quality of their pro-
duct, turned to Pasteur, who had graduated from the prestigious
Ecole Normale Supérieure, which was no small recommendation,
and now held the chair of Chemistry at the University of Lille. In
fact, Pasteur saw only what everyone else saw; it was his thought
processes that were different. Thus in 1857 he determined that
fermentation was caused by invisible organisms or germs called
ferments and not by spontaneous generation, and deduced that by
isolating and selecting the ferments one could obtain the desired
quality of alcohol. Pasteur’s sensational discovery secured the

                                 99
                    15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


fortune of brewers, for which the grateful Dane Carlsberg paid
him tribute by installing his bust on the brewery’s facade in
Copenhagen. This discovery led him to the conclusion that germs
are to be found everywhere and that, since the theory of spontan-
eous generation was proved erroneous, they would have to be
isolated if contagious diseases were to be fought successfully. From
here it was but a short step to the development of pasteurisation —
named after him — and sterilisation, processes that did not just
contribute to the prosperity of some brewers but, for the first time
in the history of mankind, towards the eradication of epidemics.
Today l'Institut Pasteur is still one of only two establishments in
France that prepares vaccines against various diseases. Following
Pasteur’s  discoveries, victims of contagious disease no longer
shared their room with other patients, let alone their bed, as had
been the case for centuries.
   But Pasteur was a doctor of science, not of medicine, and the
medical community was as conservative as the rest of society. Out-
raged that an outsider should instruct them in conducting their
profession, they mounted a fierce campaign against him and went
on operating on patients in their morning coats and with unwashed
hands. While doctors elsewhere in the Western world lost no time
in acknowledging Pasteur’s findings and applying them to their
patients, it took French surgeons 20 years to accept the truth. How
many lives would have been saved but for this blinkered attitude!
Nobody, however, challenged him when he discovered the remedy
for rabies in 1885, for it was incontrovertible that he had saved the
life of a little boy bitten by a rabid dog. People streamed to Paris
from all over Europe, even from as far as Russia, to be inoculated by
Pasteur against rabies. By 1888 Pasteur had managed to persuade
the international community to raise enough money for the
founding of the Institut Pasteur to replace the laboratory of Ecole
Normale Supérieure, which, he claimed, was no longer adequate for
the advanced state of his research.
    A part of the building was reserved for Pasteur’s apartment, a
grand bourgeois home by the standards of those days. It even hada
bathroom and a bathtub with hot and cold running water — one of
the first bathrooms in Paris and a real luxury in those days. The
bathroom remains as it was, except that it is now also used as a
wardrobe to store some of Pasteur’sclothes and hats, along with his

                                100
                   MONTPARNASSE        — LA RUCHE


professorial gown, his insignia of the Légion d’honneur and his
embroidered Académicien’s outfit, the celebrated habit vert. The
other rooms are dark and stuffy, cluttered with austere family
portraits in excessively elaborate gilt frames, (There are also some
portraits painted by Pasteur himself, characterised by the same
sharp observation that was so central to his scientific career). A
suffocating atmosphere permeates the place, so foreign to the
aesthetic canons of today. Paradoxically, it is a relief to visit
Pasteur’s crypt underneath,     a glorious abode for his remains,
bursting with luminous gilded mosaics.
   As one of France’s undoubted heroes, Pasteur was destined to
be buried in the Panthéon but his wife changed her mind at the last
minute and wished him to be buried in a crypt adjoining the Insti-
tut Pasteur. The inscriptions on the crypt commemorate Pasteur’s
ideals, which he shared with the Republic and its bourgeoisie,
namely the love of science and art combined with patriotism and
the Christian faith. The crypt itself is a reflection of the time, dec-
orated in the Byzantine style, like the contemporary Basilica of the
Sacré-Coeur. Pasteur’s crypt is largely inspired by the mosaics in
Ravenna, to which were added polychrome designs evoking Pas-
teur’s discoveries. Pasteur’s wife was laid here too in 1910, but his
disciple and successor at the head of the Institute, Dr Roux, was
not granted this honour and now rests in the garden. Thus, apart
from Napoleon, Pasteur seems to be alone in having his own
private crypt in Paris, and there isn’t a village or town in France
that does not boast a street or avenue that bears his name.
    Today 2,600 people work in the institute, 1,100 of whom are
scientists. Since it first opened, eight have been awarded the Nobel
Prize. Every year 600 trainees from over 50 countries are welcomed
to the Institut Pasteur, which, in its turn, is the living hub of a
network of institutes in all parts of the world. In the last few years
the Institute has been intensively committed to the fight against
AIDS and its small hospital (100 beds) exclusively treats a1ps
sufferers. Despite government subsidies, which total 40 per cent of
the Institute’s budget, most of the funds are raised by private don-
ors, which enables the Institute to maintain its independence. The
donors are not necessarily French; among them, for example, was
the late Duchess of Windsor.


                                 101
                     15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


As you leave the Institute turn left on rue du Docteur Roux and
right into rue des Volontaires, which will lead you to RUE DE
VAUGIRARD, once the high street of the village of Vaugirard.
Nothing is left of its rural past and the oldest vestige you can see —
though perhaps not for long — is the 18th-century alley at no. 226 to
your left, La Cour du Soleil d’Or, where the Auberge du Soleil d’Or
was situated. On the night of 8 September 1796, 60 Jacobine con-
spirators gathered in this inn, where they had set up an arms and
ammunition depot; hundreds more awaited instructions in other
cabarets in the area. Their plan was to stir up the troops at Grenelle
and overthrow the government, but the troops would not follow
them and their conspiracy, known as the Conjuration du Camp de
Grenelle, ended in bloodshed. Some of them managed to flee
through a narrow passage leading to the present rue Blomet, but
132 were arrested, 31 of whom were shot on the plain of Grenelle
and many others deported. Incidentally, five years earlier another
abortive conspiracy had been fomented at the Soleil d’Or, organ-
ised by Citizen Thévenot (but the great Condé was behind it), in
the hope of exterminating all the members of the Jacobine Club
and bringing Louis XVI back to the throne. The Mayor of Vaugi-
rard got wind of the conspiracy and had Citizen Thévenot arrested.
   Those who were lucky enough to escape after the 1792 con-
spiracy did so by way of the narrow alley, la Cour du Soleil d’Or,
precisely the spot that a committee of conservationists have been
trying to save, advocating the preservation of the site on historical-
ly valid grounds, all the more justifiable since the 15th arrondisse-
ment has little history to show for itself. Today the Cour du Soleil
d’Or is a dead-end alley, so you will have to retrace your steps on
rue de Vaugirard to join rue Blomet.

Turn left on rue Copreaux and left again on RUE BLOMET, a
typical nondescript street, yet another stronghold of Montparnasse
inits heyday. No. 33 was the site of the celebrated Bal Négre to which
everyone swarmed in the 1920s. Originally this was just an ordinary
neighbourhood café. At weekends, however, its back room became
the dance floor of the area’s West Indian community, who exploded
to the rhythm of beguine, their own variety of jazz, swaying to
exhaustion to the wonderful sound of a clarinet in an atmosphere
hanging heavy with the smell of rum. From time to time they gave

                                 102
                  MONTPARNASSE         — LA RUCHE


the floor to outdated folk groups in their traditional garb who
would sing sentimental songs from the colonies. Needless to say, at
a time when jazz and all things black were the ‘in’ thing, and the
accordion and the bal-musette had been ousted, this exotic, colour-
ful place could not long escape the attention of Robert Desnos, who
was living just a couple of houses away. He soon stirred up his
Surrealist friends who, together with the rest of Montparnasse,
invaded the place and called it their own. By the same token they of
course destroyed its atmosphere. Once the painters of l’Ecole de
Paris, Jean Cocteau, and the American expatriates had moved in,
the genuine Antillais no longer felt at home and deserted the place.
The crowd of the Roaring Twenties did not stay for long and Le Bal
Négre was once more just an ordinary neighbourhood café. The
Antillais, however, never came back. The present owner has tried to
revive it by adjusting to new trends. It is now called the St Louis
Blues and serves a potpourri of Manhattan cocktails, Tex-Mex
cuisine and Auvergnat- or Périgord-style salads.
   Just a few steps up the street, at no. 45, is Square Blomet, a neat
garden surrounded by surreal-looking highrises. It is situated on
the site of one of the two phalansteries of the Surrealists, the other
being on rue du Chateau in the 14th arrondissement (see that
chapter). The artists here were less fanatical about ideological and
political issues than their literary counterparts in the 14th arron-
dissement, and also less violent. The first to arrive was Juan Miro,
who made himself an impeccably neat nest inside a dilapidated
house that threatened to collapse, but which was not devoid of
pastoral charm, shaded by the overhanging branches of the neigh-
bours’ trees. In early spring he even benefited from their purple,
fragrant lilac blossoms. André Masson, on the other hand, lived
here with his wife and little daughter in appalling poverty and
amid a barely conceivable clutter. Among their friends who stayed
at or frequented the place were Robert Desnos, Michel Leiris,
Alberto Giacometti and Jacques Prévert. Despite its historical
interest, the house was probably beyond repair and was torn down,
but at least one had the good idea to replace it with a garden. It
would have also been a good idea to fix a plaque at the entrance as a
tribute to its former tenants, and another one next to Mird’s sculp-
ture, l’Oiseau Lunaire, inside the garden, which was offered to the
City of Paris by the artist, and of which no mention is made.

                                 103
                    15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


   Most of the houses along rue Blomet are of little interest but no.
48 across the street is a rustic old building, a welcome survivor.
Keep on walking as far as SQUARE ADOLPHE-CHERIOUX,
on your left, and the traffic-free RUE PECLET with the imposing
Mairie on your right. Built for the better-off few at a time when the
15th arrondissement was essentially proletarian, it is a pleasant
spot, which has not been wrecked by concrete and has preserved an
architectural unity. Continue along rue Blomet to rue Pétel, the
next street to your right. A turn-of-the-century boulangerie stands
on its corner, from which emanates a wonderful smell of fresh
bread. On the right-hand side of rue Pétel is a tiny Russian Ortho-
dox church, resplendent with icons and, if you hit it at the right
time, with melodious services.

Back on rue Blomet, as you reach RUE GERBERT on the left, you
will notice two attractive, solid bourgeois buildings, another indi-
cation that this was where the more affluent people lived, around
the church of Saint-Lambert. It was built during the Second Em-
pire to satisfy the needs of the growing population of Vaugirard.
The church has no great artistic merit, but at least its simple
austerity does not interfere with the surroundings, which have
preserved their old-fashioned provincial character. As you skirt it
to reach the entrance, which faces east according to tradition, you
will come to the continuation of rue Gerbert, which will take you
back to rue de Vaugirard; there turn right, then left, into rue de
P Abbé Groult.

Continue along the latter and on to rue de Vouillé. Turn right into
RUE SANTOS-DUMONT, a haven of pastoral serenity, espec-
ially as you penetrate the U-shaped alley of Villa Santos-Dumont,
whose Art Deco houses are surrounded by tree branches and
creepers and are animated by a lively chorus of birds. In these
discreet, hidden parts poet and singer Georges Brassens spent the
last decade of his life, at no. 42 rue Santos-Dumont. Ever since his
arrival in Paris in 1939 from his native southern Séte, his Parisian
territory had always been the 14th arrondissement, where he had
first boarded with his maternal aunt, Antoinette, at 173 rue
d’Alésia. In 1944, when he needed safer shelter so as not to be sent a
second time to Germany on an STO (Service du Travail Obliga-

                                 104
                  MONTPARNASSE           — LA RUCHE


toire) mission, his aunt sent him to her friend Jeanne, who lived in
a wretched hovel with no gas, no electricity and no running water,
at no. 9 Impasse Florimont, an ‘appendix’ of rue d’Alésia. Here she
shared a humble existence and a heart of gold with her husband
Marcel and with a wide spectrum of animals, both four-footed and
feathered. It was to Marcel, who had hidden him from the Gestapo
and offered him a roof, that Brassens dedicated his famous
Chanson pour lAuvergnat:
                  Elle est a toi cette chanson
                  Toi l’Auvergnat qui sans facon
                  M’as donné quatre bouts de bois
                  Quand dans ma vie ilfaisait froid. . .
                  This song is for you
                  The Auvergnat who without ado
                  Gave me four bits of wood
                  When my life was bitter cold.
And it was to Jeanne’s duck, whom the threesome had not the
heart to drop into the cooking pot, that Brassens dedicated his
exquisite La Cane de Jeanne, when the bird eventually died a
natural death:
                        La cane
                        De Jeanne
                        Est morte au gui l’an neuf,
                        Elle avait fait, la veille,
                        merveille!
                        Un oeuf!
                        Jeanne’s duck
                        Has died
                        She died on New Year’s Day
                        And had made on the Eve,
                        How marvellous!
                        An egg!
Even when Brassens was financially secure, he would not betray his
benefactors and the woman who had mothered him in Paris. For
over 35 years he went on sharing their humble roof and fare. But
after Marcel’s death in 1965, when Jeanne, already in her seventies,
and knowing herself equally doomed, married briefly a 37-year-old

                                   105
                        Parc Georges-Brassens


fellow, Brassens decided to move out. Jeanne had only a few months
left and Brassens, after a short stay in a huge block of flats in the 14th
arrondissement (so unlike him), moved to the quiet rue Santos-
Dumont. His life-long companion, whom he had met after the war,
the Eastern European Joha Heyman — Piippchen, to him — was
always hidden from the public eye, but always present by his side.

Leave rue Santos-Dumont on its southern side. Turn right into rue
des Morillons on the northern boundary of a network of narrow,
sunny alleys, bordered on the west by rue Brancion. It was opened
in the middle of the 19th century by the developer Chauvelot, and
was named le Village de PAvenir. Its street names and the obelisk
that once stood there commemorated the victories of the Italian
campaigns and was a popular attraction for a Sunday stroll. If you
come here in fine weather, when the enclave is bathed in sunshine,
you will appreciate why it was propitious for vine-growing. Early
18th-century archives record that its vineyard, le Clos des
Morillons, bore black grapes. North of rue des Morillons, on the
other hand, the land was taken over by quarries, all the way to rue
de la Convention, the stone of which was used for the building of
the Ecole Militaire.

                                   106
                  MONTPARNASSE         — LA RUCHE


   Turn left into RUE BRANCION. At no. 15 still stands boxing
champion Jean Walczak’s café, looking as it must have done some
40 or 50 years ago, the kind of place Georges Brassens found con-
genial. Old pictures, yellowed with age, and autographed by such
notables as Marcel Thil, Maurice Holtzen and Marcel Cerdan, line
the walls and until recently friends of the patron gathered here on
Sunday afternoons for a game of belote (a card game).
   Cross over and walk into the Parc Georges Brassens, lying on
the site of the old slaughterhouse of Vaugirard, which used to
supply the entire Left Bank. Some vestiges of it remain, notably
two sculptures of cattle by Auguste Cain surmounting the main
gate of the gardens on rue des Morillons, as well as Baltard’s
characteristic iron pavilions, which now house a secondhand book
market at weekends. The books are well worth browsing through,
provided you know French. There is also a herb garden whose
exquisite fragrance will keep your mind off the ugly high-rises that
obstruct the horizon to the south. A vineyard of 700 vines recalls
the old vineyard of Vaugirard, highlighted by a grape-picking cere-
mony ona Saturday in either September or October, depending on
the year (to be checked at the Mairie).

Exit through RUE DES MORILLONS, turn left and walk past
the red brick offices of the Objets Trouvés (lost property). Turn left
into rue de Dantzig and diagonally right into PASSAGE DE
DANTZIG,      the last destination on this itinerary. Tucked away
in these remote parts — even more remote in the early years of
the century — nestling among venerable trees, is the celebrated La
Ruche, standing behind an imposing gate — a moving sight, so
impregnated is La Ruche with the history of many of this century’s
great artists. Chagall, Zadkine, Soutine, Archipenko, Kisling,
Lipchitz, Fernand Léger and many others, all lived here at the out-
set of their careers.
   However, this was hardly a paradise — most of the artists ran away
from here as soon as they could afford to! When he washed up here
in the autumn of1910, Zadkine commented, ‘To tell the truth, it was
a sinister Brie cheese.’ He went on, ‘A pile of stones, a jumble of
chairs and other broken furniture, leaning in their misery against
the walls of this mortuary institution.’ How could it have been
otherwise? To start with, La Ruche rose in the middle of a desolate

                                 107
                     15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


plain — la zone — where ‘vegetation was rare and shade was totally
unknown’, and where a well-structured society of rag-pickers
(‘zonards’) held sway. Even worse, La Ruche had been erected just
next to the slaughterhouse! ‘Two, three o’clock in the morning. The
sky is blue. Dawn is rising. Over there, further away, the cattle were
being slaughtered, the cows were bellowing, and I painted them. I
can still hear their screams in the night as their heads were being cut
off, wrote Chagall in his autobiography. On the other hand, the
rent was only 37 francs a term and unpaid rents were overlooked by
the kindly Boucher. He also overlooked, without batting an eyelid,
the arrival of new tenants who moved in secretly in the middle of the
night, such as Soutine, a total stranger whom he bumped into the
following morning, and whom he greeted naturally, as if he had
always been there. It is true that Soutine had got lost on the way and
might otherwise have turned up earlier. Still, Boucher never
checked his identity, which was all to the good, since Soutine had no
identity papers and was not to have any for the next seven years.
    More than a landlord Alfred Boucher was a philanthropist who
had founded La Ruche as a calling and a mission to help out needy
artists. In 1900, while roaming around this section of the zone, he
stepped into a rickety wineshop and struck a deal with its owner to
the satisfaction of both sides: 5,000 francs for 5,o00-square metres:
the wine merchant got some money for his worthless land and
Boucher got some land to lodge his future protégés. The Universal
Exposition having just closed down, Boucher, like many other
 Parisians, went over to the fair grounds to see what could be picked
 up among its abandoned structures and came back with the booty
 of Gustave Eiffel’s octagonal wine pavilion and the impressive iron
 gate of the Palais de la Femme. He then set out to turn his piece of
 wasteland into a pleasant oasis by planting trees and bright flowers
 along neatly raked paths. The place was named La Ruche (beehive),
 both to symbolise the dynamic tenants he meant to house here and
 because of the honeycomb shape of the studios, imposed by the
 octagonal shape of the pavilion. Other buildings were added behind
 this main rotunda and were occupied by the better-off tenants, the
most attractive and comfortable of them being ‘le coin des Princes’,
next to which Boucher had built himself a house too. Chagall con-
firmed this hierarchy: ‘I lived in the Rotunda, where the proletar-
ians and the poorest lived. The stone buildings were occupied by the

                                  108
                               La Ruche

better-off. The rich went to Montparnasse.’ If you felt weary by the
time you came here, you can imagine what it must have been like for
those artists who could not afford a Métro ticket, when they wanted
to socialise or find shelter from their freezing studios in the cafés of
Carrefour Vavin (see chapter on the 14th arr.). You will understand
why they left for Montparnasse as soon as they could, even though
the hovels of Montparnasse did not necessarily offer more comfort,
nor were they necessarily any cleaner.

                                  109
                    15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


  Alfred Boucher was no great sculptor but his academic works
pleased officialdom, whom he served sincerely and for which he
was rewarded amply. It was while riding in the barouche the
Queen of Romania had offered him for the marble sculpture he
had made of her that Boucher first discovered Vaugirard and the
Passage de Dantzig. Boucher wallowed in his success, and was
overjoyed when he was awarded the Cross of the Légion d’honneur,
hesitating whether to wear it on the left- or right-hand side of his
chest, and finally opting for the proud centre. But he never forgot
or disowned his humble origins and wished from the bottom of his
heart to help his tenants whose talents he acknowledged to be
greater than his own. To help them sell their works, he opened an
exhibition gallery in the Rotunda, and in order to offer them
entertainment, he opened a 300-seat theatre where, incidentally,
Louis Jouvet made his debut when he was still a student in phar-
macology. Admission fees were optional, which was not enough of
an incentive to fill the theatre, despite its undeniable quality. Its
remote location was too much of a deterrent and it had to close
down after six months.
   When the band of Eastern Europeans invaded the premises in
the second decade of the century, bringing along both anarchical
ideas and an anarchical lifestyle, the benevolent Pére Boucher sim-
ply referred to himself as ‘the hen that hatched duck eggs’; but he
never complained and never stopped protecting his community.
On one occasion, when the Fine Arts Under-Secretary of State,
Dujardin-Beaumetz, came to visit the place, a couple of intoxi-
cated residents were hopping about on the lawn in the nude. The
outraged minister inquired what that was, to which Boucher
replied, “Two happy men!’.
   But World War I brought an end to the bliss. With no further
formality, Chagall closed his rickety door with a wire and left for
Russia. Of course, he never retrieved his works which he had left all
over his wretched studio. It is very unlikely that they were stolen by
the refugees from the north of France who occupied the premises
for the duration of the war and who were certainly unaware of
their value. It seems that at least some of the canvases were used to
cover the chicken coops: on a visit to the States years later, Chagall
recognised his painting Les Amoureux, which he had left lying on
his table, stained with chicken droppings that never came off.

                                 110
                   MONTPARNASSE        — LA RUCHE


Others must have served as fuel during the bitter winter nights of
1917 or earlier.
   World War II brought calamity on a much greater scale, when
Granowski and Epstein were dug out here by the Gestapo and their
French collaborators and were carried off as sacrificial quarry
together with one hundred other artists of Montparnasse. Neither
of them was to return. This time it was not the refugees that invad-
ed the deserted La Ruche but the butchers of the nearby slaughter-
house, one of whom bullied Picasso’s sensitive nephew Juan Fin,
who arrived here in 1946. But the artists returned little by little —
Reyberolle, Simone Dat, Tisserand, Yankel, Ben Dov, Polak, and
younger ones such as Bernard Buffet — and life returned to normal.
   In 1967, the heirs of Alfred Boucher were planning to sell La
Ruche to the French council housing authorities (HLM — Habi-
tation a Loyer Modéré). André Malraux moved into action to
thwart this death threat. President Pompidou bought a bronze by
Arp to raise some money and the sale of Degas’s Groupe de Dans-
euses fetched some more. But an additional one million francs
were still needed. Rescue came from the United States, the
accursed Uncle Sam who is always denounced for killing French
culture, but who more than once has saved it from destruction.
   There are now only 23 honeycombs in the Rotunda, instead of
the 80 original ones. Like the rest of the 15th arrondissement, La
Ruche has been upgraded, its studios enlarged and equipped with
modern amenities. Today’s tenants are carefully selected and do
not sneak in late at night. They also must be registered with Social
Security. Nostalgic sentimentalists will regret the passing of that
anarchical spontaneity, but the residents of those days, who had to
live among piles of rubbish and rats, could not wait to get away.
