13th Arr: Chinatown & La Salpétrière

                          CHINATOWN



                                  UNIVERSITE DE PARIS
                                PIERRE MENDES FRANCE

                                              ape TOS


                                          LES
                                      OLYMPIADES




this exotic touch is purely coincidental, the complex having been
completed in the early 1970s, before the arrival of the Asians, and
was intended for French locals. This was when the 13th arrondisse-
ment, with an optimistic view to the future, was scattering high-
rise complexes here and there, giving them such bombastic names
as Olympiade, Galaxie and Super-Italie.
   At no. 48 Avenue d’Ivry is the largest and most famous Asian
supermarket, Les Fréres Tang. The most prolific choice of exotic
food in the capital is to be found here — from coconut milk to
frozen eels, from canned bitter melons to a seemingly infinite var-
iety of curry powders. Freshly arrived in France from Laos, the two
brothers started their business in 1976 with one office and tele-
phone. Today they are at the head of an empire that markets exotic
food all over the Western world. Theirs is one of the more con-
spicuous success stories of the 13th arrondissement’s Chinatown.
There are other successful enterprises in the 13th arrondissement,
such as la tontine — a family loan network which enables new-

                                25
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


comers to have a start and makes local French people point an
accusing finger at the invisible Chinese Mafia — but these operate
behind closed doors, as do the numerous clandestine sweatshops
that operate round the clock and are not accessible to the visitor.
   Tang Fréres supermarket has a car park for its customers,
who come from all over the Paris area. Tucked away behind it is a
Buddhist temple, from which emanates a sweet smell of incense.
You are welcome to step inside, where you may find a serene wor-
shipper, meditating or laying his offerings on one of the altars.
   Quite a different atmosphere prevails opposite the Olympiade,
on rue Tolbiac, where the University of Paris I — Tolbiac (special-
ising in law and economics) rises, a vertical structure of three
superimposed glass blocks — rather an impersonal and uninviting
environment for a place of learning. Like other recent buildings of
the University of Paris, it does not contribute to creating a sense of
community among its occupants, nor does it engender any respect
for the premises. Shockingly ill-kept, they sadly demean the mem-
ory of the great statesman Pierre Mendes France, after whom the
university has been named.
   A meal in one of the Chinese restaurants is a self-evident con-
clusion to your visit. They are much cheaper than those of central
Paris and the food can be just as good. What the atmosphere lacks
in elegance, it gains in authenticity, often underlined by their
gigantic dimensions (Chinatown Olympiades at 44 Avenue d’Ivry,
for example, seats 600 and features an orchestra on Saturday
nights).



                        LA SALPETRIERE

Lovers of 17th-century architecture may wish to visit La Salpét-
riére, the largest hospital in Paris, sprawling on the north-eastern
edge of the arrondissement. The main entrance is on Square
Marie-Curie, on BOULEVARD DE L’HOPITAL, adjacent to
the Gare d’Austerlitz. Here stands a statue of Pinel, commem-
orating the 19th-century doctor who devoted his career to the relief
of the mentally ill. The imposing facade of the institution ahead
vividly recalls the facade of the Hétel des Invalides, not surpris-
ingly, since the two are roughly contemporary and were designed

                                  26
                               PET     RIERE
                        LA SAL




                                               TRIER
                                  TIE - SALPE



                                         |             [2

for a similar function, that is, to remove from the streets undesir-
able or cumbersome members of society and to intern them in a
glorified setting as befitted the era of the Sun King. Homeless war
veterans were shut up at the Invalides (1670) and all categories of
paupers at the Hdépital Général (1657), which was made up of three
sections, Bicétre for males, La Pitié for boys and La Salpétriére for
women. Paris at the time numbered 400,000 inhabitants — 10 per
cent of whom were homeless! As many as 10,000 were interned at
La Salpétriére alone, making it the largest hospice in the world!
   Following the canons of the time, Louis Le Vau designed a com-
pound in perfect geometric order around a square courtyard, La
Cour Saint-Louis, endowing it with an austere facade in keeping
with the nature of the institution. However, he was too busy with
other ventures — the Louvre, Versailles, Vincennes — and had to
pass on the torch to Duval and Le Muet, and it was Libéral Bruant,
the architect of the Invalides, who was commissioned to build the
institution’s chapel in 1669 on the site of an earlier chapel dedic-
ated to Saint Denis. At the entrance to the chapel is an elegant
porch with three harmonious Ionic arcades, and a beautifully
sculptured wooden portal,-also dating from the 17th century.
Inside the chapel a lantern-shaped dome surmounts a central
octagonal rotunda where the high altar stands, the meeting-point
of four austere equal-sized naves which make up the shape of a
Greek cross. This design allowed the four groups of worshippers
for whom the chapel was erected — men, women, boys, girls — to be
seated apart yet close to the high altar — the demented, the feeble-
minded, the homeless and the debauched — all of whom listened to

                                  27
                    13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


the sermon and the Holy Scriptures read to them from the beauti-
ful wrought-iron lectern that may still be seen at present. The
chapel was in fact the keystone of the venture, which gave it moral
and spiritual credibility, and it is not insignificant that the first
chaplain of La Salpétrigre was no other than Saint Vincent de Paul,
the most respected churchman of the 17th century, who had
devoted his life to improving the lot of the poor and alleviating the
pains of society’s rejects (see also the 10th arr.).
   Reality proved very different. La Cour Manon Lescaut, one of
the hospital’s courtyards, commemorates the tragic heroine of
l Abbé Prévost’s novel who, like so many of her contemporaries,
was locked up for debauchery in the prison section of La Salpét-
riére before being deported to the ‘islands’. Throughout the 18th
century, La Salpétriére remained the antechamber of deportation,
helping France consolidate her grip on the newly acquired terri-
tories in Canada, Louisiana and the Caribbean Islands.
   The mentally deranged had their own section in this purgatory,
where they were chained to the cell walls, abandoned to their fate,
bitten by rats, screaming out their agony. It was only in the early
19th century, at the instigation of Dr Pinel, that the approach to
mental disease began to change. Friend of the Encyclopédistes and
child of the 18th-century enlightenment, Dr Pinel did away with
the chains, a revolutionary step and hitherto inconceivable. Pinel
died in 1826 but he had shown the light to his followers and during
the reign of Louis-Philippe the inmates’ cells were also done away
with — yet another revolution. In the second half of the 19th cen-
tury, when Dr Charcot took over the department, La Salpétriére
became world famous as a psychiatric centre, and students came
from all over Europe to listen to Charcot’s lectures. Among them
was a young student by the name of Sigmund Freud.
   Today a cultural association, Les Amis de Saint-Louis, helps to
promote the 17th-century chapel and bring it to the attention of
the public by way of various activities. You may consider attending
a chamber-music concert here on a Sunday afternoon.
