19th Arr: Overview

    THE 1QTH ARRONDISSEMENT
B EFORE 1986, when the site of the main slaughterhouse and the
premises of the livestock market of Paris were metamorphosed
into, respectively, a science museum and a multipurpose entertain-
ment hall, as part of the new 35-hectare Parc de la Villette, the only
reason for a bourgeois from western Paris to come all the way to
these remote infamous parts of north-eastern Paris was the pros-
pect ofa gastronomic meal at Le Cochon d’Or, Au Boeuf Couronné
or Dagorno on Avenue Jean Jaurés. Such establishments took pride
in the quality of their meat, freshly supplied from the slaughter-
house of La Villette, on the other side of the canal, which they served
in copious chunks. It was the ‘in’ thing to savour Gargantuan por-
tions, especially during the Third Republic, when the consumption
of food was a respectable occupation, a daily ritual celebrated
around the dining table, described by Emile Zola as the altar of a
family townhouse in the beaux quartiers of western Paris. Zola’s
memory, incidentally, was honoured here in 1930, on the occasion
of the 5oth anniversary of the gatherings that used to take place in
his home in Médan, les rencontres de Médan, as they came to be
known. Léon Hennique was the only survivor of those gatherings to
have attended the anniversary celebration. Excursions to La Villette
were not a family affair but an all-male experience — this was no
neighbourhood for honest middle-class wives or daughters. On the
other hand, potbellied lawyers, doctors, politicians and entre-
preneurs ofall sorts, as well as artists, writers and actors, thoroughly
enjoyed themselves here over a meal that could consist of ten
courses and took several good hours to absorb. How many people
today could face a meal consisting of five different meat specialities,
such as ris de veau normand, queue de boeuf limousin or veine de
boeuf charolais preceded by a consommé and followed by the
inevitable salade de saison and plateau de fromages, and still be able
to tackle a tarte aux fruits? The writer Francis Carco and the gastro-
nome Escoffier seemed to cope all right when they gathered here in
1935 with other members of the Académie du Goat, for a feast
presided over by Curnonsky, le prince des gastronomes. Needless to
say, those feasts were always accompanied by an assortment of

                                  229
                     19TH         ARRONDISSEMENT




                             4
          Ail      mt ie Z       aes al 4g   ig

           CNN    LL.            da le


wines of the best vintage, as well as by vintage Calvados, which is
known to help the digestion.
   The guests hardly noticed, let alone cared about the surrounding
poverty, the shrieking hunger, the mass carnage of cattle, sheep and
especially pigs (the pork section was dubbed I’Enfer. . .). Chewing
away in a Belle-Epoque setting, which exuded self-confidence and
prosperity, they ignored the fact that the 19th arrondissement was
the headquarters of the feeding and evacuation industries of the
capital and resembled a gigantic sewer, although the municipal
dump had by then been transferred to the forest of Bondy, east of
Paris. Even the headquarters of the Pompes Funebres were set up in
the 19th arrondissement, at104 rue d’Aubervilliers, on the site of the
early municipal slaughterhouse as it happened. The rag warehouses
too were set up here, debouching the clothing waste of the capital to
the ragpickers who operated in the ‘zone” — the slum belt of Paris,
now the stretch between the Boulevards des Maréchaux (Extér-
ieurs) and the Boulevard Périphérique. Also near by, but beyond
the diners’ attention, were sugar refineries and gasworks which
belched their noisome fumes into a steel-tainted sky hanging heavy
above. And while they were titillating their palates with a full-
bodied scarlet Bourgueil or Chinon, a few blocks away, at ‘le Bistro
des Miracles’, nicknamed after Victor Hugo’s notorious Cour des
Miracles, less distinguished customers were gobbling downatrans-
lucid, vinegary wine known as rouquet.
   These customers were known in their own jargon as pilons
(‘wooden legs’ and, by extension, ‘beggars’) or pieges a poux (‘flea
traps’), wretched tramps who did not take off morning coats or top
hats as they came in, but shed a stick or a pair of crutches, working

                                      230
                          INTRODUCTION


tools with which they hoped to arouse pity among charitable
passers-by, as they hung around the elevated Métro stations of
northern Paris.

It was the geography of the 19th arrondissement that predisposed it
to host the infrastructure of a fast industrialising Paris. Situated on
the north-eastern edge of the city and having two canals anda basin,
it was doomed to become the gateway to the heavily industrialised
regions of northern and north-eastern France. It was also con-
veniently remote from the city centre and thus a suitable place to
dump waste, along with the dregs of society.
    When Napoleon created the Bassin de la Villette, his main object
was to divert the waters of the river Ourcq in order to feed the
fountains of Paris, which he hoped would outdo those of glamorous
Rome. A thrilled crowd attended its inauguration ceremony on 2
December 1808, cheering, “Vive l’Empéreur! Ata time when recrea-
tional grounds were scarce, Parisians were enchanted by the lake,
the refreshing trees planted along its banks against a backdrop of
pastoral meadows to the north, and also by the majestic vista to the
south, up to the Rotunda designed by Nicolas Ledoux. Compared
by some to the water pools of Versailles, the Bassin de la Villette was
appreciated even by the privileged of western Paris. In spring and
summer lovers and families relaxed on its green banks, on cold
winter days adults and children went skating on its immaculate ice
that glittered in the crisp air under a canopy of blue sky.
    Three centuries earlier, Henri IV had also been driven by aes-
thetic considerations when he wished to bring an air of Venetian
grace to his intended Place de France (see chapter on the 3rd arr.) by
means of an elegant canal between the river Ourcq and the Seine, a
project which was nipped in the bud by his assassination. Louis XIV
also showed interest in the idea of a canal but both his ministers
Colbert and Riquet (the latter had built the Canal du Midi) died
before they had time to carry out the plan. Louis XVI was caught
unawares by history, and Jean-Pierre Brullée, who was entrusted
with the project in 1790, at his own expense, was ruined in the
process. So it was Napoleon who finally took charge of a-venture
originally conceived in 1520, at the time of Fran¢ois I.
   Napoleon’s waterways, however, soon found a more profitable
use than providing pleasure to idle Parisians, having come in good

                                 231
                     19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


time for the great industrial revolution of the 19th century. By 1830
the Canal de l’Ourcgq, of Saint-Denis and the Bassin de la Villette
proved a tremendous asset as a means of transport in addition to
rue de Flandre and la Route d’Allemagne (now Avenue Jean-
Jaurés), which had led respectively to the north and to the east since
Roman times. Rue de Flandre was, in fact, an extension of the
Roman road that became rue Saint Martin and rue du Faubourg
Saint-Martin in medieval times, itself built on the axis of the Roman
city’s cardo on the Left Bank (rue Saint-Jacques). During works on
the Canal de l’ Ourcq in the early 19th century, a vase was found
containing 2,500 Roman coins from the early 4th century and be-
lieved to have been hidden here by a native during the Germanic in-
vasions. The new waterways were built between those two arteries,
benefiting from the topography afforded by the vast plain of La
Villette that lay between the hill of Montmartre to the north-west
and that of Belleville to the south-east. Flowing across the suburb of
La Villette, the two canals met at right angles and headed for what is
now Place de Stalingrad, then the north-eastern edge of the city,
where the two roads also converged. The canals became the life-
blood of the arrondissement, carrying on their waters all the wares
from the north and east of France (notably coal for domestic fires)
to be stored or processed along the Bassin dela Villette—‘the general
warehouse of the capital’. Here also began the Canal Saint-Martin,
which headed south through eastern Paris to meet the Seine.
   It took but one generation to transform rural La Villette into a
sordid area, and it was largely the cross-shaped waterway that was
responsible for its martyrdom. When Napoleon came over for the
inauguration in 1807, two thirds of its land were still covered with
corn, barley and oats. Orchards, vineyards and vegetable gardens
completed the scene, alongside meadows where grazing cows
provided milk for the 2,000 villagers of La Villette. By 1830 the
pleasure-seekers of the Bassin de la Villette had been replaced by
sweating stevedores and dockers, and dreary sheds, warehouses and
barns lined its once green banks. Among other things stored here
was the cereal of La Villette, its major crop since the Middle Ages,
which thrived on the vast plain.

Like many medieval villages on the outskirts of Paris, La Villette
grew as a ribbon development along the two ancient roads, mainly

                                 232
                          INTRODUCTION


along rue de Flandre, where it was known as La Grande Villette, and
toa lesser degree along the Route d’Allemagne, which was knownas
La Petite Villette and was more of a hamlet. First mentioned in 1198
as part of the domains of the community of Saint-Lazare-villa nova
sancti Lazari Parisiensis — it appeared again two centuries later in a
deed of Charles V, dated 1374, as La Villette sainct Ladre (Lazare) lés
(near) Paris. In 1407 it was referred to as Longueville in keeping with
its strung-out development along the main road. Largely exposed
to the outside world, La Villette was attacked and besieged by the
troops of Henri IV in 1590. Three years later, while stopping over in
the house of Emeri de Thon at La Villette, Henri IV declared his
intention to convert to Catholicism. Following this, a truce was
signed between him and the Catholic League on 31 July and made
public the next day ‘a son de trompes et cri public (‘to the sound of
horns and public cry’), thus putting an end to the civil war. Louis
XV also passed through this north-eastern gateway of Paris after his
victory over the Dutch and the English at Fontenoy (Belgium) in
1745, but, unlike his ancestor, failed to stop at the house that had
been prepared for him and merely rode past it. It was also through
La Villette that Louis XVI was brought back to Paris from Varennes,
where he was recognised, disguised as a valet, during his attempt to
escape abroad with his family on the night of 21 June 1791.
   In 1814 La Villette made news once more when it became the sad
scene of France’s capitulation to the Allied armies, signed on 1
March next to the Rotunda at the present Place de Stalingrad. The
following day the Allies entered Paris through the barrier gate of La
Villette, with the Tzar of Russia and the King of Prussia at their
head. Twelve days later the Comte d’Artois and future Charles X
followed suit as Lieutenant General of the kingdom of Meaux.
When he next entered the capital, on 6 June 1825, it was with great-
er ceremony, however: seated with his family in the royal carriage,
he was coming from Reims after his coronation, the last monarch
of France to have celebrated this 1000-year-old ritual. A triumphal
arch had been erected at the barrier of La Villette, where the King
was met by the Prefect of the Seine and presented with the keys to
Paris before the colourful ranks of the National Guard.

Charles X was inflexible and unimaginative and did not last long.
Under his successors, the bourgeois Louis-Philippe, and later

                                 233
                    19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Napoléon III, the wheels of the industrial revolution turned ever
faster. By 1860, the year of its annexation to Paris, La Villette
numbered 65,000 inhabitants struggling to survive in Dickensian
conditions. 150 firms had been established here and 15,000 vessels
used the port, transporting 40,000 tons of merchandise per year. A
final blow was dealt to the neighbourhood on 1 January 1867, when
the new Paris slaughterhouse opened, followed on 22 October by
the livestock market. And yet, by some ironical coincidence, on 1
April of the same year, les Buttes-Chaumont, among the most
enchanting gardens in Paris, were also inaugurated in the arron-
dissement — a juxtaposition of events that exemplified Napoléon
III's contradictions. In his Guide du Promeneur, Delaforgue wrote
that, ‘At the top of the list of wonders of the new Paris, one must,
without any doubt, rank the park of Buttes-Chaumont.’ He went
on to praise this “graceful paradise’ with its magnificent, sweeping
views and its countless beauty spots that even ‘the least impres-
sionable tourist does not tire of admiring’. This was not, of course,
Parc de Monceau and no nanny would be seen here pushing a
stately pram, but the Emperor was full of good intentions, if
unable to resolve his contradictions. For while he made these
recreational grounds available to the people of eastern Paris, he
had also aggravated their poverty by annexing the area to the
capital and subjecting them to taxes, from which the suburbs had
hitherto been exempted.
   Furthermore, when Haussmann gutted the centre of Paris, the
middle classes, whom the naive east had hoped to lure, turned
their backs on this fast-deteriorating area and migrated to the west.
After all, the neighbourhood could no longer boast the rivulets and
springs which had at one time watered the slopes of Belleville. One
by one the windmills disappeared and in no time the hill was
covered with hovels. Dismayed, the locals watched the real-estate
market plummet and were plunged into a state of despair and
anger, ready to explode: the only people who had moved to their
area from central Paris were the poor! A decade of turbulence
followed, during which time the area’s inhabitants gained the rep-
utation among the self-righteous bourgeoisie of western Paris of
being ‘the scum of the earth’.
   On 8 May 1870, the 19th arrondissement voted en masse against
the Emperor’s plebiscite and after Napoléon III’s defeat by the

                                 234
                          INTRODUCTION


Prussians joined forces with the Commune. Working-class aware-
ness had already been rife at La Villette during the 1848 revolution,
but, with little experience and no organiséd leadership, their
insurrection had swiftly been quelled and many of the rebels found
themselves deported to Algeria. By 1870, however, three sections of
the First International had been established in Belleville (by some
strange fluke also in 1867), two in the 19th, one in the 2oth.
    Social discontent had already been bubbling in Belleville since
the Restoration. The Napoleonic wars had impoverished its inhab-
itants, and in the open-air guinguettes the Bellevillois, stimulated
by ample quantities of cheap wine, gave vent to their anti-royalist
feelings in the form of subversive refrains, notably those of the
poet Béranger. By the late 1840s the poverty was such that the
municipality had to make special provision for the allocation and
distribution of bread, while three newly-founded revolutionary
clubs signalled the ever-growing social unrest among the Belle-
villois. During the 1848 Revolution, hundreds of them had rushed
down the slope to join their fellow Parisians in the centre of action
and put an end to the French monarchy. There were many more of
them by 1870, and they were better organised. With such charis-
matic and persuasive leaders as Gambetta and Henri Rochefort,
successively their deputies to the National Assembly, the militant
journalist Jules Vallés and the hot-headed Flourens, who led the
suicidal riots, they could stand up for their rights and hope to be
victorious, especially after Napoléon III’s capitulation to the
Prussians at Sedan on 4 September. And when the riots culminated
into the semaine sanglante (‘bloody week’) of 21-28 May 1871, the
Communards set fire to all the installations in the Bassin de la
Villette — the docks, warehouses, factories and lofts, all collapsed
under a glowing sky. Sugar, cotton, oil, wood, cashmere and
alcohol went up in flames — even the deep dark waters were ablaze.
   Seven years later the 1878 Universal Exposition brandished in
the face of the world the definitive victory of the bourgeois Third
Republic. When the festivities were over, the pavilions proved
handy replacements for the time-worn installations of the port of
La Villette. The children of the defeated Commune, prostrate and
weakened by their diet of absinth, which had long since replaced
the fresh milk of cows, roamed this dismal, ominous wasteland.
Crime was their only prospect. Their victims were often the

                                 235
                    19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


neighbourhood’s young females whom they would round up and
offer as game to their fellow men. The brutality and callousness of
these pimps was notorious and once caught in their noose, the girls
had little hope of escape: those who put up a resistance could be
stabbed, and other working women were also vulnerable when
loaded with their scanty weekly wage. Violence thrived among the
butchers too, notoriously hot-tempered, and fights between
trigger-happy pimps and butchers, knife at the ready, were not
uncommon. Who knows how many victims ended up in the ooz-
ing waters of La Villette? Seven criminals from La Villette were
sentenced to death between 1872 and 1900.
                  La dernieére fois que jTai vu
                  Tl avait torse a moitié nu
                  Et le cou pris dans la lunette
                  A la Roquette
                  The last time I saw him
                  He was stripped to the waist
                  And had his neck trapped in the guillotine
                  At the prison of La Roquette,
wrote Montmartre’s celebrated chansonnier, Aristide Bruant.


The upright citizens of Paris, the target of Bruant’s derision, shud-
dered with terror at the mere mention of La Villette and Belleville,
but the immigrants who came here in search of livelihood or
refuge could not afford to be so fussy. As always in Paris, the new-
comers had to make do with the outlying arrondissement before
being allowed the privilege of venturing further in, a pattern that
still persists. Sixty-seven ethnic communities — the widest spect-
rum in the French capital — have taken up residence in the 19th
arrondissement since the latter part of the 19th century: Poles,
Russians and Yugoslavs; Armenians, Turks and Greeks who had
fled from one another back home and were reunited in this small
area, where the former distinguished themselves once more          in
making excellent shoes; Jews fleeing persecution in eastern Europe
and later in Germany, who brought to Belleville their clothing
trade; Black Africans and North Africans, who fill the air with the
smell of exotic spices; Far East Asians who have turned the north-
ern half of Belleville into the second largest Chinatown in Paris,

                                 236
                           INTRODUCTION


with lush food stores and restaurants catering to local compatriots,
which is a guarantee to the visitor of value for money and genuine
atmosphere. Even the street names have followed the trend —
Morocco, Algeria, Indochina and many other foreign countries,
towns and regions are remembered here. Scattered through the
arrondissement, too, are many mosques, churches of various
denominations and synagogues. At the state primary school on rue
Tanger nearly half of the pupils are of North African extraction.
The school even offers bilingual instruction in Arabic and French
to both its Arab and French pupils.
   The 19th arrondissement is also the stronghold of the more
traditional segment of the Parisian Jewish community, notably its
residential parts around the Buttes-Chaumont and Avenue
Secrétan. Fellow Jews have long been present here and the oldest
and most established school in the community, Ecole Lucien de
Hirsch at 70 Avenue Secrétan, goes back to 1901. However, lately
they have moved here in great numbers, attracted by the area’s
greenery, altitude and healthier environment.
   In 1993 the then Mayor of Paris, Jacques Chirac, was invited
over to the inauguration of the arrondissement’s 20th synagogue.
In 1691, when Jews, Protestants, suicides and actors were denied
burial, the inn-keeper Camot allocated a portion of his backyard to
the Jews at a special price. In 1773 the property belonged to Matard,
a skinner by trade, who, despite Jewish protestations, also buried
carcasses of animals on the site. In March 1780, Jacob Rodrigues
Pereire, one of Louis XVI’s interpreters, succeeded in buying the
site on behalf of the Jewish Portuguese community, obtaining
from the King, for the first time since the expulsion of the Jews
from Paris in 1394, a pledge that it would be officially recognised as
a Jewish cemetery, provided the deceased were buried by night and
discreetly. Pereire himself became one of the first to be laid there
the following September. However, the cemetery fell into disuse
after 1810, when Napoleon abolished the restrictions that had
hitherto weighed on the Jews; from then on, they were buried, like
the rest of the population, in the new cemeteries on the edge of the
capital. The tiny old cemetery is still in existence, hidden. behind
no. 44 rue de Flandre, some thirty silent tombstones, on an area 35
metres by 10, behind a locked gate. It is the property of the Jewish
Consistory, which does allow visits.

                                 237
                     19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


The Jews are not the only ones who have discovered the virtues of
the 19th arrondissement. By the late 1970s, when the shortage of
space in the affluent west had become alarming, it dawned on the
public authorities that a real-estate reservoir was still available in
the east. It also dawned on them that once cleared of the stigma of
the last century, the area could display to advantage its obvious
assets, namely, its gardens and waterways, its sunshine and lesser
pollution. As part of this thorough clean-up, it was decided in 1979
to do away with the slaughterhouse, and the following year the idea
of opening a science and technology museum in their place was
put forward. By the same token, the harbour of La Villette, which
in the early 20th century had employed as many as 2,000 steve-
dores, was to cease trading and to be restored to its original recrea-
tional function. Its vacated warehouses were to be given over to
aspiring artists who would add a cultural dimension to the area.
The only flaw was that, as usual, the plan was          rash and not
thoroughly thought out. Admittedly the science and technology
museum, La Cité de la Science et de Industrie, enjoys 35 hectares
of surrounding open-air space and sits cleverly moored in the
water like some gigantic vessel. Admittedly, too, this showcase of
French technology is the largest museum of its kind in the world,
thus greatly flattering to the French national ego. Likewise, it
boasts an overwhelming number of visitors — over 4 million a year
— and has become one of the unmissable sites on the Paris
sightseeing tours. Coaches and buses bring over their daily load of
foreign tourists, most of whom are unaware that but a few decades
ago, animals were dragged here to be butchered. Altogether 18% of
international visitors to Paris get to La Villette, an impressive
figure considering the remoteness of the site.
   However, its success is only partial, or, as some critics put it, the
vessel is pitching in an all too customary financial chasm. Indeed,
most visitors treat the museum as part of a day’s outing to the Parc
de la Villette and wander exclusively through the sections that are
free of charge. Only 5,000 of the 15,000 daily visitors buy an
entrance ticket; many only use the médiathéque, which is free of
charge, or give the children a one-off treat at the Planetarium or
the Inventarium, a cheaper alternative to Disneyland. Others just
use the car park! Indeed, overwhelmed by the gigantic size of the
place, the visitor feels disoriented and ends up by riding the

                                  238
                           INTRODUCTION


reassuring escalator that takes him to Explora, the real heart of the
futuristic museum. Concepts of space and light, the universe and
the weather forecast, techniques that defy nature by growing
plants without soil are among the thrilling experiences that await
visitors inside. School parties run around pressing on any button
they can lay their fingers on: whether they will have come out wiser
we do not know, but at least they will have let off steam. The
unemployed of the northern and eastern suburbs, in search of new
outlets, also have a go at the museum’s numerous gadgets. All this
is a far cry from the initial ambition, expressed in 1985, ‘to create an
establishment whose cultural mission is to make accessible to all
members of the public the development of science, technology and
industrial know-how.’
    Opposite the science museum, the 36-metre-diameter sphere of
the Géode mirrors the surroundings of sky and land, turning blue
or silver-grey according to the weather. Inaugurated in 1986, it
boasted the largest circular screen in the world, 1,000 square
metres. One million spectators a year climb aboard for a three-
dimensional sensory voyage, into the bowels of the earth, into the
outer reaches of space or around a car racetrack, Another attrac-
tion is the Cinaxe, a heart-stopping, high-tech experience where,
for 20 minutes, visitors are moved about in rhythm to projected
visual clips. A ride on the Argonaute submarine, though less novel
a concept, provides an equally potent thrill for some.
   One vestige has also been salvaged from the past — La Grande
Halle, south of the Canal de l’Ourcq, the work of Victor Baltard’s
student Jules de Mérindol — a remarkable structure that used to
shelter the livestock market. It has been beautifully converted intoa
multipurpose hall for exhibitions and various performances. Its
renovation is one of the architectural success stories in the French
capital, thanks to the talents of Philippe Robert and Bernard
Reichen,   who   have   made      the    conversion   of old   industrial
constructions their speciality.
   Also on the southern side of the Canal de l’Ourcq is the Zénith,
Paris’s most popular temple to rock and pop. It is a makeshift
structure which was put up in 1984, temporarily it was then
thought, at the trivial cost of 40,000 francs and within the record
time of 12 months. Many Grands Projets of the last decade or so,
which have so shamelessly exhausted public funds, could learn

                                   239
                     19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


from the success of the Zénith, which responds to the cultural
aspirations of today’s youths and where Eric Clapton, Ray Charles
and Miles Davis, among others, were given an ecstatic reception by
their 9,000-strong audiences of fans.
  In   autumn    1990,   the   Paris    Conservatory   (Conservatoire
National Supérieur de la Musique et de la Dance) moved to the
Parc de la Villette, the first element of La Cité de la Musique, which
was completed in January 1997 with the opening of the museum of
music. Thus the Parc de la Villette was also to become the centre of
musical research and education for the future, although again the
overambitious project was carried out in a chaotic way and with-
out sufficient funds. Architecturally speaking this has unquestion-
ably been a successful venture, owing to the immense talent of
Christian Portzamparc. Young musicians like the vast premises, all
shining and new and an improvement on the cramped former
Jesuit school on rue de Madrid, north of Gare Saint-Lazare, their
previous home.
   For the non-specialist the main attraction of La Villette, how-
ever, remains its infinite and varied activities and festivities which
embrace, literally, everything. All kinds of aquatic activities are on
offer, from crash courses in motor-boating or intensive canoeing
to an idle cruise. Those who prefer to stay on dry land can take a
109-km bicycle ride along the Canal de lOurcgq, as far as La Ferté
Milon. This is also the mecca of world culture, as light-weight and
transient as much of this age. On special occasions spectacular
water festivals are staged on the Bassin de La Villette. Laser and
synthesisers reign supreme in these high-tech-oriented parts,
which have long discarded their innocent lanterns and pompoms.
The new generation hardly resembles the blood-stained butchers
and sweaty, ruddy dancers in the guinguettes, and are more likely
to be thrilled by pyrotechnics than by the traditional Féte du Boeuf
Gras, which celebrated the fattest and most select ox of La Villette
in the days of the livestock market. This was the highlight of the
year, when decorated carts, disguised merrymakers and a boist-
erous band followed the imposing animal down the streets,
watched by the entire arrondissement in a trance.
    In 1987, in keeping with contemporary trends, Bernard Tschumi
set out to design a park that would have a certain cerebral interest.
Admittedly it has some attractive spots, such as the bamboo garden,

                                  240
                BELLEVILLE     — PRE-SAINT-GERVAIS


but most of the extensive stretches are impersonal and arid, with
 ‘designer’ benches that are hardly suitable for the weary bodies of
the elderly. Nor are the red geometric, paltry metal structures in-
tended as sculptural decorations and much vaunted as one of the
park’s highlights, worth writing home about. Supposedly reflecting
the spirit of pop art, they only serve to reinforce the emotional
vacuum created by today’s urban environment. Dubbed preposter-
ously folies, they are no match for the neo-classical Second Empire
folie of les Buttes-Chaumont, the Sibylline temple that crowns its
dramatic cliff. Unlike les Buttes-Chaumont neighbourhood, La
Villette has not yet become a hospitable environment, which per-
haps explains why the vicinity of the Rotunda has become the city’s
hottest night-time centre for drug traffic, in particular crack. But
the Rotunda is also the pride of La Villette, one of the four surviving
monuments Nicolas Ledoux built for the city’s toll gates and the
only monument in the arrondissement bequeathed by the Ancien
Régime. It should be seen after dark, preferably from the footbridge
of the Bassin de la Villette, when it gleams magically across the
water, standing out splendidly against a black sky.
