19th Arr: Les Buttes-Chaumont and Thereabouts

    LES BUTTES CHAUMONT                AND THEREABOUTS

PLACE DE RHIN ET DANUBE, the starting point of our next
itinerary, is close to Métro Danube. (If you come from La Butte du
Chapeau Rouge, where the previous walk ended, take the
Boulevard Sérurier, west of the gardens, then rue David d’Angers.)
    This is a lethargic spot, with shady old plane trees, a provincial
little hotel and two equally provincial cafés, survivors of a more
leisurely past. The centrepiece of the roundabout has been planted
with corn, a reminder of the area’s agricultural past. Who else but
the French would have thought of erecting in the middle a statue of
a beautifully shaped peasant woman reaping the corn? Next to this
‘village green’ are the traditional baker’s and butcher’s, but also a
video club lit by neon lights, the only noticeable sign of contem-
porary life.
   West of Place de Rhin et Danube, on the site bounded by rues du
Général Brunet, David d’Angers and Compans, there used to be a
horse market which was done away with in 1878. In 1889 it was
decided to build here a network of countrified alleys and bunga-
lows, one of the very rare examples of a successful housing estate in
a working-class neighbourhood, quite unlike the vandalism perpe-
trated around Place des Fétes. The enclave extends south beyond
RUE DE MOUZAIA, which is loosely considered as its backbone
and its point of reference. The other major streets are named
Egalité, Liberté and Fraternité, substitutes for unkept promises
down the years.
  Make your way into RUE           MIGUEL      HIDALGO       and the
countrified havens on either side, notably Villa d’Hautrive, on
your left, with its examples of Art Deco, followed by Villa de
Cronstadt and its romantic street-lamps. It continues into Villa
Marceau, with a bourgeois corner house which was obviously built
for a prosperous resident. If you have come here in early spring,
you will be greeted on by silvery-mauve clusters of wistaria; if
somewhat later, by bright roses. There is a charming miniature
garden at no. 6, and a profusion of creepers at no. 7 and another
picturesque pocket-handkerchief garden at no. 9.
   Turn left into RUE DE LA LIBERTE and left once more into
Villa de Fontenay. Neither Monet nor Renoir would have sniffed

                                 249
                  19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT




            ——S
IWAYAD-LS




Aud

31




                            250
                    LES   BUTTES    CHAUMONT


at the pale yellow house at no. 10, steeped in luxuriant vegetation
and drowsing behind its closed green shutters in the heat of a still
summer day. The roof over the garage of no. 8 seems about to
collapse under the weight of rambling creepers. An attractive iron
gate and a bower lead to the tiny garden at no. 6.
    The celebration of nature continues on the parallel Villa Amalia
(right on rue du Général Brunet and right once again). Some wan-
ton clematis peep into the street through the latticed wall at no. 7.
If you are intrigued by the sound of trickling water behind the wall,
and in turn peep through, you will delight in a miniature Japanese
garden, complete with rockery and pond, waterlilies and goldfish.
    Retrace your steps and turn right into rue du Général Brunet.
The Hameau (hamlet) du Danube, on your right, is barred to
outsiders, but its neat red roofs and red geraniums can be enjoyed
from behind the gate.
    Continue to Place de Rhin et Danube and turn right into RUE
DE LA FRATERNITE. An attractive Art Nouveau piece of green
ceramic at no. 5 reads ‘l’oeuvre de la bouchée du pain (‘the morsel of
bread charity’), harking back to the days when this neipabourood
shrieked with hunger.
    Turn left into RUE DE L’EGALITE. The corner house at no. 2
is an attractive example of 1920s architecture. Villa du Progrés, to
your right, is also shedding its working-class heritage: the over-
hanging wistaria is a sign of gentrification. No. 10 has been taken
over by Pop Art and resolutely painted orange, bright blue and
apple green. An old-timer was standing idly across the street on
our last visit and we wondered whether he appreciated this artistic
revolution.
   Beyond rue de Mouzaia, the alley becomes Villa de Bellevue and
climbs up the steep slope lined with arching roses, cascading honey-
suckle and some exquisitely decorated bungalows.
   If you are not satiated with lovely sights, you could meander
back through Villa de la Renaissance, Villa du Danube (or Villa
Alexandre Ribot), before turning left into rue David d’Angers,
past Place de Rhin et Danube and along rue Miguel Hidalgo. At the
end of the street a last cluster of alleys commemorates Monet,
Verlaine and Rimbaud. Walk into Villa Claude Monet which
boasts an ‘Anglo-Norman’ chalet with a substantial terrace over-
looking a steep flight of steps. Villa des Boers, across the street,
                                   251
                      19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


allows no cars. Its elegant street-lamps and the church-tower of
Saint-Francois-d’Assise in the background make for a lovely
picture. Built in 1902, the alley commemorates the Boer War, when
 France sided, naturally, against the British.

Turn right into rue Compans, left into rue d’Hautpoul and left
again into rue de Crimée, which will take you to the entrance to les
 Buttes-Chaumont at Métro Botzaris. Old-time France is ever
 present on the tree-planted stretch along rue Botzaris, where its
 representatives gather daily for a game of boules.
    Les Buttes-Chaumont_ are unquestionably among the most
Aeautiful..gardens in Paris and also among the        least polluted.
 However, a pleasing landscape it was not in 1864, when Napoleon
 III commissioned his inevitable Alphand to use his creative
 imagination and turn a dusty wasteland in the newly annexed
 territory of eastern Paris into a garden worthy of his capital, ‘Les
 Tuileries du Peuple’. Unlike his wife, the Emperor was sincerely
 affected by the plight of the unde            ;          so hoped to
a rort
     socialunseatbrprowtltne TNERTWNISSTSTEATEhvironerent. It
took Alphand seven yearsleConverTTRE TWH TENESGISS into
gardens of dramatic beauty, fit for the most extravagantly Romantic
poet; quite a feat, for the site consisted of disused gypsum quarries,
cleaned out after a century of intensive activity. The quarries were
known as les carriéres d’Amérique or du Mississippi, because their
plaster was exported to North America. It took more than 1,000
workmen, 100 horses, 400 small trucks, two steam engines and
much dynamite to prepare the ground, after which more than
200,000 cubic metres of earth had to be brought to the site. 5,000
metres of footpaths were then laid out, followed by an artificial lake,
fed by the waters of the Bassin de la Villette. Then came a brick
bridge, then a suspension bridge, both linking the mainland with a
dramatic cliffrising from the water. A grotto anda roaring waterfall
followed and, to crown it all, an overpowering folly topping the cliff
~a charmingly blatant copy of the Temple of the Sibylle in Tivoli.
   Alphand capitalised on the rugged, uneven surface of the gard-
ens and alternated mineral and vegetal matter to achieve his goal,
which he defined as follows: ‘The stroller can see the landscape
change as he goes along. Except for some prominent and open sites,
he should be unaware of the city.’ What Alphand could not foresee,

                                  252
                                   ——


                          Les Buttes-Chaumont

however, were the jarring low-rent high-rises that now mar the
otherwise idyllic landscape. Nor did he foresee that his suspension
bridge would become a focus for the desperate, the ‘suicide’s
Mecca’, according to the poet Louis Aragon, who wrote the
following lines: ‘Et je reviens vers cette arche jetée vers une ile ott jadis
on cherchait la mort avec ferveur (‘And I come back towards this
arch thrown out towards an island where death was once fervently
sought.’) Nowadays the bridge is protected by parapets, which are
easily surmountable, but no one comes to jump here any more.

Leave the gardens on their northern side, at PLACE ARMAND
CARREL. Here stands the festive, confident Mairie of Flemish
inspiration, built by the Third Republic as a promise of future

                                     253
                     19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


bounty, a promise which is definitely being fulfilled at present in
the vicinity of les Buttes Chaumont. This you will notice as you
walk west along the park on rue Manin, along Avenue Mathurin
Moreau to your right and into RUE GEORGES-LARDENNOIS
on your left, home of two public figures of contemporary France —
Jean-Paul Goude, the conceptual inspiration of the 1989 Bicent-
ennial splash-happening on the Champs-Elysées, and Patrick
Dupont, the director of the Paris Opera Ballet Company. (The
street can also be reached up a steep flight of steps between nos 17
and 19 rue Manin, along the park). Jean-Paul Goude’s multi-
million-franc palatial home is in an elevated position with a
spectacular view overlooking Montmartre. How remote it all is
from the sinister Place du Combat that lay until 1850 between the
present Avenue Mathurin Moreau, rue des Meaux and rue des
Chaufouniers, a stone’s throw away. It was set up in the late 18th
century as an arena for staging animal fights. A vociferous mob,
baying for blood, would urge on the most ferocious animals as they
tore one another apart: dogs against wolves, dogs against bears,
dogs against dogs, most often dogs against bulls. Betting was part
of the fun, and even some snobs from western Paris occasionally
came here in search of a low-life thrill.

Not much further away, on the corner of the present AVENUE
SECRETAN and RUE DE MEAUX (which can be reached
through the pleasant, leafy Avenue Simone Bolivar to your right),
on the site of the present market of La Villette, was the city’s dump
until 1850, la Grande Voierie, a cesspool reeking with the stench of
the fecal matter of Paris which was turned here into manure called
poudrette. Furthermore, all the ageing or sickly horses of the
capital (up to 15,000 a year!) were brought here to be put down.
The poor beasts’ hair, bowels and hide were used by tanners,
saddlers, violin-string and -bow makers. The rest was left for the
neighbourhood’s hordes of rats, which meticulously took care of
the pickings, leaving the ghastly abandoned carcasses to decay in
this abominable seat of disease and infection.
   From 1761 this had also been the site of the second gallows of
Montfaucon, which replaced the notorious gallows in the 10th
arrondissement — four sinister stone pillars surrounded by a moat,
where the bodies of those denied Christian burial were also laid by

                                 254
                              LA VILETTE


night. With the advent of the guillotine the gallows fell into disuse
and was eventually torn down in 1823. Some of the stones were
used to build the dump and others for the construction of the
parapet of the Canal Saint-Martin.
   By 1868, the neighbouring ‘arena’ on Place du Combat and la
Grande Voirie had been gone for nearly 20 years and an iron
structure was put up here to shelter a new market, similar to the
other market ‘pavilions’ scattered in Paris by Napoleon III. This
one was built by Baltard’s collaborator, Jolly, and was saved from
demolition in the 1950s by the determination of the neighbours. At
present, however, the market seems threatened _by its own leth-
ar                      asser-by   can still enjoy ite eal ee
ced i eum codSa
             Secrétan, itsel
                     eT      f'amarketplace
                                    eT of
 orts,   lined with bountiful food stalls and   tee              ers.
