17th Arr: Epinettes to Batignolles

           FROM EPINETTES TO BATIGNOLLES

Lying east of the railway line — the wrong side — this area contains
no trace of wealth, no evidence of past glory, no sign of social
recognition, but you will be treading the soil where the first shoots
of Impressionism appeared.

Start out from PLACE DE CLICHY, now the central roundabout
ofa busy commercial neighbourhood on the cheap side. In the early
20th century, Place de Clichy was a strategic junction between the
Bois de Boulogne and Montmartre, society’s two centres of gravity.
Brasseries proliferated here consequently, a few of which are still
holding their own around the Place, lit up by neon lights at night.

                                 179
               ST-JOSEPH DE:
                 EPINETTES


                           hy
                  f
                           S)
                   cS)
                     (af




   Walk into AVENUE DE CLICHY. The very plush La Taverne
de Paris was located at no. 3, just off the Place; it was decorated by
the most prestigious artists of Belle Epoque Paris — Steinlen,
Willette and Chéret.
  At no. 7 stood Le Pére Lathuille — known worldwide thanks to
Manet’s painting — which went back to 1765. At the time it was one
of the many guinguettes (open-air taverns) that sprang up beyond
the toll barriers of Paris, where on Sundays and holidays lower-
class Parisians gained a sense of freedom by way of cheap wine. By
1790, some substantial dishes were added to the menu — lapin sauté

                                 180
                  EPINETTES    — BATIGNOLLES


and sole Moncey — which could be eaten in merry company, under
the branches of lilac trees, all the more exquisite in the month of
May, when in bloom. Not surprisingly, it became a very popular
establishment, often chosen for wedding banquets. On 30 March
1814, the place actually made the headlines and entered history
books, when General Moncey, in charge of the defence of the
Clichy barrier against the Allied forces, set up his command in this
restaurant, a source of inspiration to Horace Vernet, who used it as
backdrop for his painting La Bataille de Clichy (1820). The patron
proved himself both patriotic and generous, feeding the troops
abundantly and, above all, distributing to them his entire wine
cellar — the ultimate act of heroism!
   A less idyllic picture of the establishment is supplied by the
caustic pen of a 19th-century writer who qualified its wine as suit-
able ‘for washing the feet of horses’. The tables, he wrote, were
wobbly and about to collapse and its countryside was reduced
to ‘one stump of Virginia Creeper, three nasturtiums and four
Spanish beans’. He went on to describe its female clientele as Miss
Lonelyhearts, ‘misunderstood beauties’ of ‘missed opportunities’
and ‘lost futures’, not unlike Manet’s buttoned-up model, whom
the lecherous suitor tries to loosen up. The latter was in fact the
patron’s son, Louis Gauthier-Lathuille, from the Dragons regi-
ment, who happened to be on leave in July 1879, when Manet
stumbled on him in front of his house. Impressed by his dashing
uniform, the painter wanted to fix it on canvas. By 1906 the estab-
lishment was converted into a café-concert, Le Kursaal, where such
popular singers as Fréhel and Maurice Chevalier performed. The
vogue of the café-concert was shortlived, overtaken by the cinema.
In 1928, a first picture house was opened here, with the promising
name of Eden, followed a few years later by another with a no less
significant name, Les Mirages.
   Manet’s presence on Avenue de Clichy was no coincidence, for
he had been frequenting the Café Guerbois at no. 9 (then no. 11,
Grande-Rue des Batignolles) since 1863. Manet liked this typical
suburban café, with its provincial decoration in Empire style, com-
plete with five billiard tables, a garden and a bower, and got into
the habit of stopping here every evening when he finished working
in his studio. Here too the atmosphere was pastoral, so unlike that
of the city centre, yet so close. Duranty, one of the eccentric
                                 181
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


characters who, along with the Impressionist clique, gravitated
around the Guerbois, said, ‘It’s Dutch-looking, it’s odd, it’s quite a
way from Paris.’ The latter soon joined forces with Manet to make
this their headquarters, a laboratory where new ideas fermented
and would bring about a revolution in painting. The gatherings at
Café Guerbois and the entrance of the Impressionists into public
life both occurred in 1863, the year that thus marked the official
beginning of their movement.
    This was also the year of the first Salon des Refusés, initiated by
Napoléon III after the panel of the official Salon had declined to
exhibit thousands of paintings. The Emperor, who prided himself
on his liberal and open-minded attitude, wished to give the reject-
ed artists the same opportunity enjoyed by other artists, and de-
creed that they be allowed to exhibit in the Palais de l’Industrie (see
chapter on the 8th arr.), in galleries adjacent to those of the official
Salon, and be allocated the same amount of space. The public
should judge for themselves! This was of course to ignore the fact
that the public —largely uncultivated nouveaux riches —had neither
the finesse nor the experience to form their own judgements, and
blindly followed the tyranny of officialdom. The Impressionists —
Manet, Pissarro, Cézanne, and also their friends such as Whistler
and Fantin-Latour — made the same mistake and naively jumped at
the opportunity, only to become the laughing-stock of Paris.
Manet provoked an outrage with his Déjeuner sur ’herbe and its
scandalous nude — not an ethereal, mythical nude but a real flesh-
and-blood nude, lying on the grass among the picnic things,
surrounded by men in their town outfits. Worse was to come the
following year with his Olympia, depicting an odalisque sprawling
shamelessly on a bed, her clothing scattered around on the floor.
But at least the Salon des Refusés gave valuable publicity to the
clique from Batignolles and ensured that Manet’s name would
never be forgotten. This was exactly the tactic suggested by Zola,
an energetic regular at Le Guerbois and a tireless spokesman for
the Ecole des Batignolles — to shock the bourgeoisie. Manet, how-
ever, never wished to shock the bourgeoisie and would have
preferred its approval; if his art was revolutionary, it was not his
intention to be that himself.
   The Prussian War was to disperse the friends for a while. The
generous Frédéric Bazille never came back. After the war, Le

                                  182
                  EPINETTES     — BATIGNOLLES


Guerbois lost its appeal and was superseded by La Nouvelle
Athénes, more   centrally located, in the 9th arrondissement. A
generation later the Brasserie Muller opened on the site, followed
in recent times by a junk clothes shop, much the same as the many
others that now line the Avenue de Clichy. You can catch bus no. 81
along the Avenue and get off at GUY-MOQUET.

Cross over into the perpendicular RUE DE LA JONQUIERE, a
provincial street, winding through the humble village of Epinettes.
The name Epinettes may have meant “cheap wine’, of which there
was plenty in these parts. Rue des Moines on your left
commemorates the monks of Saint-Denis, who used what was
then a dirt road for their processions. The parallel rue des Dames
was used by the nuns of the Abbey of Montmartre on the same
occasions. As two parallels never meet, the idea was that female
and male servants of the Lord would not meet either, so as to avoid
undesirable consequences.

Continue along rue de La Jonquiére and take the third turning to
the left — a leafy place of enchantment, deservedly named La Cité
des Fleurs. Unlike many other such nooks, which are jealously
closed to outsiders, here everyone is welcome, as is shown by the
presence of the parish church of Saint-Joseph, an early 20th-cen-
tury domed edifice of reinforced concrete, sober, unassuming but
luminous and in impeccably good taste.
    In 1847 the owners of this strip of land imposed strict but bene-
ficial regulations on each buyer, so as to ensure a pastoral
environment. Every house had to have a front garden, with three
flower-yielding trees. Houses, fences and gates had to conform to
the same standard proportions, but otherwise each proprietor was
free to choose for his house the architectural style he wished. In-
deed, there is a proliferation of styles here, including combinations
of all the ‘neo’ variants possible, with an evident predilection for
the Italianate. Such a lovely street was bound to attract artists,
among them Alfred Sisley, whose studio was at no. 27, the home of
his mistress. During the last war some members of the Resistance
also spied out this remote nook, believing the neo-Venetian facade
of no. 25 would look innocent enough to provide cover for a
printing house for forged papers. The vigilant Gestapo tracked
                                 183
                      17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


them down nonetheless, rounded up all those who were present
and shot them on the spot.
    Turn left into Avenue de Clichy and right into RUE DE LA
CONDAMINE, where the village of Batignolles begins, still
sleepy on Saturday and Sunday afternoons. Unlike the streets of
the Plaine Monceau and those around Boulevard Berthier, which
glorify their Pompier painters, here it is the names of real-estate
developers that tend to be commemorated, the artists of Batign-
olles having not yet gained public recognition. Thus Zola had a
bungalow at no. 14 and Auguste Renoir shared a studio with his
close friend Bazille at no. 9 (7 rue de la Paix at the time). Bazille was
a very generous friend, always ready to support his needy com-
panions with the substantial allowance he received from his well-
to-do family, and often he put Sisley up in his studio. Renoir felt
Bazille’s death in the Prussian War very keenly for the rest of his
life. The house still stands, though hermetically closed to out-
siders.

You may wish to walk into RUE NOLLET, as drowsy today as it
was between 1865 and 1870, when Verlaine lived at no. 10, feeling
rather unhappy in this petit bourgeois atmosphere. The cartoonist
Cham, born the Vicomte Amédée de La Noé, lived at no. 5. The son
of a French Peer from rue du Bac, on the aristocratic Faubourg
Saint-Germain, the Viscount refused to give up his artistic pur-
suits, to his father’s horror, and joined the poor artists’ stronghold
at Batignolles, adopting the name of Noah’s renegade son, Ham
(Cham in French). He also abducted his family’s cook, whom he
was later to marry. The gatherings in his house included Emile
Zola, obviously, but also the militant journalist Henri Rochefort,
who, despite a working-class partisanship, was later to rally the
right wing over the Dreyfus Case. Beyond rue Nollet, at no. 52 rue
de la Condamine still stands a shabby-looking hotel, where Edvard
Munch stayed at the beginning of the century.

Turn right into RUE TRUFFAUT, the heart of Batignolles, whose
inhabitants were derided by many a Parisian as the occupants of
small dwellings in keeping with their small horizons. A few build-
ings are worth noticing, notably the six-storey one at no. 33, en-
hanced by some blue touches on its brick facade, emulating the

                                  184
                   EPINETTES     — BATIGNOLLES


better-off hétels in the western parts, or the charming no. 54 with
its pleasant backyard, tended with the utmost care by generations
of pensioners. Notice also the characteristic double flight of steps
at nos 62/64 and the concierge’s charming lodge, the size of a
closet. Unfortunately, the little Mairie that was built here in 1830,
when Monceau and Batignolles were briefly united into one sub-
urb, has been demolished — more’s the pity, since it was considered
one of the loveliest suburban Mairies around Paris. A hideous
building now houses the Mairie at 16—20 rue des Batignolles.

Turn left into rue Legendre, and left again into RUE LAMANDE,
displaying a Louis-Philippe facade at no. 12. No. 11/13 still houses the
Polish school, originally opened for émigrés during the troubled
days of 1830. Turn right into rue Bridaine and right again into RUE
DES BATIGNOLLES,           the home of Edouard Manet throughout
his career (like Renoir, he kept his home separated from his
studios). Ahead is the white, provincial church of Sainte-Marie (so
called because during its construction a 25-cm bronze statuette of
the Virgin and Child was unearthed on the site). It was built in 1828
by Eugéne Lequeux, when the church of Saint-Charlesat 22 rue
Legendre could no longer contain the growing number of parish-
ioners of Batignolles. This was not an easy venture, for Batignolles
was not a rich man’s haven, and although Charles X and the
Duchesse d’Angouléme helped raise the funds for the venture, for
several years it had only a simple nave. Worse — it did not even have
a bell tower, of which the locals were thoroughly ashamed: ‘Is this a
church that has no tower and consequently has no means of calling
the faithful together for prayer?’, protested a member of the com-
mittee in 1844. The bell itself proved altogether a humiliating issue.
There were claims that it had been brought over from the little
chapel of rue Legendre: ‘Doesn’t its only bell resemble those used in
harbours to gather the workers?’, it was asked. As a matter of fact,
while the bell was being serviced in 1985 it emerged that it had a
prestigious pedigree, having been cast in 1851 in the foundry of
Hildebrand, purveyor to the Emperor. In 1888 the statuette of Mary
was stolen and was never retrieved. Another Mary now rises above
the altar, gloriously illuminated by the rays of the sun.
   The little white church is set in exquisite provincial surround-
ings, taking you back several decades. In front of the church a
                                  185
                     17TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


picturesque crescent is lined with quaint houses; a pretty modern
salon de thé and the old Café du Lion d’Or stand side by side, the
latter’s red awnings adding a cheerful touch to the drowsy street.
