13th Arr: Overview

    THE 13TH ARRONDISSEMENT
  A stroller forty years ago penetrating beyond La Salpétriére
  by way of the Boulevard de lHépital . . . would have come to
  a region where Paris seemed to disappear.
                                      Les Misérables, Victor Hugo, 1862

O NLY a few years ago most people would have agreed with
Victor Hugo — some may do to this day. Despite its conspicuous
high-rise buildings, to many, the 13th has remained a “no man’s
land’. Few outsiders venture here; guidebooks hardly mention the
area, except for the Gobelins workshops, which are on the north-
ern edge of the arrondissement and mercifully close to the ‘civilis-
ed’ 5th. In short, an uninviting neighbourhood most Parisians
avoided until recently and most tourists have never heard of.
   Many would still agree with the rest of Victor Hugo’s descrip-
tion: ‘By day the place was ugly. In the evening it was melancholy.
At night it was sinister.’ The waves of Far East Asian war refugees
who arrived in Paris in the mid-1970s did not pay attention to such
details. A dismal high-rise compound of concrete in the south-east
of the arrondissement, repugnant to the conservative French who
had not yet come to terms with American-style urbanisation, was a
godsend to them. In no time they turned the area bounded by the
Avenues d’Ivry and Choisy and the Boulevard Masséna into the
biggest Chinatown in Paris, Le Triangle Jaune as it has come to be
known, with a population of 30,000 out of the arrondissement’s
total of 190,000. With their multitude of inexpensive, no-nonsense
restaurants, they brought the out-of-the-way, unsightly 13th to the
attention of Parisians, livened up its bleak arteries and almost
overnight put it on the map.

In pre-industrial days this was a land of green pastures, of scattered
windmills, and of vineyards watered by the meandering Biévre as
reported by one of its inhabitants:
                 Le liquide puisé au tonneau d’Ivry
                 me chatouille d’une maniere suave
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


              The liquid drawn from the wine-cask at Ivry
              gently titillates my palate.
A few other villages already stood here in the early Middle Ages —
Gentilly, Arcueil and Saint-Marceau (or Marcel). Later the great
Renaissance poet Ronsard used to meet his poet friends under the
bowers of Saint-Marcel or take a leisurely stroll through the
countryside to Arcueil. Ronsard was pining at the time after the
young but married Geneviéve, a native of the future arrondisse-
ment, and it was for the love of her that he drank his fill so as to
forget his pangs:
                  Go to Harcueil hereafter,
                  Put the table as close as may
                  By the fountain.
                  Put hither the bottle full,
                  Then for ever
                  Pour wine into my glass,
                  To strangle the memory
                  Of my troubles after drinking.
    Geneviéve’s husband was either the owner of one of the area’s
guinguettes (open-air taverns) or the concierge of the prison of the
borough of Saint-Marceau. It was named after Marcel, the ninth
bishop of Paris in the 5th century, when it was still a very small
village, but by the second half of the 12th century it was a sizeable
borough and was even confirmed as an independent borough by a
parliamentary decree in 1296. As such it was exempted from
Parisian taxation and entitled to its own prison.
    It had begun as one of the very early Christian settlements of
Paris, as revealed in the 17th century by excavations undertaken in
the vicinity of the present Gobelins cross-roads of a Christian
cemetery with 1,000 graves, dating from the 3rd century. Indeed,
lying on the southern gateway of Paris, this was where the early
Christians settled having made their way through France from the
Mediterranean shores. Two centuries later Marcel was the inspir-
ing leader of the Christian community of Paris. Born next to Notre-
Dame in 360 AD, he had played an active role in the conversion of
heathens. His natural ascendancy was such that even a monstrous
dragon was forced into submission by him. In Le Miroir historial
Vincent de Beauvais reports that the horrific beast made its way

                                    4
                           INTRODUCTION


into the above-mentioned Christian cemetery, sowing terror
among the inhabitants. However, the charismatic Bishop Marcel
came to their rescue and prayed on their behalf, after which ‘the
dragon lowered its head and applauded with its tail with great
humility, imploring mercy.’ At this point Marcel dealt him three
strokes on the head with his crook and led him three miles out of
town. He then admonished ‘the enemy from hell’ to disappear: ‘Ou
ten vas au désert, ou ten vas jeter a la mer(‘either you clear off into
the desert or you throw yourself into the sea’). The beast plunged
into the river at once ‘et de lui jamais plus ne fut nouvelle (‘and was
never heard of again’). Soon pictures of the holy man were hung on
gables and street corners and when he died on 1 November 436,
huge throngs streamed to the chapel of Saint-Clément, just south of
the present Boulevard Saint-Marcel, where his body was exposed,
all the more so, as he continued to heal the sick even after his death.
No wonder he was offered a magnificent reliquary, as Madame de
Sévigné reported in the 17th century. On Ascension Day, she wrote,
the reliquary would be carried by the goldsmiths’ guild to Notre-
Dame, together with the reliquary of Saint Genevieve, the Patron of
Paris, ‘la plus belle chose du monde’ (‘the most beautiful thing in the
world’), according to Sévigné, covered with more than 2,000 gems.
The memory of the evil dragon was still alive as recently as the 18th
century, when sweets were sold outside the Hétel-Dieu hospital
(next to Notre-Dame) in a dragon-shaped wicker basket. The holy
man’s name not only honours a boulevard and a Métro station, but
his bishop’s mitre also decorates the coat of arms of the 13th
arrondissement, despite this being a secular administration.

This land of bucolic retreat, through which Rabelais led Pantagruel
on his way to the library of Saint-Victor, where J.J. Rousseau liked
to gather plants and which Watteau immortalised in his idyllic
landscapes, notably in his famous painting Voyage a Cythére, had
nonetheless been marked for doom already in the 13th century.
Paradoxically, it was the lovely Biévre that was its undoing,
attracting to its banks all the most polluting activities, in particular
from the 17th century on, when these were expelled from the banks
of the Seine in the heart of the city. Butchers were the first to settle
here and dump their trash into the river, followed by tanners,
curriers, cobblers, and later by dyers, weavers, laundresses and

                                   5
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


others, who transformed this happy watercourse, once frequented
by diligent beavers (biévres) into a dark, oozing river of hell — ‘un
fumier qui bouge’ (‘oozing dung’) according to Huysmans; ‘cette
salope de petite riviére’ (‘this slut of a river’), according to Edmond
de Goncourt. Even Rabelais had no kind words for the Biévre and
said that this ‘Parisian Lady’ was peed into by dogs, although a
contemporary claimed that it was not the dogs but the students of
the University who were actually paid to water her in this way. Up
river, however, the waters maintained their purity and we know
that Madame de Maintenon relished its crayfish.
   Among the artisans who settled on its banks was the dyer Jehan
de Gobelin, who may have come from Bruges, a city reputed for
the expertise of its dyers, or from Reims as some historians are
inclined to believe. He arrived at Faubourg Saint-Marcel in August
1443 and on the 23rd of that month rented a house on the banks
of the river with the sign “The Swan’ affixed to it. Here he started
what in the 17th century was to become the celebrated Gobelins
manufactory, famous throughout the continent for its glorious
tapestries. However, Jehan de Gobelin was no tapestry-maker but
merely a dyer, which was why he had settled by the Biévre, to make
use of its waters. When he discovered a much-prized durable scar-
let dye, jealous tongues accused him of having contracted a pact
with the Devil. In fact, it was the salty quality of the river’s water
that helped him obtain this dye and the title of ‘teinturier en
écarlate’ (‘scarlet dyer’). Jehan de Gobelin had 13 children, which
was no special feat in those days, but it put him at the head of a
large dynasty who lived on well into the second half of the 17th
century. By then its members had gathered much wealth and had
bartered their trade for financial or military careers, purchasing
titles of nobility or buying high offices as magistrates. Having sold
their property, they moved to the fashionable Marais, happy to
leave behind the polluted Biévre whose waters, into which the
Gobelins workshops dipped, were as black as ink, according to the
satirical poet Claude Le Petit, who wrote in 1668 that ‘the black-
skinned Devil, being too hot in Purgatory, comes to bathe here
in the summer.’ He also blamed the Gobelins for their share of
responsibility in this ecological disaster:
                    Crest la le sieur Gobelin,
                    Qu’il est sale et qu’il est vilain!
                                     6
                         INTRODUCTION


                  There is master Gobelin,
                  How dirty and how ugly he is!
   The last descendant of the dynasty, Antoine de Gobelin, became
the Marquis de Brinvilliers, husband of the notorious mass poi-
soner, who, rather than providing her family with heirs, chose to
eliminate its members, hoping to inherit the lot (see chapter on the
4th arr.).
   When Antoine’s ancestor Jehan had arrived here over two cen-
turies earlier, the Flemish dyers were not the only foreign group
living in Faubourg Saint-Marcel. The English too were present, as
an occupying force in the aftermath of the Hundred Years War,
and like the rest of the population liked to frequent its taverns.
They preferred their own ale, however, and tried to introduce it
among the natives, with apparently little success: the latter
snubbed their barley-based drink and clung persistently to their
own Dionysian customs and to their ‘vinetum sancti Marcelli’.
They did, however, retain the name of the new beverage — ‘good
ale’ — which, as true Frenchmen, they distorted into ‘godale’, and
then again into ‘godailler’ (‘to booze’). Jehan de Gobelin, on the
other hand, because of his Flemish origins, was accustomed to
drinking beer and even opened a brewery on the banks of the river
for the benefit of his employees, most of whom were fellow-
countrymen from Flanders and enjoyed a hearty pint at the end of
a day’s work.
   With so much wine and beer flowing about, the banks of the
foul river attracted the most wretched riff-raff, who whiled away
the hours in unsavoury dives along the river, drowning their mis-
ery in cheap alcohol, engaging in brawls and crime. It was among
the embryonic working class of Faubourg Saint-Antoine (now in
the uth and 12th arrondissements) and among the rabble of the
future 13th, ‘more wicked, more inflammable and more disposed
to mutiny than could be found anywhere else in Paris’, according
to Louis-Sébastien Mercier, that the French Revolution recruited
its zealous hordes of angry followers. Restif de la Bretonne, a con-
temporary of Mercier, described how on the eve of 14 July the
bandits from Faubourg Saint-Marcel passed by his house on their
way to join those of Faubourg Saint-Antoine: ‘Tout cela formait
une tourbe formidable’ (‘All this formed a formidable bog’). And it
was the Patriotes of Faubourg Saint-Marcel who were the first to
                                 7
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


arrive at the Palais des Tuileries on 10 August 1792 and demand the
abdication of the King.
   It was here also that one of the most hideous episodes of the
French Revolution took place, le massacre de La Salpétriére, on the
night of 3/4 September 1792. La Salpétriére, originally a gunpowder
factory (hence its name) set up conveniently opposite the King’s
Great Arsenal across the Seine, was converted at the time of Louis
XIV into a sort of gigantic alms-house, into which were herded
willy-nilly the tramps and vagabonds of Paris, its rascals and rogues,
whores and cut-throats, charlatans and crooks — 40,000 in all out of
a total population of 400,000! This initiative was intended to clear
the streets of vice whilst providing shelter for this wretched portion
of humanity. A royal edict of 27 April 1656 clearly stated the objec-
tive ‘to put an end to beggary and idleness, as being the source of all
disorder’. But the road to hell is paved with good intentions and
what was meant as a charitable institution, where “all the poor
would be gathered on clean premises, so as to be tended to, be
educated and be given an occupation’, turned out to bea diabolical
depot for the dregs of society, an infernal mosaic of human misery.
The feeble-minded and the hardened whore, the offender and the
outlaw, the outcasts and the homeless, the epileptic and the para-
lytic were penned up side by side in this purgatory, the men at
Bicétre, the women at La Salpétriére. And despite the architectural
care bestowed on the establishment by the greatest artists of the day
— Le Vau, Le Muet, Libéral Bruant— who had at their disposal huge
donations from Fouquet, Mazarin and Pompon de Belliévre, and
despite the efforts of its first chaplain and most charitable man in
the kingdom, Saint Vincent de Paul, the institution suffered from
horrendous overcrowding and appalling conditions.
   These deteriorated dramatically after 1680, when, following a
new royal edict, La Salpétriére also became a jail for prostitutes
arrested on the authority ofa sealed letter from the King. Caught in
the net on the streets of Paris, they were driven in carts through
crowds of jeering Parisians to La Salpétriére, where they were pair-
ed off with hardened convicts and shipped off to the New World to
populate its newly conquered territories. The reign of absolutism
had no concern for the suitability of the couples or for their up-
rootedness. Nor did it have much compassion for the mentally de-
ranged, as the Duc de La Rochefoucauld reported after a visit to the

                                   8
                           INTRODUCTION


place: ‘Everything is in a state of neglect to a degree as inconceivable
as it is distressing. All categories of madness are confounded;
chained-up mad women (and there are many of them) are united
with peaceful ones. The latter have to put up permanently with the
horrific spectacle of the contortions and fury of their enraged in-
mates, which they accompany with perpetual screams, and never
enjoy a moment of rest... Here there is no gentleness, no con-
solation, no remedy.’ What the Duke had overlooked (or failed to
mention) was that the building was also overrun by voracious rats.
   On that night of 3/4 September 1792, the unbridled rabble of
Faubourg Saint-Marcel, equipped with their notorious pikes,
assaulted La Salpétriére, initially with the generous intention of
releasing the cruelly detained street-girls. However, with so much
alcohol flowing in their veins, by the time they reached La Salpét-
riére their brutish instincts got the better of them and the enterprise
turned into an unutterable orgy of blood. Whereas 183 prostitutes
were   indeed released and hailed by the mob, 45 dishevelled,
mentally-deranged women were dragged into the street and
massacred in view of all. This prompted Madame Roland, hitherto
a great supporter of the Revolution, to write in her Memoirs that the
Revolution ‘has been stained by villains and become hideous’.

With the coming of the Industrial Age the 13th arrondissement was
predisposed to house the new workshops and factories of southern
Paris. The rural stretches that had so far partly redeemed it and had
made it congenial to Rousseau and Watteau were now choked by
smoke and soot from chimney-stacks and packed with squalid
hovels — ‘a makeshift collection of planks held together by crudely
cut cross-bars’, as Victor Hugo wrote in Les Misérables. House-
holds of a dozen people would cram into these damp shacks, a few
of them often having to share one bed — when there was a bed.
Usually the floor and a bit-of straw would do. Cardboard replaced
window panes, running water and toilets were unheard of — trash
was simply thrown into the Biévre, where it had accumulated for
centuries, until the river was no more than an open-air sewer,
spreading pestilence and epidemics, notably the cholera epidemics
of 1832 and 1849 which hit the 13th arrondissement in particular. In
1905/6 the municipal authorities decided to cover over this health
hazard, thus wiping the poor Biévre off the face of Paris and out of

                                   9
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


the memory of future generations. Today one has to travel to
Verriéres-les-Buisson, south of Paris, to see the Biévre flow in the
open air.
   Attempts to improve the environment of the 13th arrondisse-
ment and amend past errors, in the second half of the 20th century,
have not turned out to be a success. Undoubtedly it was necessary
to clear the area of its insalubrious streets, but the drab, unimag-
inative tenement houses that have replaced them are hardly more
inviting, while the concrete high-rise buildings only mar the
arrondissement further by jarring its skyline.
   From the 1970s on, the 13th arrondissement has been showered
with new projects, many of which have been completed and most of
which give the impression of a replastering or patching-up job. In
an effort to promote the arrondissement and give it a cultural
dimension, a new branch of the university of Paris opened here,
Paris I—Tolbiac, specialising in law and economics, but it too is just
another vertical, unsightly construction. The 13th also takes pride in
its Médiathéque—a book, record and video library, named after the
late film director Jean-Pierre Melville, which opened in July 1989.
Boasting 200,000 volumes on every imaginable field of knowledge,
and every modern means of communication, it was meant to
become a cultural magnet but, being situated in an unappealing
neighbourhood, it draws few outsiders. The Grand Ecran on Place
d'Italie is a multi-media hall with a three-dimensional giant cinema
screen, the largest in the capital. Its deliberately contemporary
structure boldly points to the sky, trying to look like some space-
craft. Whatever its architectural merits may be, it positively kills the
general harmony of Place d’Italie, which still prevailed until a
couple of decades ago; however humble, it was preferable to this
high-faluting pretentiousness.
    The Seine—Rive Gauche scheme is the largest urbanisation pro-
ject of the century, involving a stretch of 2.7 km on an area of 137
hectares along the Seine, all the way from the Gare d’Austerlitz to
the Paris ring road, the Boulevard Périphérique. It was elaborated
during the optimistic decade of the 1980s with an initial budget of
22 billion francs and was meant to boost the economy of the arron-
dissement and contribute to the promotion of eastern Paris. How-
ever, with the economic recession of the 1990s, the authorities have
become more cautious and building projects are not at the top of

                                  10
                           INTRODUCTION


their agenda. The final destiny of Seine-Rive Gauche is yet to be
determined, though its high-faluting proclaimed objective is ‘to
blend culture, finance and housing’.
