16th Arr: Around Auteuil

                                               AROUND             AUTEUIL

The old village of Auteuil is best visited on a Wednesday morning,
when the open-air market on Place Jean Lorrain adds to its local
colour. The village had its heyday in the late 17th and 18th centur-
ies, when it lay on the route between Paris and Versailles (hence
the Avenue de Versailles). As one Parisian pointed out at the time,
whereas the Pont-Neuf was the busiest thoroughfare in Paris, this
was the busiest road in all of France.
    Back in the Middle Ages, the wine of Auteuil had gained a rep-
utation that spread beyond the borders of France. A Danish bishop
by the name of Roschild thanked the canons of Notre-Dame for
the excellent quality wine from Auteuil they had sent him as a gift:
‘Vino optimo Altolil’. At the time of Pierre Abélard, students came
to Auteuil to drink its wine and every 22 January — the holy day of
Saint Vincent, patron of the vineyards — was celebrated here with

                                                              120
                          AROUND      AUTEUIL


much rejoicing. But later the wines of Passy and Chaillot began to
compete with it, eventually bringing about its decline.
   Auteuil remained a pleasing rural area into the 2oth century, at
the beginning of which a goat boy could still be seen here with his
flute, milking the goats at the customers’ doorsteps. Maurice, the
son of Edmond Rostand, loved Auteuil ‘because it is already Paris
without quite being so yet’. Even today some old-timers speak of
‘going to Paris’ (aller 4 Paris) — after all, Auteuil, like the rest of the
16th, was not incorporated into the city until 1860. Ten years later it
was still a remote neighbourhood, where Proust’s mother found
shelter and quiet during the Prussian War and the Commune that
followed, away from the famine and bloodshed of Paris. She
moved to her uncle’s house at 96 rue La Fontaine where she gave
birth to the boy Marcel on 10 July 1871.

Start out from LA PLACE DE LA PORTE D’AUTEUIL on the
edge of the Bois de Boulogne, pleasantly enhanced by a pretty
‘chalet’ restaurant and an air of well-being. The Roland-Garros
Tennis Stadium, where the French Open takes place, is a short
walk away in the direction of the Bois, to the west. Two lovely
gardens are also situated in that direction — Le Jardin des Serres
d’ Auteuil and Le Jardin des Poétes, where Homer is honoured
with an oak tree and Dante with a laurel bush.

Retrace your steps and turn left into BOULEVARD DE MONT-
MORENCY, which runs between la Petite Ceinture, the old rail-
way that circles Paris, and the Villa de Montmorency, a ravishing
oasis which opens on to no. 93 (The main entrance is at 12 rue
Poussin, unfortunately barred to outsiders by a female Gardien-
Chef, as she is officially described in bold characters on her little
hut by the entrance barrier). The enclave was built on the site of the
gardens of the Chateau de Boufflers, its alleys following the same
lay-out as those of the old park. The Chateau itself stood on the site
of 60 rue d’Auteuil. The park was landscaped by an English gar-
dener and enchanted visitors, among them Marie-Antoinette, and
on the day of the execution of Louis XVI, his brother, the Comte de
Provence and future Louis XVIII, even came to plant a poplar tree
here. Horace Walpole, on the other hand, found ‘the lawn bearable
but of a green hardly likely to impress an English gentleman’, al-

                                   121
                     16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


though he did admire the view. Walpole complained in general
about the way the French clipped trees to look like broomsticks!
   The Comtesse de Boufflers was the mistress of the Prince de
Conti, the Grand Prior of the Temple, where he held a brilliant
salon. (see chapter on the 3rd arr.). She can be seen among society
in Ollivier’s celebrated engraving of little Wolfgang Amadeus
Mozart playing the harpsichord before the Prince. She was reputed
to be of small virtue, and malevolent tongues even claimed that
she was visited by night by the notorious bandit Cartouche.
Rousseau described her as being ‘cosmopolitan in the lower half of
her body’. She retired to Auteuil in 1776, upon the Prince’s death,
together with her stepdaughter Amélie, the two being knownas the
Dames de Boufflers. Here she maintained the traditions of the
Temple with her brilliant soupers, which were held three times a
week and to each of which she invited 15 illustrious figures —
Rameau, Boucher, Madame de Staél, Turgot and Walpole among
them.
   The two ladies escaped the Revolution with less than a year’s
detention, but they were ruined financially and had to let the
estate. Their tenant was that crafty dodger Talleyrand, the only
prominent figure who managed to wriggle his way through the
successive regimes of those troubled times and die of old age in
1838 — a tour de force! Napoleon was not fooled by him, however,
and qualified him as ‘de la merde dans un bas de soie’ (‘shit in a silk
stocking’). The last landlady of the estate was the Duchesse de
Montmorency, from whom the Pereire brothers bought it in 1852
to make way for the adjacent circular railway (see chapter on the
17th arr.).
   No. 67 Boulevard de Montmorency, an elegant yet at present
shabby-looking house, dozing in the sun under a blanket of Vir-
ginia creeper, was the home of the Goncourt brothers, ‘Le Grenier
Goncourt’ (the “Goncourt Attic’), to which they transferred from
rue Saint-Georges (in the 9th arr.) their collection of earthenware,
bronzes, Far Eastern items and china, drawings and bibelots — an
extraordinary jumble. This also became the seat of the Goncourt
Academy, founded by Edmond de Goncourt to provide a pension
for ten writers who became members of the Academy and were to
award a yearly prize of 5,000 francs for a work of fiction written by
a talented young author. Among the first to be awarded the prize,

                                  122
                         AROUND     AUTEUIL


still during Edmond’s lifetime, were Alphonse Daudet and Huys-
mans. Daudet’s son Léon became a member of the Academy in
1900, replacing his late father.

Retrace your steps to Place de la Porte d’Auteuil and turn left into
RUE D’AUTEUIL, once the village high street, still leading to the
‘village square’ —la Place d’Auteuil—and its church. The Chateau du
Coq, built by Richelieu in the early 17th century, was situated be-
tween nos 63 and 73, a simple country residence or hunting lodge
before Louis XV turned it into a magnificent mansion some hun-
dred years later. Its botanical gardens extended beyond the present
Avenue Murat, part of which now make up the Jardin des Serres
d’Auteuil.
   The house next door, now no. 59, was the home of Madame
Helvétius who bought the property from the painter Quentin La
Tour in 1772. The place was already a stronghold of society at the
time of La Tour— Rousseau, Diderot, D’Alembert, Sophie Arnould,
Fontenelle, Buffon, le Maréchal de Saxe, all came here to have their
portraits painted by La Tour. So did the philosopher Helvétius,
whose literary salon on rue Sainte-Anne (now in the 2nd arron-
dissement) was one of the enlightened centres of Paris. It was to this
house that his grieving widow retired after his death, where, follow-
ing in his footsteps, she perpetuated the salon tradition. Talleyrand,
however, was unimpressed and observed sarcastically, “Everyone
hastened to display his wit, nobody considered gathering any’.
   Madame Helvétius, although no longer in the prime of life — she
was 53 when she moved to Auteuil —was admired and courted by her
guests. Both the minister Turgot and Benjamin Franklin wished to
marty her but she remained faithful to the memory of her husband.
She was, nonetheless, most affected by Turgot’s death and Benja-
min Franklin’s return to America and felt their absence very keenly.
On one occasion Fontenelle, avery close friend who often stayed for
the night, and by then in his nineties, met her unexpectedly in the
morning, when she was still barely dressed. ‘Oh Madam!’ said the
old man, ‘if only Iwere 80!’ John Adams’s wife had a different view.
In one of her letters, the puritanical New Englander wrote how dis-
gusted she was with the lack of propriety of Madame Helvétius —by
then 60 years old — and with the liberties she took with Benjamin
Franklin. Voltaire, another of her admirers, once said, “There are in

                                 123
                     16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


Paris a great number of small coteries presided over by a woman
whose spirit dawns as her beauty declines.’ She certainly proved
him right a couple of years after the Revolution, when Napoleon
paid her a visit and expressed his surprise at the modest extent of her
property. To which the lady replied, ‘General, if only one knew how
much bliss can be contained in a fewacres of land, one would reflect
less about conquering the world.’
   In 1870, these few acres of bliss became the scene of a crime of
major political consequences. The house was occupied at the time
by Prince Pierre Bonaparte, Napoleon III’s cousin. On 10 January
1870, following a political argument between Pierre Bonaparte and
the journalist Victor Noir, the prince pulled out a pistol and shot
the journalist dead. Over 200,000 opponents to the regime took to
the streets. A massive demonstration on the Champs-Elysées took
place during the funeral and was violently repressed by the police,
who arrested the charismatic Henri Rochefort, one of the opposi-
tion’s leaders and chief editor of La Marseillaise. Prince Pierre
Bonaparte himself was politely acquitted on 26 March, which did
not boost the popularity of the regime.

Ahead is PLACE JEAN LORRAIN, previously known as Place de
la Fontaine after its former fountain, which was renowned for the
quality of its water — Louis XV would drink no other during his
stay at the Chateau du Coq. If you have come here on Wednesday
morning, you will savour the colourful atmosphere of the open-air
market. At all times you will enjoy the Wallace Fountain standing
gracefully among shady trees.
   Continue along rue d’Auteuil. At no. 43/47 stood the magnifi-
cent Hétel Antier, also known as the Hotel des Demoiselles de
Verriéres. Today the building on the site belongs to a French oil
company — La Frangaise des Pétroles —- who bought it from the
Rothschilds in 1954. The only way to peep in is through the barrier
at 3 rue Michel-Ange — the inflexible doorkeeper is unlikely to let
you in without written permission.
   Mademoiselle Antier, highly acclaimed as an interpreter of
Lully’s operas, came from Lyons. A determined, cynical social
climber, she made use of her successive or simultaneous lovers
(such as the Farmer General Le Riche de la Popliniére and the
Prince de Carigan) to carry out her designs. Both court and town

                                 124
                        AROUND     AUTEUIL


society were invited here to her dazzling balls, notably to those
held successively in 1744 in honour of the convalescent Louis XV.
    The mansion later belonged to the two gorgeous Verriéres sis-
ters, Marie and Genevieve, whose father, an ordinary café owner by
the name of Rainteau, capitalised on his daughters’ beauty by offer-
ing them up to the renowned Maréchal de Saxe, thus securing their
social ascent. They became actresses — the traditional springboard
into the world—and a theatre holding 400 seats was built in the back
garden, where naughty and otherwise banned plays, unfit for the
eyes of the common people, were staged for the privileged few.
Marie, the brighter of the two, had several children by her different
lovers. One of them was the daughter of the Maréchal de Saxe,
Marie-Aurore, who was adopted by Louis XVI's mother and was la-
ter married to an illegitimate son of Louis XV. Being of poor health,
he died without consummating their marriage. Marie-Aurore then
married Dupin de Francueil, a handsome man by whom she had a
son — Maurice Dupin, who became the father of George Sand! The
American reader might like to know that both John Adams and his
son John Quincy were guests at the Hétel de Verriéres.
   At no. 40 rue d’Auteuil stood until recently a restaurant called
l Auberge du Mouton Blanc, a name perpetuated since the time of
Moliére, when he came here with his friends — Racine, La Fontaine,
Lully, among others. Moliére may have hada place on the corner of
the present rue Théophile Gautier, where his friends may have gath-
ered too—no one knows for sure. These were happy days, according
to Madame de Sévigné, who also took part occasionally in the soup-
ers d’Auteuil and wrote of the Auberge du Mouton Blanc, ‘Combien
gaies ces diableries’ (‘how jolly those devilments’). One time, how-
ever, when everyone had had too much to drink — except Moliére,
who was unwell and had stuck to milk — they went on philosophis-
ing into the night and got on to the subject of man’s wretched con-
dition. They ended up utterly depressed and decided to walk to the
Seine and drown themselves in unison. Moliére, the only sober
member of the group, managed to persuade them to postpone their
act until the following morning, arguing that such a noble deed
should be carried out in broad daylight. The next morning they
revised their plans, as Moliére had anticipated,‘sparing France the
loss of some of her great thinkers and creators. The story was re-
ported by Louis Racine, the playwright’s son. In 1991 Le Batifol, yet
                                 125
                       16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


another all-devouring chain of restaurants, which had already
made a clean sweep of the Jockey, the landmark of Montparnasse’s
nightlife, spread its tentacles to Auteuil. The mural from 1900,
which until then had decorated the wall to the left of the entrance,
has also—alas— disappeared. Inspired by an old engraving, it depict-
ed Moliére at the Auberge du Mouton Blanc, reading from Le
Misanthrope to his circle of friends.
   Cross over. The Lycée Jean-Baptiste Say, stands at the back of a
courtyard on the charmingly villagey corner of 11bis rue d’Auteuil
and rue du Buis, displaying beautiful 18th-century Palladian archi-
tecture.


Retrace your steps and turn into RUE BOILEAU on your left. In
prehistoric times the Seine flowed here, which accounts for the
shells and crocodile teeth unearthed during archaeological digs in
1838. Closer to our era, rue Boileau was one of the three streets of the
old village (together with the present rues d’Auteuil and La Font-
aine) and was known as rue des Garennes. It led to the gallows of
Auteuil which stood close to the present Porte de Saint-Cloud. At
no. 16 stands an attractive 19th-century building, then used asa rest-
house, les Bains d’Auteuil, frequented by such prominent members
of society as Prince Napoléon, Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux, Adolphe
Thiers, Alexandre Dumas, Victor Hugo and Alphonse Daudet.
   A block of flats now stands at no. 26. In the 17th century the site
belonged to Boileau, the author of L’art poétique, after whom the
street is named. Boileau bought the place in 1685, a much larger
property at the time, which expanded even further over the gener-
ations. He seems to have spent here the happiest years of his life,
albeit in poor health, ‘as happy as a king in his solitude, or rather in
his hostelry at Auteuil, according to Racine. He spent much time
playing skittles with his friends and was quite vain about his skill at
the game. Apart from his wife and Racine, his close friend who
dropped in regularly, his companions in residence were his gar-
dener Antoine Riqué and his wife Babet. Boileau clearly held
Antoine in great respect, as the following verse shows:
           Antoine gouverneur de mon jardin d’Auteuil
           Qui dirige chez moi Vif et le chévrefeuille
           Et sur mes espaliers industrieux génie
           Sait si bien exercer Vart de la Quintinie.
                                    126
                          AROUND      AUTEUIL


        Antoine, ruler of my garden at Auteuil
        Who commands at my place the yew and the honeysuckle
        And on my espalier this industrious genius
        practices so well the art of La Quintinie*.
Boileau also kept an old horse, an ass and a cat. However, by 1700
he rarely came here, grieved by the death of Racine the previous
year; he sold the property in 1709 and died in Paris two years later.
When the Regent’s physician Claude Dehaies Gendron came to
live here some time later, his friend Voltaire visited him and was
appalled by this ‘most unsightly shady dive’. He nevertheless laud-
ed it as the seat of Parnassus, so great was his respect for Boileau.
    At no. 38 is the entrance to another ravishing and serene leafy
nook, le Hameau Boileau, to which you will find the gate unlock-
ed, if you avoid coming at weekends or in August. Most of its
houses date from 1825-30, but even the modern blocks of flats are
unobtrusive.

Turn right into RUE CLAUDE LORRAIN and left into the
countrified Avenue Georges Risel at no. 25, part of an enclave
known as La Villa de Mulhouse. It is so narrow it will not take a
car. Avenue de la Frillitre beyond it opens into the tiny Villa
Lorrain, dipped in flowers and the twitter of birds. At no. 57bis rue
Claude Lorrain ahead is the new cemetery of Auteuil, which in
1793 replaced the old cemetery on the present Place d’Auteuil, for
lack of space. Here lie the cartoonist Gavarni, the composer
Gounod, the sculptor Carpeaux and the composer and conductor




                           le Hameau Boileau

     * Jean de la Quintinie, 1626-1688, famous agronomist from Charente

                                    127
                         16TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Musard, a star in his day who made Paris dance to his newly in-
vented quadrille. Madame Helvétius is also buried here, and so is
the heart of her ‘spiritual’ son, the celebrated Dr Cabanis, next to
his wife, Charlotte de Grouchy.

Retrace your steps and continue along rue Charles Marie-Widor,
then turn left into RUE CHARDON-LAGACHE.                          No. 47 opens
into the Villa dela Réunion, where Gavarni spent his last years and
where Carpeaux had his studio. At no. 41 stands lHétel Jassédé,
erected by Hector Guimard in 1893 and decorated with ceramics by
Emile Muller.
    Rue Chardon-Lagache was named after the philanthropists
Pierre-Alfred Chardon and his wife (née Lagache) who founded a
home at no. 1, exclusively for destitute old people. Another such
home, Sainte-Périne, stands at no. 17 and both occupy the beautiful
grounds of the former domain of the Génovéfain Order. The Ros-
sini Foundation, a separate section of the institution at the corner of
rues Wilhem and Mirabeau, was bequeathed by the composer
Rossini for destitute or incurably ill French and Italian singers.
    Continue along rue Chardon-Lagache to PLACE D’AUTEUIL
and its church, leglise d’Auteuil, once the focal point of the village.
Rising in its centre is the mausoleum to the memory of the
Chancelier d’Aguesseau and his wife, which was erected by order of
Louis XV. Despite a short period of disgrace for having opposed the
financial reform introduced at the time of the Regency by the
Scotsman Law” (and rightly, as it turned out), he was one of the
most honoured figures of the reign of Louis XV, and it seems that he
lived for many years in the splendid hétel that now houses the Lycée
Jean-Baptiste Say. The monument marks the site of the old village
churchyard, next to the parish church. It was the priest of Auteuil
who had interceded with Louis XIV on behalf of Moliére’s wife to
allow her husband to have a Christian burial at Saint-Eustache (see
chapters on the ist and 2nd arr.). The first church of Auteuil dated
from the 11th century, but the present one, the work of Vaudremer,
was built only in 1877. Some old houses still stand around Place
d’Auteuil, helping to re-create the old village atmosphere.
    * Controller general of the finances who founded a banking system to eradicate
the exorbitant national debt, but which ended in bankruptcy owing to frantic
speculation.

                                       128
Between Auteuil and Passy further north was an unbuilt stretch of
land which was developed only after the area was annexed to Paris.
Around the turn of the century it provided space for Hector
Guimard and others in his wake to explore a new style of archi-
tecture known as Art Nouveau, disparagingly dubbed style nouille
by Paul Morand because of the spaghetti-shaped lines that charac-
terise it. It was rather the curving forms of nature that Hector
Guimard had in mind, to which bear witness his soft green entran-
ces to the Métro stations. However, a generation later architects
substituted geometric rigour for his natural profusion and invented
Art Deco. Discovering the Art Nouveau and Art Deco heritage in
the neighbourhood will be the main focus of the following walk.

Start at PLACE CLEMENT ADER next to the Maison de Radio
France, home of French National Radio, which also boasts a good
concert hall. Walk into RUE DE BOULAINVILLIERS along its
western side. An elegant house used to stand at no. 15, surrounded
by a pretty garden, which served as a detention centre for the
deserters of the Garde Nationale between 1864 and 1870. It was
nicknamed l’Hétel-des Haricots (beans) because of the unimag-
inative menu it served to its inmates, many of whom were great
celebrities such as Alfred de Musset, Théophile Gautier, Gavarni,
Daumier, Balzac and Baudelaire, who spent their time covering
the walls with witty graffiti and cartoons. An earlier institution was
founded during the Revolution, on the premises of the College
Montaigne in the sth arrondissement, likewise nicknamed Collége
des Haricots — its menu must have been just as unimaginative!
                                 129
                     16TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Turn left into RUE LA       FONTAINE, where, at no. 14, stands one
of Guimard’s best-known buildings in Paris, le Castel Béranger,
built between 1894 and 1898. The artist’s manipulation of the
Gothic style is spectacular (notice the gargoyles and the blend of
animal and vegetal forms, notably on the fountain in the court-
yard). Needless to say, the average mortal was bewildered by his
architecture and the building was nicknamed Castel Dérangé (‘de-
ranged’). Notwithstanding, the City of Paris awarded the facade
first prize, which boosted Guimard’s career overnight. The en-
trance hall, beyond the fabulous wrought-iron gate, is stunning
with its blend of brick and glass and its Gothic staircase. All being
well, you will be able to walk in during week days, although
certainly not at weekends.
                               A later compound was erected
                             across the street in 1911, between RUES
                             GROS and AGAR. Note the attractive
                             plaque carved in the stone in memory
of the actress Agar, who lived in Auteuil between 1870 and 1880 and
after whom the street is named. The spectacular balconies on the
6th floor run throughout the street where everything bears
Guimard’s stamp.
   Continue along rue la Fontaine and turn left into RUE
FRANCOIS-MILLET. At no. 11 is another block of flats built by
Guimard in 1910. Notice on the right corner the pretty garden and
church, now part of an orphanage, reminiscent of a pastoral past.
Back on rue La Fontaine, at no. 60 stands a hétel built by Guimard
in 1912 for a friend.

Turn right into rue Georges Sand and left into AVENUE
MOZART. At no. 122 is the Hétel Guimard, built by the artist for
himself and for his wife, the American painter Adeline
Oppenheim, between 1909 and 1912. He set up his agency on the
ground floor, a studio for his wife in the attic, while the couple’s
apartment was situated on the main floor. Because the house was
built for his own use, Guimard could follow his aspirations, and he
abolished all right angles. Thus the living and dining rooms are
oval in shape. The facade overlooking the side alley, Villa Flore, on
your right, looks almost human! How different from the building
opposite, an Art Deco construction dating from the 1920s.

                                 130
                        AROUND     AUTEUIL


Retrace your steps and turn left into RUE HENRI-HEINE. At the
corner of RUE JASMIN isa much later work by Guimard, built in
1925/6. Turn right into rue Jasmin, a pleasant street with the tiny
Cour and Square Jasmin running into it.
   Turn left into rue de l’Yvette and left into RUE DU
DOCTEUR       BLANCHE. At no. 51 is Le Corbusier’s foundation,
located in the Cubist white villas of Raoul La Roche and Albert
Jeanneret (1923) at the back of a dark, leafy alley. You can see on
display in one of the windows his celebrated deckchair, which
began its long career on this site. The library, which is open to the
public, contains practically all the research work of Le Corbusier.
   Retrace your steps and continue to no. 9 rue du Docteur
Blanche which opens into RUE         MALLET-STEVENS,           another
lovely nook, built in the 1920s by Robert Mallet-Stevens for
himself and for his friends (Mallet-Stevens lived at no. 12, where
he died in 1945), in a style of exemplary purity of line, surround-
ed by a countrified environment. Mallet-Stevens was a great
socialiser and invited Tout-Paris to the inauguration of the alley in
1927.

Continue along rue du Docteur Blanche and turn right into rue de
lAssomption, which commemorates a magnificent convent that
once stood here in exquisite rolling grounds. Walk downhill in the
direction of La Maison de Radio France and turn left into rue de
boulainvilliers and left again into the Hameau de Boulainvilliers, a
tiny remnant of the 8-hectare grounds of the Chateau de Passy.
(The Consulate of the Philippines is now located here, enabling
you to walk in during opening hours).
