Epilogue: The Seine

                         EPILOGUE

                   Passent les jours, passent les années
                   Sous le Pont Mirabeau coule la Seine
                   Pass the days, pass the years
                   Under Mirabeau bridge flows the Seine
                                                 Guillaume Apollinaire


Paris emerged from the Seine at its intersection with the south-
north road. It could have chosen the busy road, through which
travelled copper, pewter, iron, amber and furs as far as the Pyrenees
or the Rhine. It chose the river instead. Today, long after it has been
dethroned by the railway, then the automobile, the boat the early
merchants used to ply its waters still represents the city’s emblem.
Unlike the peaceful present, marred only by zooming car traffic on
either shore, quick blood ran through this artery in earlier times,
reflecting on the nature of the turbulent city, throbbing with a life of
intense activity, of territorial and economic struggles, of fun and
crime, ravaged periodically by the floods of the swelling river.
   In 1760, a time of intense commercial activity, the banks of the
Seine were crowded with as many as 20 ports: wine at La Rapée,
fruit and vegetables at the Arsenal, coal at the Ile Saint Louis,
fodder and fishponds at Pont Marie, corn at the Gréve (Hotel-de-
Ville); a long succession of tiles, bricks, wood, coal, apples and
chestnuts faced them across the river, while oils, wines, flour,
oysters, codfish and herring overflowed at the foot of the Louvre —
a bustling, crammed territory where traders, especially the timber
dealers, fiercely elbowed one another out of the way for extra
space. There was similar wrangling over the water itself. At that
time, when bridges were few and threatened by floods, the
ferrymen enjoyed a monopoly and a right to levy a toll, a privilege
granted by Louis XIV, which the city authorities tried to grab for
themselves. Even leisure boats such as those which took passengers
on a 6-hour journey to Sévres were not allowed to cross the river
from bank to bank. (The 8-hour ride back would necessarily follow
the shore, the boat then being horse-drawn upstream). But the real

                                  297
                               EPILOGUE


threat to the ferrymen came from the passing of time: Paris was
growing and the construction of new bridges could not be post-
poned for long.
    It was only in the 12th century that the first stone bridge was built,
le Petit Pont between Notre Dame and the Left Bank, surmounted
by houses, which, it was hoped, would give it more weight to resist
the floods — to no avail: the Petit Pont was swept away in 1280, 1296
and 1325. The Pont Notre-Dame, between the island and the Right
Bank, was also built of stone but it collapsed in 1499, together with
its 65 houses. A new bridge replaced it in 1512, complete with 68
houses of equal height and harmonious proportions, considered at
the time the most beautiful bridge in Europe. The Grand Pont con-
nected the island with the Chatelet prison, just a little further west;
it became the Pont au Change when Louis VII started to levy rents
there. It went up in flames in 1620 and was replaced by another
bridge soon after. But it was on the brand new Pont Neuf, now the
oldest bridge of Paris (1578-1604), that the city’s lifeblood pulsated:
‘Le Pont Neuf is to the city what the heart is to the human body,’
wrote the 18th-century chronicler Louis-Sebastien Mercier. This
was the stamping-ground of beggars and tramps, rogues and charl-
atans, such as the notorious would-be ‘dentist? Grand Thomas,
who, again in the words of Mercier,
                    ... with his panache
                    Is the best of charlatans
                    A toothache he relieves
                    By pulling out all one’s teeth.

Street performers also congregated here, such as Tabarin, who in
the 17th century delighted his audience with crude jokes from the
top of his trestles. The boat jousts at the foot of the bridge, opposite
the Louvre, were of better taste. The Pont Neuf was also the hunting
ground of the police, teeming with spies in search of those on the
run, and with the military hired to abduct recruits for their ranks.
This was no place for ladies of society, which is why the Pont Royal
was built in 1652 opposite the Tuileries, an indispensable link with
the budding Faubourg Saint Germain across the river. The Pont
Marie and the Pont de la Tournelle became a necessity, too, when
the elegant Ile Saint Louis was being constructed about the same
time.

                                   298
                             EPILOGUE


  The construction of bridges accelerated in the 19th century. Like
many inhabitants of mainland Paris at this time of economic rev-
olution, the ferryman lost his trade. Steamboats took over from
1830 on, and were boosted by the 1867 Universal Exposition, when
they became an ideal mode of transportation to the Champ-de-
Mars, where the fair was held. Following a contest, the boat selected
for the fair was the ‘mouche’, so called because of its propeller.
Others claim it owes its name to the ‘flea’ (puce)-boats on the
Thames, which some French engineer mistook for ‘fly’ (mouche).
Be that as it may, it remains the most famous of Paris’s pleasure
boats to this day. With 3.5 million passengers plying the water
aboard the bateaux-mouches in 1867, the Seine resembled an aquatic
motorway. In 1874 their number was 9 million but by then one had
to fend off fierce competition from the ‘hirondelles’ which had
stepped in in 1874. Worse was to come in 1883, when the bateaux-
express offered a non-stop crossing of the city, sweeping off 850,000
passengers within 100 days! From now on it was free competition
for all and in 1889 33 million passengers took a ride on the Seine.

The boats, of various shapes and sizes, have never lost their appeal,
carrying back and forth their loads of visitors. The loud commen-
taries they spit out in several languages do not exactly enhance the
experience, but the beauty of the banks of the Seine as one glides
along is irreplaceable, and magical when floodlit by night. So much
so that on 10 September 1992 the section between the Pont de Sully
and the Pont d’Jéna was listed by UNESCO as international herit-
age ‘of exceptional universal value’.
   The Pont Mirabeau, albeit the work of Résal, the architect of the
lavish Pont Alexandre III, was excluded from this honour — sculpt-
ed mermaids and all; so was the third island of Paris which lies
between it and the Eiffel Tower, a narrow leafy, uninhabited strip,
barely 11 metres wide, blessed with the name of I’Ile aux Cygnes —
the Island of Swans. Of course, it does not have the glamour of I’lle
de la Cité, nor the sparkle of l’Ile Saint-Louis. Besides, it has no
swans and never had any (these belonged to another island at the
time of Louis XIV, further east, and which no longer exists).
