18th Arr: La Goutte-d'Or

                        LA GOUTTE-D’OR

A tiny patch of Africa transplanted to Paris — La Goutte-d’Or — will
 enchant the adventurous traveller in search of something exotic.
The neighbourhood is also one of the last remnants of genuine
working-class village life. Despite desperate struggles on the part of
local associations to rescue it from the hands of technocrats deter-
mined to “clean up’ the area, demolition has already begun and the
usual characterless buildings of our times are cropping up, notably
the new police station, easily distinguishable by its tricoloured flag.
    Saturday morning is the best time to come here, when the local
population is disproportionately inflated by streams of North
Africans surging into the neighbourhood from the entire Paris area.
The fun begins virtually inside the Métro station of Barbés-
Rochechouart, or even before you get there, during the train ride
itself! When the train pulls in at the station, you will be disgorged
onto the platform and swept along with the human tide through the
station’s long corridors, among a jumble of stalls, vendors and
goods; eventually you will be spilled out into the open air, where the
ever-growing throng continues its inexorable advance, flooding
both causeways and pavements. A closer look will bring to your
attention huge carrier-bags carried by this multitudinous crowd,
each bearing the name TATI. Indeed, TATI is where most of them
are heading, on this their weekly shopping expedition, for TATI is
the main attraction of the intersection of Boulevards Barbés, de
Rochechouart and La Chapelle, loosely referred to as Barbés. This is
the empire of junk clothing, and it has turned Barbés, both above
and below ground, into the most gigantic bazaar in France, where
total chaos prevails. Although this territory has in effect been en-
tirely taken over by the hordes of pedestrians, motorists have not
renounced their right to use the road and make brave attempts to
pass through, only to end up in endless queues of cars and buses. It
is nothing short of amazing that the Paris Transport Authority, the
                                 223
                      18TH ARRONDISSEMENT




 BARBES
 BOULEVARD




                                                         BOULEVARD DE LA




RATP, has not provided an alternative route for buses, at least on
Saturdays.
   TATI is not only the main clothes supplier for the poorer
sections of Paris, it is also the main tourist destination for relatives
from North Africa, who spend the better part of their visit to Paris
burrowing among cheap goods piled up on innumerable counters.
Middle-class French locals also shop at TATI’s occasionally, but
not at Barbés (there are a couple of other shops in the city), and
often for the fun of it — it is always exciting to find a bargain for the
price of a cup of espresso, which will look nice as long as it is new.
   If you want a real taste of the atmosphere, join the crowds and
arrive by Métro, but keep an eagle eye on your belongings. Once on
the street, walk east into BOULEVARD DE LA CHAPELLE,
where a colourful food market is held under the elevated railway
tracks — a pretty sight, though the air is filled with the incessant
clattering of passing trains.

Turn left into RUE DES ISLETTES, where the famous wash-
house of La Goutte-d’Or stood, a red-brick building, reeking with
steam. It is around this working-class hub that the life of Zola’s
Gervaise rotated and from where his Nana set out on her journey

                                  224
                          LA GOUTE-D’OR

 up the echelons of society. La Goulue, a creature of real flesh and
blood, was also the daughter of a laundress from La Goutte d’Or —
 Zola’s characters are all true to life.
    Turn right into RUE DE LA GOUTTE-D’OR, at present pre-
 dominantly North African. The first North Africans came here in
 the early years of the 20th century, but the big wave of immigrants
 arrived in the 1950s, often to work in the automobile industry. By
 the end of the decade the Goutte-d’Or was so heavily populated
with Algerians that it became the headquarters of the FLN during
the Algerian war. Today the street is lined with food stores and
 cafés, but you will rarely see a woman among the customers, even
though some of the goods on display in the shops are clearly there
 for them, notably the candy-coloured, heavily machine-embroi-
 dered fabrics suitable for bridal wear.
    In the middle of this North African enclave, behind an iron gate
at no. 42, is la Villa Poissonniére, an incongruous countrified alley-
way sloping gently down towards you, decked with the same
romantic street lamps as those that decorate la Butte Montmartre: it
seems to have been placed here by mistake. On either side stand
charming old houses, some attractively embellished by ceramics,
each with its exquisite, pocket-size garden filled with the twittering
of birds. The site is believed to have been the property of a wine-
grower when this was open countryside, ideally situated on its
sunny slope rolling gently to the south. Indeed, in the Middle Ages
the wine of La Goutte d’Or had attained such renown that during a
European contest at the time of Saint Louis it shared third prize
with the wines of Alicante and Laconia. The first prize went to
Cyprus, the ‘Pope’ of wines, and the second prize went to Malaga,
the ‘Cardinal’ of wines. The wine of La Goutte d’Or was crowned
the ‘King’ of wines, which also tells us something about the position
of the royal authorities in the hierarchy of medieval Europe and
their struggle to gain independence from Rome. It was customary at
the time for the City of Paris to present the King with wine from La
Goutte d’Or on his birthday.
    The hubbub of present-day reality will hit you as soon as you
step back into rue de la Goutte-d’Or. Ahead, at the intersection of
rues de la Goutte-d’Or and Polonceau, is a pleasantly tree-shaded
triangle where the local men meet socially on a sunny day, re-
creating the atmosphere of their North African homeland.

                                 225
                     18TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


   Turn left into RUE PIERRE-L’ERMITE. The church of Saint-
Bernard de La Chapelle at the end of the street is a 19th-century
copy of a15th-century style. Most Parisians had never heard of this
remote church until the summer of 1996, when it made the head-
 lines as a stronghold of resistance to the energetic measures of
 expulsion taken by the government against African workers de-
void of work permits, known as sans papiers. Having occupied the
 church, they engaged in a long-haul hunger strike, supported by
the media and by a substantial portion of the public and humani-
tarian organisations, members of which joined them in the
 church. Early in the morning of 23 August, they were taken by
surprise, when the police stormed the church and dislodged the
strikers with their customary brutality, heedless of public opinion.
    The sculptured bourgeois facade at no. 3 is evidence that well-
to-do people — successful shopkeepers and suppliers of other
services to the poor — lived so close to the slums. In the courtyard
of no. 4 a climbing vine is a reminder of the time when La Goutte-
d’Or was a hamlet of vine growers.
    Turn right into RUE SAINT-LUC. A pleasant compound built
around a pretty courtyard is to be seen at no. 11.
    RUE CAVE, on your right, honours Monsieur Cavé, an impor-
tant figure in the industrial development of 19th-century France,
and bread-provider to nearly 1,000 inhabitants of La Goutte-d’Or,
who worked in the workshops he set up on the wasteland of La
Chapelle. The son of a poor farmer from Picardy, he had come to
Paris on foot, without a penny to his name. He built a marine steam
engine that increased the speed from Calais to Dover to 13 knots, an
exceptional achievement for those days. Other pioneering indust-
ries were set up here, notably Francois Calla’s foundry, where a
good number of Paris’s street-lamps and monuments were melted
down, such as the pillars of Sainte-Geneviéve’s university library in
the Latin Quarter, some of the fountains of the Champs-Elysées and
Visconti’s lovely fountain at Place Louvois (in the 2nd arr.). There
was also the plant founded by Antoine Pauwel, elected Mayor of La
Chapelle in 1845. In 1856 a young unknown engineer was picked out
by the firm to build the railway bridge of Bordeaux. His name was
Gustave Eiffel.
    A sign reading hétel familial at no. 32 underlines the fact that
this is a territory of uprooted migrants and has been so since the

                                226
                           LA GOUTE-D
                                    OR

reign of Louis-Philippe, when the neighbourhood’s population
shot up from 2,000 to 11,000! The few cottages, notably the one
concealed behind a huge tree and overflowing with rambling ivy at
no. 26, are further reminders of a pastoral past.
   Turn   right into rue    Saint-Jérome    and left into rue Saint-
Mathieu, running north of the church. The pleasant Square Saint-
Bernard in front of the church enhances the small-town drowsy
atmosphere. Beyond is the railway bridge, a gruesome landscape of
steel and iron. Somehow, even in this unlikely Dickensian land-
scape a bright green vine has found itself a place in the sun.
   Retrace your steps and walk north along rue Stephenson. From
the corner of rue Cavé you will get an excellent view of the Sacre-
Coeur and the eastern slope of Montmartre.

Turn left into RUE MYRRAH, the gateway to Black Africa. This is
no Place du Tertre but a genuine neighbourhood catering for gen-
uine locals, who have their traditional African costumes made to
measure, for example at no. 25. Here slender African women walk
down the street in their traditional headdresses and robes, often
with a baby tied to their backs. West Indians have also moved in
here and have opened a fast-food restaurant, Mac Doudou, at no.
42, which serves their own ethnic food. There is also a Bulgarian
restaurant at no. 57, as well as a kosher butcher’s.
