19th Arr: Belleville to Pré-Saint-Gervais

      FROM BELLEVILLE TO PRE-SAINT-GERVAIS

Because Belleville had been a nest of social unrest, the unsym-
pathetic authorities seized the opportunity during the 1860 annex-
ation to run a dividing line through rue de Belleville, its high street,
relegating the northern part to the 19th arrondissement, the south-
ern part to the 20th. The following walk, from the northern part of
Belleville to the suburb of Le Pré-Saint-Gervais, is a strenuous one,
to be undertaken only by the enterprising visitor. If you have come
a long way, you may decide to combine it with the second walk,
which explores the neighbourhood of les Buttes-Chaumont. If
you must opt for one or other of these walks, we suggest you leave
out the first one.




                                  241
                                                                             Aeuajuoy ap "A
                                                                                              Z9g             nooly 3G
                                     1qN'V'A             EL                       eyeury'A                  ia7a4uvd “y
                                aqnueqnp'A    ZL                         SHOUEG ROWERS       S:
                             ausayery 2] ap YL                                aALIOINLLP "Ap
                           aouessreudy eaPp"A            OL                  IpesuoID ep A    €
                                 sqisolgnp’A             6                      sI20g S9P"A    Z~
                                     neaoieyl'A          g                    sorgtyed “VA
ARRONDISSEMENT


                                            t Asissv.d
                                            SIOONVHSLS                                                                                        242
                                                                                                                          NVLSHO3S
                                                                                                                                     SHOUVN
19TH
                                                                \\         Nod.   WH,.G Os
                                                                  anvaNiy A 7,
                        =e                                     ANIVTHNd “A     6
                 aBNod oC                                     anouosv1                  fi
                                                                                   Ys
                                                                                   C2
                  =——   “3gnnva 13
                                                                                                     V"ld
                                                                                                    [f=
                                     3G
                                     “Id
                                     NIHY
               BELLEVILLE     — PRE-SAINT-GERVAIS


Head for PLACE DES FETES, best reached by Métro when com-
ing from the centre of the city. As its straightforward name indic-
ates, this was the centre of festivities of Belleville. As the cinema
became the favourite form of entertainment among working-class
Parisians, it was in Place des Fétes that, in 1907, the first picture-
house opened, in a makeshift conversion of a café, large enough to
seat 200 spectators. Since electricity had not yet reached Belleville, a
gas engine and a dynamo answered the need for energy. Sadly, the
house was torn down the following year to allow for the extension of
the Métro. The 19th arrondissement was in fact the birthplace of the
film industry, for it was in his home at no. 55 rue de la Villette that
Léon Gaumont installed his first studio in 1896, shortly after the first
astonishing, public showing of La sortie de l’usine Lumiere in the
Salon Indien of the Grand Café (see chapter on oth arr.). Belleville
was soon to number a dozen picture-houses, bearing such names as
lEpatant, le Féerique, le Paradis and also Cocorico (after the French
mascot). Place des Fétes was still a picturesque spot 30 years ago,
when it was surrounded by humble, even derelict houses, but which
 kept a low profile and blended in with the unpretentious gardens
 and the picturesque kiosk in the centre. Today, unsightly high-rises
~a rash solution for an acute housing problem — thrust their necks
 impudently upwards. Only on market days — Sunday, Tuesday,
 Friday mornings — is the illusion ofa village féte perpetuated, when
the food stalls, extending full circle round the gardens, make
splashes of bright colours.
    One nook, however, has been salvaged due south of the Place des
Fétes. It is tucked away behind nos 11 and 15 RUE DES FETES and
can be reached through a narrow passage between the two build-
ings. Before walking in, notice the incongruous 17th-century hdtel
at no. 11, proudly displaying its characteristic wrought-iron balcony
and slate roof, a reminder that in pre-industrial days this was a
desirable area where the city dweller could enjoy commanding
views and a healthier air than in central Paris. A number of privileg-
ed Parisians built themselves houses on the heights of Belleville. In
the 18th century, the famous Favart of the Opéra-Comique is
known to have owned at least five different houses here. Even at the
time of Louis-Philippe no one could have predicted the economic
and social upheaval that would cause Belleville’s decline.
   A cobbled passageway at no. 13 leads to an enclave of some 20

                                 243
                     19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


bungalows, on either side of a central alley, each with its own
pocket-size garden. This cité-jardin had the merit of providing a
pleasant environment for people of modest means, quite unlike
the concrete jungles of today. With its picturesque octagonal kiosk
and Art Nouveau glass canopy, venerable shady trees and jumble
of bushes, creepers and flowers, this is now a sought-after oasis of
tranquillity, way beyond the reach of lower-class Parisians.

Retrace your steps. Turn right into RUE AUGUSTIN-THIERRY
where a small garden, le Jardin du Regard de la Lanterne, is named
after the round stone structure on your right, which shelters the first
of several, successive inspection- or peepholes (regards) built above
the medieval aqueduct of Belleville, running here 2.5 metres below
ground level. These were built in order to check the level of the water
and they were always kept locked to prevent the water from being
harnessed or stolen. The opening in its lantern-shaped roofallowed
for the circulation of fresh air, which ensured a better quality of
water. The iron rings that until quite recently were fixed to the wall
served to tie the aldermen’s horses when they came on their annual
inspection round.
   The aqueduct of Belleville was built under Philippe Auguste for
the use of the religious communities of Saint-Martin-des-Champs
and the Temple. However, the King demanded that some of its
water be diverted to the three public fountains of the city, which
were located in the area of Les Halles. Together with the aqueduct
of Pré-Saint-Gervais, which was built at the same time by the
Order of Saint-Lazare, they constituted the bulk of the water
supply of the Right Bank until the early 19th century, which
explains why the inhabitants of Paris disposed of only one litre of
water per day each, and accounts for the filth and stench of the
capital’s streets. The aqueducts were overshadowed by the newly
opened Canal Saint-Martin and fell into disuse altogether in 1865,
when Belgrand endowed Paris with a modern network that piped
water into private homes — more than three centuries after London
had been supplied with the same service!

Turn left into rue Compans and right into RUE DU PRE-
SAINT-GERVAIS, which leads to the former village by the same
name, today a suburb of Paris. You will soon reach the summit of

                                  244
              BELLEVILLE     — PRE-SAINT-GERVAIS


Belleville, 128.5 metres, less than one metre short of the summit of
Montmartre and of Paris, although the Bellevillois swear to the
contrary. Two streets fork out at the junction ahead, rue des Lilas
on your left, rue des Bois on your right. In pre-industrial days, the
area was indeed covered with meadows (prés), woods and lilacs. In
1901 a lovely house of elegant proportions, surrounded by an
exquisite garden, could still be seen on the site of the drab block of
flats at no. 32. This was the country house of Francois Soufflot ‘le
Romain’, nephew of the famous architect of the Panthéon. Other
artists, now less widely known, came to live here too. Among them
were two friends of the writer Eugéne Dabie, the author of Hotel du
Nord, who would have probably also been forgotten had it not
been for the movie made out of his novel by Marcel Carné. Eugéne
Dabie used to come over from the Hétel du Nord by the Canal
Saint-Martin, which was run by his parents. Today all that is left is
a pocketkerchief patch of garden with three ugly concrete benches.

Continue down rue des Bois and turn right into rues Emile
Desvaux and Paul de Kock — an unexpected delight: from an
Anglo-Norman chalet to a copy of Bauhaus, or a fairy-tale crooked
cottage with pink shutters and bright blue frames — every resident
has given vent to his creative individualism and his gardening
talents. Not surprisingly this was a stronghold of painters, who
came to be known as the Ecole du Pré-Saint-Gervais, of whom,
admittedly, few outsiders have ever heard. If you happen to walk
by during the day, you may chance upon Orthodox Jewish school-
boys coming out of their school in these unlikely surroundings,
tangible evidence that the southern part of the arrondissement has
in recent years become a stronghold of Jewish Orthodoxy. You
may have also noticed at the entrance to this enclave the names of
three residents who were shot by the Germans in 1942, 1943 and
1944, respectively, as members of the Resistance — a large number
for such a small enclave, but then this was a patriotic, working-
class area, with strong anti-German feelings going back to the 1870
war. When you leave rue Emile Desvaux you will see on your left
their names indicated once more, not just as victims of the Nazis —
the usual formula in Paris — but of the Bosches! This working-class
life is portrayed in the novels of Paul de Kock, who died in 1871
and after whom one of the streets is named. The self-righteous

                                 245
                      19TH    ARRONDISSEMENT


bourgeoisie of western Paris was shocked by his crude, licentious
literature, which today would make an altar-boy smile.
Admittedly, he did not write great literature, but he was very pro-
lific and produced some 250 works.
    Turn left into rue de Romainville and right into Passage Monte-
negro, a modest alley with crooked paving, a window bursting
with red geraniums at no. 8 and a bright vine climbing at no. 11.

Turn left into RUE HAXO, running downhill due north. From
here you will enjoy a sweeping view of the northern suburbs and the
countryside and understand why the village was once called
Bellevue. Cross over Boulevard de Sérurier and BOULEVARD
D’ALGERIE. The latter traces the zone non aedificandi, the unbuilt
strip of land, 200 metres wide, that surrounded Thiers’s fortifica-
tion walls (the ‘fortifs’) and was known as la zone. Its denizens, the
zonards, ragpickers and other destitute people, vanished only 30
odd years ago when the Boulevard Périphérique was built.
   The fortification walls, built in 1841, ran parallel to the inner toll
walls until the 1860 annexation, when the latter were torn down.
The fortification walls were torn down in their turn in 1919, until
when they also served as substitutes for the toll walls (Boulevard
Sérurier now runs on their site while Boulevard de la Villette, the
south-western border of the 19th arrondissement, has replaced a
section of the old toll walls). In 1914, when the tax collectors posted
at the gates stopped travellers into Paris with the standard
question, ‘Anything to declare?’, the poor women would reply, ‘A
husband at war and three children to feed’, enough in those days of
penury to make the functionary melt. Initially the zone non
aedificandi was meant to be replaced by gardens, but the housing
problems in Paris were too acute and low-rental red-brick blocks
of flats were built around the city in their stead. Here, however, an
attractive garden did spring up — Square de la Butte du Chapeau
Rouge, to be visited later.
   Continue along AVENUE DE LA PORTE DU PRE-SAINT-
GERVAIS. The white building sprawling on your right is
PH6pital Robert Debré, a children’s hospital named after the
renowned surgeon, son of a rabbi and father of Michel, one of
General de Gaulle’s most loyal companions. On the eve of World
War I, Jean Jaurés held desperate peace rallies in this strongho
                                                                   ld of

                                  246
                BELLEVILLE   — PRE-SAINT-GERVAIS


radical socialism, to no avail. As the war dragged on, the area was
divided up into allotments by hungry Parisians who raised meagre
crops to feed their families.

Take the subway crossing under the Boulevard Périphérique and
walk across rue Alexander-Fleming, the border of the city of Paris.
On your right, adjoining the ring road, stands an 18th-century
regard, which served the aqueduct of Pré-Saint-Gervais. The
romantic poet Charles Nodier, a one-time curator of the Arsenal
Library (in the 4th arr.), used to come all the way from the centre of
Paris to rest by its side.
   Walk into rue André Joineau for a brief detour beyond the city
boundaries to the suburb of Pré-Saint-Gervais, where you will be
able to recapture much of the atmosphere of the outlying arron-
dissements as they were a mere 30 years ago. On your left stands the
festive, somewhat provincial Mairie, displaying a profusion of red
geraniums, while neat lawns and patterns of flowers roll like carpets
at its feet. The site is worthy of any town-hall square in any small
town of sleepy France; the star-studded blue flag of the European
Community, hoisted next to the tricolour, is a reminder, however,
that this is the end of the 20th century and that France is determined
to make European unity work. The modern-style telephone booth
and the police uniforms designed by no less than the House of
Balmain are further indication that France is also determined to
shed her laid-back image of pre-technocratic days.
   When, on the eve of World War I, the indefatigable Jean Jaurés
set out on his peace mission, he came here too to exhort the citi-
zens to renounce the folly of war. He was, of course, preaching to
the converted: the Pré-Saint-Gervais was then and still is a socialist
stronghold, holding its own within what was until recently over-
whelmingly communist territory, known as ‘la banlieue rouge’.
   Opposite the Mairie can be seen another regard, built by the
Order of Saint-Lazare over the aqueduct of Pré-Saint-Gervais. The
aqueduct supplied water to the fountains of rue Saint-Denis, the
main axis of the city up to the 1820s, but lost its raison d’étre with
the opening of the Canal of Ourcq. Thiers’s fortifications ran right
through it, dealing it a final blow.
    The doorway at no. 63 will lead you into a charming enclave, in
itself a good enough reason to have come all this way! Another

                                  247
                     19TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


doorway at no. 73 opens into an enchanting network of leafy alleys
bearing the names of chestnut trees, acacias and sycamores, with
exquisite gardens and houses of eclectic styles on either side. Time
seems to have stood still here since 1816, when a contemporary
writer spoke of this haven of greenery “away from the whirlpools of
the capital’. In 1800 another writer recommended going to Pré-
Saint-Gervais to dine on a fresh lawn.
    Exit by way of Avenue des Marronniers, then left on Avenue du
Belvédere. If you take the tiny cul-de-sac la Sente des Marchais you
will reach a car park with a flight of steps, which leads to Avenue
Jean Jaurés. Cross into Avenue Edouard Vaillant. On your right is
another regard and, beyond it, a steep alley lined with rustic
houses, la Sente des Cornettes. Rose bushes and geraniums will
reward you for your climb. At no. 17 stands a cottage built more
than 40 years ago entirely out of broken roof tiles.
   If, before retracing your steps, you turn right into Avenue
Faideherbe, you will come to the drab suburb of the Lilas, a flat
area like the rest of the extensive plain lying north-east of Paris,
where large-scale industrialisation replaced the cornfields of
earlier times, bringing, inevitably, a dismal air to the landscape.
The Pré-Saint-Gervais, being hilly, escaped a similar fate to a
certain extent.

Retrace your steps to the junction of Boulevards Sérurier and
d’Algérie, either of which leads to the entrance of the gardens of
Square de La Butte du Chapeau-Rouge, on RUE ALPHONSE
AULAND.       This was still part of the zone on 25 May 1913, when
Jean Jaurés came here too on a peace rally. ‘We have a formidable
problem to resolve,’ he said to 10,000 people, ‘formidable because
we have to fight against war without jeopardising the independ-
ence of the nation.’ Jean Jaurés was assassinated for his convictions
on 31 July 1914.
    The gardens were laid out in 1939, the only patch of the 33-km-
long belt around Paris to have escaped being built on. Those who
live in the vicinity have the hilly terrain and the memory of Jean
Jaurés to thank for this pleasing setting for their recreation.
