13th Arr: Place d'Italie to Cité Florale

    FROM PLACE D’ITALIE TO THE CITE FLORALE

   If one ventures into this land, it is out of curiosity; nothing
   calls you there, there isn’t a single monument to see.
                                  Louis-Sébastien Mercier, Tableaux de Paris


Although the above lines were written in the 18th century, they still
largely apply today. If you are nonetheless driven by curiosity to
discover an ordinary neighbourhood of Paris, avoid coming on a
dull day when the area is downright lugubrious. The few astonish-
ing pockets that redeem it — countrified remnants in the midst of
urban disaster — are unimpressive without the helping hand of
nature. Before making the journey, however, take into account
that the Gobelins workshops can be visited on Tuesdays, Wednes-
days, Thursdays 2—4 pm only,* while it is on Sunday mornings that
Chinatown is at its most exciting and full of shoppers from the Far
East Asian community.

PLACE D’ITALIE is a good starting-point. This is the hub of the
arrondissement and can easily be reached by public transport. In
ancient times this was the southern gateway of Paris that led to
Rome and later to Italy. It is through this gateway that Napoleon
entered Paris on 20 March 1815, after his successful escape from the
island of Elba. At the time, open-air taverns (guinguettes) prolif-
erated in the vicinity of its toll-gate, where Parisians would gather
        * Guided tours only. Prior booking essential. Tel. 01 44 08 52 00.

                                       12
                    PLACE        D ITALIE         — THE              CITE    FLORALE


                                                         <6
                      |                 R. DES GOBELINS a
                     N                  R. G. GEFFROY




                                              MOBILIER
                                              NATIONAL
                                                        py
                                                        Ov AV.DE LA
                                        SQRE RENEZ.     G7     = SCEUR ROSALIE

                                             Yipee
                                        LEGALLYZZ)
                                          NZS
                                            Oy
                                          YR. DES




                                                                        zZ
                                                             PL.PAUL_   \O
                                                             VERLAINE   S
                                                                         Z




                                                SQRE DES
                                                PEUPLIERS



                                                      PL. DE ‘ABBE
                                                      G. HECNOQUE                          R. DIEULAFOY
                                                                                           A. DU DR LERAY
                                                                                          R. DU DR L. CHAMPIONNIERE
                            ee
PARC DE                      PL. DE RUNGIS
MONTSOURIS
          R.       R. DES MIMOSAS                                                R. DE L'INTERNE LOEB
          DES IBIS




on Sundays and holidays to enjoy their tax-exempt wines. The gate
was a symbol of oppression and in 1789, during the first revolu-
tionary outbursts, the populace, goaded by the inflammatory
oratory of the famous Mirabeau, came over to Place d’Italie and set
fire to the gate.
    To the north of Place d’Italie, between Boulevard de l’H6pital
and Avenue des Gobelins, stands the ostentatious Mairie of the
13th arrondissement, typical of the town halls built in the last cen-
tury, and particularly festive-looking when decorated on special
occasions such as Christmas time. Facing the Mairie across the
Place is Kenzo Tange’s cinematographic centre Le Grand Ecran,

                                                        13
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


an obtrusive addition to a hitherto neighbourly spot. Inaugurated
in 1991, it was meant to crown two decades of futuristic élan, when
everything new in the 13th arrondissement pointed to or was
named after the heavens and beyond, notably the unremarkable
shopping centre adjoining it, Galaxie.
   Running into the west side of Place d’Italie is the pleasant
AVENUE DE SOEUR ROSALIE. Soeur Rosalie, real name
Jeanne-Marie Rendue, deserves this smiling setting, for during the
19th century she was the only ray of hope in this dismal, Dicken-
sian arrondissement, alleviating the pains of its ailing population,
notably during the cholera epidemics of 1832 and 1849. During the
1848 Revolution, when violence took to the streets, she braved the
infuriated rebels in an effort to appease them, at the risk of her own
life.

The next artery, BOULEVARD AUGUSTE-BLANQUI, also
affords a pleasant sight. Its picturesque kiosk, motley, cheerful
flower-beds and boules players create a touch of small-town
provincialism. A market is held along the Boulevard on Sunday,
Tuesday and Friday mornings, adding extra colour to the place.
Many of the vendors are North Africans, some are Far East Asians,
both groups bearing witness to the ethnic evolution of French
society. If you are interested in the sculptor Rodin, you may wish
to walk down the Boulevard to no. 68, the site of his studio, where
Camille Claudel used to visit him during their passionate love
affair. It was located in a charming 18th-century folie, which had
been built for one of the King’s councillors, but has unfortunately
been demolished, like the other folies that embellished these once
bucolic parts.

Turn right into rue Abel Hovelacque and left into the dismal rue
des Reculettes, whose winding course will take you to RUE DE
CROULEBARBE, where you will turn right.
   The windmill of the Croulebarbe family (whose picturesque
name probably referred to the overblown beard of an ancestor) is
mentioned way back in 1214 and appears on all the maps of pre-
Revolution Paris. The street ran along the river Biévre, an obvious
location for the family’s windmill, which disappeared only in 1840.
By 1243 this prosperous family is known also to have owned a

                                  14
             PLACE   D ITALIE   — THE   CITE   FLORALE


substantial, profitable vineyard and, by the following century, an-
other property which was ‘located along the road that leads from
Saint-Marcel to Gentilly’. Nobody knows, though, how it came
into the hands of the Order of Saint-Martin-des-Champs a few
years later, all the stranger since their domain was situated at the
other end of town. It still belonged to the Order at the time of
Louis-Philippe, which explains why Fieschi, who, on 28 July 1835
had made an attempt on the latter’s life on Boulevard du Temple
(see 11th arr.), went into hiding here — he was the concierge of
Saint-Martin!
   In 1827 rue de Croulebarbe made the headlines when the goat
girl of Ivry, Aimée Millot, was stabbed to death by the mentally
unbalanced Honoré Ulbach in the middle of a thunderstorm — an
appropriate setting for a melodrama. Aimée would come here
every day with her goats and sit reading a book, looking lovely in
her straw hat. Her murder aroused outraged compassion all over
Paris: even the sensational arrival of the first giraffe in the Jardin
des Plantes (see chapter on 5th arr.) — the first ever to tread French
soil — was overshadowed by the crime. Ulbach was among the last
convicts to be put to death on Place de Gréve (now Hotel-de-
Ville), the traditional place of public executions in Paris up to the
reign of Louis-Philippe. However, after the three-day riots of July
1830 that brought Louis-Philippe to the throne, the new King vow-
ed never again to carry out executions on Place de Gréve as a token
of gratitude to the people of Paris, who had supported him
heroically on that site.
   Rue de Croulebarbe runs along Square René Le Gall. At the
back of the garden a row of poplar trees denotes the subterranean
course of the Biévre. The street and the garden make for a peaceful,
provincial atmosphere, a blessed retreat on a hot summer day, just
off the busy main arteries of the arrondissement, a villagey atmo-
sphere enhanced by the presence of the Basque restaurant Etche-
gorry, at no. 41, a well-known old-timer, and the provincial inn
Chez Angéle, at no. 29. In the last century a countrified tavern
stood here. It belonged to Madame Grégoire and was a favourite
with the Romantic writers, especially Victor Hugo. At no. 33 stands
Paris’s first skyscraper, 21-storeys high. Square René Le Gall was
opened in 1938 on land that used to belong to the Gobelins work-
shops, situated to the north-east, and was divided up as kitchen

                                  15
                      13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


gardens among its craftsmen. It is now named after a member of
the Resistance who was shot by the Germans.

RUE BERBIER-DU-METS branches off rue de Croulebarbe to
the left and follows the meandering course of the Biévre, running
parallel to the curved back of the Gobelins annex, a building of
reinforced concrete put up by Auguste Perret in 1935. A neat, mod-
ern building across the street, surrounded by a green stretch of
lawn, houses the new Gobelins workshops, which face the north so
as to enjoy abetter quality of light. A pile of stones lying round in the
garden by the street is all that remains of the exquisite 18th-century
folie of Jean de Julienne, shamefully demolished recently for no
good reason. Julienne’s uncle was a famous dyer, Jean Gluck, who
helped Julienne develop his workshop. The painter Watteau, a close
friend of Julienne’s, used the place as a base for his walks in the
neighbouring countryside, a source of inspiration for his paintings.

Rue Gustave Geoffroy on your right will lead you to RUE DES
GOBELINS. At no. 3bis a courtyard with an archway on its right
leads to the site of the Hétel Mascarini, the mansion of a wealthy
financier in the 17th century, when members of society were attrac-
ted to these southern parts and their sunny stretches of neat
vineyards. Only the orangery of the hétel still stands, an early 18th-
century addition. A more unexpected sight awaits you at nos 17 and
19 where, at the back ofa drab courtyard, amidst a medley of shabby
workshops and rickety offices, rises a genuine medieval manor,
dilapidated and blackened by age, a stunning apparition from a
fairytale book. This was the Hétel or Domaine de la Reine Blanche,
though no one knows for sure who the Queen was. It might have
been Blanche de Castille, the mother of Saint Louis, but there are
other candidates, for, up until the 16th century, when Catherine de
Medici introduced black from Spain as the colour of mourning, it
had been the custom for the widowed queens of France to wear
white and several queens were known as Blanche. Be that as it may,
in all likelihood the manor belonged to the royal family and was the
site of the tragic scene of the Bal des Ardents, a fancy-dress ball held
here on 28 January 1393. The feeble-minded Charles VI and five of
his friends turned up dressed as savages. The Duc d’Orléans, pur-
portedly curious to identify his brother the King, held a torch close

                                    16
                                                   eee


                       Hotel de la Reine Blanche

to the faces of the ‘savages’ and (accidentally?) set their costumes
aflame. Four of the unfortunate party perished in the fire, while one
survived by jumping into a tub of water. The King was saved by the
presence of mind ofhis aunt, the Duchesse de Berry, who rolled him
in her coat, yet, while he did notlose his life, he lost the last remnants
of his sanity after this traumatic experience. The mansion was
promptly razed to the ground and for the next hundred years a
market was held on its site every Monday as wellasa fair twice a year.
The present house was built some hundred years later. It is this

                                    17
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


house or the lovely one at no. 19, or both, that may correspond to ‘La
Follie-Goubelin’, mentioned by Rabelais in Pantagruel. Until re-
cently this medieval manor, for so long forgotten, was visible only
to those who cared to seek it out, but lately it has come to the notice
of the municipal authorities, who would like to turn it into a
cultural centre of some sort. We hope you will have seen it in its
natural state, before this ill-judged design is carried out.

Turn right into AVENUE DES GOBELINS. The entrance to the
Gobelins workshops is at no. 42. When Jehan de Gobelin settled in
the house ‘a l’enseigne du Cygne’ (‘with the sign of The Swan’), little
did he know that 500 years later his name would still be famous
worldwide, but that it would be erroneously associated with the
art of tapestry. His house was situated on the bank of the Biévre,
roughly where rue Berbier-du-Mets now meets Boulevard Arago.
He may have come here knowing the secret the river held in its
salty water, which would allow him to discover the scarlet dye that
made his fortune.
   It was under the new ownership of the Carraye family that tap-
estry was added to the activities of the establishment, especially
from 1656, when the Dutchman Gluck took over with the help of
Liansel. But the name Gobelin stuck. This was during the reign of
Louis XIV, when every venture in the kingdom was to enhance
the glory of the Sun King, and him alone, a policy supervised
by his minister Colbert, who replaced Mazarin when he died in
1661. It is in this context that Colbert engineered the downfall of
the King’s treasurer, Nicolas Fouquet, that same year, whose
magnificent palace of Vaux-le-Vicomte was perceived as a prov-
ocation, and who was sentenced to life imprisonment on charges
of embezzlement. The following year Colbert bought up the
Gobelins workshops for the King, too prestigious an estab-
lishment to remain in the hands of anyone else. From then on the
workshops were known as Hétel Royal des Gobelins. Louis XIV’s
grandfather, Henri IV, had already planned to set up tapestry
workshops, as is testified by a royal edict dating from 1607, but his
project never materialised, perhaps because of his premature
death. He had even invited Franz Van der Planken and Marc de
Comans from Antwerp to start up this craft in France. Nicolas
Fouquet, however, had been bold enough to set up such work-

                                   18
             PLACE   D ITALIE   — THE   CITE   FLORALE


shops in Maincy, near Vaux-le-Vicomte, in 1658, having recruited
craftsmen in Flanders. His Majesty must have eyed the workshops
because in 1664 he had them merged by Colbert into those of the
Gobelins.
   This being the reign of absolutism, when all activities were
concentrated and unified, the better to be controlled, the other
tapestry workshops of the kingdom — Beauvais and La Savonnerie
— were also moved to the banks of the Biévre, where new buildings
were erected to house them. Colbert also opened a school here,
where all the future artisans of the Gobelins were trained or
apprenticed. In 1667, cabinet-making was added to the activities of
the Gobelins, which thus concentrated all the activities dedicated
to the embellishment of the royal dwellings of France in ‘La Manu-
facture royale des meubles de la Couronne ... a Vhétel appelé des
Gobelins’, pour la gloire du roi’, as Colbert proclaimed. In 1667 too,
a parliamentary ruling granted the Gobelins full monopoly over
sales and all imports from abroad were banned. A director was
appointed with sweeping powers to supervise the workshops’ act-
ivities, the first of whom was the court painter, Charles Le Brun.
He remained in office for nearly 30 years, with 250 craftsmen under
his orders, tapestry-makers, painters, engravers, cabinet-makers,
gold- and silversmiths. .. men, women and children, all living on
the compound, so that their conduct could be controlled after
working hours and moral disorder prevented. Sixty children went
into a 10-year apprenticeship at the Gobelins before they qualified
as tapestry-makers. The reign of absolutism was also a reign of
prestige, and whereas Henri IV had been motivated by economics
(hence the mulberry trees he had planted in the Tuileries gardens,
in order to develop his own silk industry and dispense with im-
ports from Milan), Louis XIV was driven by vanity and self-
aggrandisement. He would come over in person to watch the
progress of work. all of which was designed to ensure him glorious
publicity. Thus, all the tapestries depicted either hunting scenes —
the royal pastime par excellence — or the Sun King himself,
sometimes in disguise. L’Histoire du Roi was the most prestigious
series, to which Napoleon retaliated with L’Histoire de ’Empereur,
commissioned from David.
   With the death of Colbert in 1683 Charles Le Brun’s career
came to an end. Louvois, the King’s new henchman, had his own

                                  19
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


protégé, the painter Mignard whom he wished to substitute for the
ageing Le Brun (not that Mignard was much younger). Le Brun
was aware of the manoeuvre and complained bitterly that he was
no longer allowed to supervise the work at the Gobelins which was
distributed and corrected by ‘others’, even in his presence, ‘and I
have been reduced to the rank of an ordinary workman.’ Charles
Le Brun was to die in 1690, a broken man. Things were never quite
the same after his departure. Furthermore, with the resumption of
wars, the state’s finances were shaky and it was necessary to cut
down costs. All the activities of the Gobelins ceased —a godsend for
Faubourg Saint-Antoine where a golden age was now to com-
mence. Tapestry-making, however, remained at the Gobelins, but
that too was on the decline: whereas nearly 600 gold-embroidered
tapestries were turned out during the 30 years of Le Brun’s rule,
fewer than 300 were made in the entire 18th century. With fewer
orders coming from the royal court, it now became necessary to
find new outlets abroad, which, rather belatedly, brought renown
to the Gobelins outside France. The prestige of the Gobelins
persisted through the generations and the Germans too com-
missioned works here when they occupied Paris during the last
war. However, the workers put up patriotic resistance in their own
way, slowing their activities to a near standstill and the Germans
left before the orders had been completed.
    During the French Revolution, the Gobelins workshops, the
suppliers of luxury items to the privileged, aroused the wrath of the
sans-culottes of Faubourg Saint-Marcel, who piled up all the
 tapestries at the foot of a tree of liberty they had erected in the
 courtyard and set fire to them. The furniture from the Gobelins
was sent to the mint to retrieve its gold and silver. Nearly a century
later, on 23 May 1871, the infuriated Communards also stormed this
symbol of privilege and set fire to the workshops. Only the build-
ings along rue Berbier-du-Mets, the chapel, the entrance door and
a few looms escaped the flames. The painter Courbet was called
upon to restore the premises, and when a few months later activi-
ties resumed, the workshops were given the more appropriate
name of Les Manufactures Nationales des Gobelins.
    With the progress made in chemistry in the 19th century, 30,000
different shades could be obtained, which allowed for more varia-
tions and subtlety. On the other hand, the chemical dyes were less

                                  20
             PLACE     D ITALIE   — THE   CITE   FLORALE


resistant to damage from light and air. Furthermore, the essence of
the art of tapestry was now questioned. Charles Le Brun had
argued that it should ‘imitate the effect of oil painting’, others that
it was an art in its own right: ‘To paint and to make tapestries are
two absolutely separate things.’ The issue was taken up again in the
second half of the 19th century, and even more vigorously in the
2oth: “Tapestry is not a picture, big or small,’ declared Le Corbus-
ier. ‘It must offer itself to the eye, level with the height of a man.’
Jean Lurgat believed its role was to cover a bare wall which ‘with-
out this decoration would lack a je-ne-sais-quoi of the corporal, of
the passionate, would, in sum, lack charm.’ Lurgat, Le Corbusier,
Matisse, Poliakoff and others tried their hand at tapestry, perpet-
uating an art which had survived from the Middle Ages, when the
purpose of tapestry was to cover the bare walls of castles and help
soften the atmosphere.
   In 1990 the Gobelins workshops were to be transferred outside
Paris as part of a nationwide policy of decentralisation, an arbit-
rary decision which was thwarted in extremis by the determined
resistance of its workers and a general outcry. Admittedly, Paris
plays an overbearing role culturally and economically, but moving
the Gobelins out of their birthplace and natural environment
would have been a historical outrage, particularly since these are
the oldest workshops in France, the activities of which have never
ceased since 1443, when a certain Jehan de Gobelin, “teinturier en
écarlate settled on the banks of the river Biévre, in the house “a
Venseigne du Cygne’.

Turn left on Avenue des Gobelins and left once more into
BOULEVARD ARAGO, a pleasant artery lined with shady
chestnut trees. At no. 65 La Cité Fleurie is a stunning oasis, the
jewel in the crown of the arrondissement, which narrowly escaped
demolition thanks to the fighting spirit of its occupants and of
neighbours. This artists’ enclave was built in 1878, in the middle of
what was then a wasteland, and was frequented at or just after the
turn of the century by such artists as Rodin, Bourdelle, Maillol,
Gauguin and Modigliani. Today’s occupants may not have reach-
ed the same summits, but the place is delightful — a miniature
village made up of 29 studios with their lovely little gardens, each
the size of a pocket handkerchief.

                                   21
                     13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Retrace your steps and turn right into rue de la Glaciére and right
again into RUE     LEON-MAURICE           NORDMANN.          Behind a
creaking old gate at no. 147 extends a leafy, picturesque alley, La
Cité Verte, another artists’ compound, where the bronze works of
such artists as Lipchitz or Henry Moore were once cast by the
sculptor Busato.
   Back on rue dela Glaciére, you can catch the no. 21 bus, heading
south, and get off two stops later, at rue Daviel. Walk back on RUE
DAVIEL across rue de la Glaciére. You will come to two pictur-
esque nooks: La Petite Alsace at no. 10, so called because of its half-
timbered little houses with slanting tiled roofs, and La Villa Daviel,
across the street, a humble working-class compound in the 19th
century, now nestling charmingly in green vegetation in the midst
of urban desolation.

Turn left into rue Barrault, then right into RUE DE LA BUTTE-
AUX-CAILLES, which leads to the sleepy, little hill of the same
name, once the home of quail and other species of fowl that people
came to shoot here. On 21 November 1783, la Butte-aux-Cailles
attracted widespread attention, when a gigantic, azure-coloured
balloon appeared in the skies above, gloriously decorated with
golden fleurs-de-lys and the signs of the Zodiac, leaving the
inhabitants of Faubourg Saint-Marcel dumbfounded. Twenty
minutes earlier members of the court and society, among them the
Dauphin and Benjamin Franklin, had gathered at the Chateau de la
Muette, on the western edge of Paris (now the 16th arrondisse-
ment), to watch the first manned balloon take off and soar into the
sky, with Rozier de Pilatre and the Marquis d’Arlandes aboard.
When they landed, the delirious inhabitants of Saint-Marcel rushed
at them and almost tore them apart in their enthusiasm! The two
balloonists emerged unscathed in the end, although Rozier de
Pilatre’s coat was torn beyond repair.

Turn left into RUE DES CINQ DIAMANTS, where you can get
the feel of the neighbourhood. A young understated community of
artists has taken up residence here, blending into the environment
and preserving its character as best they can. To your left is the
Passage Barrault, a narrow silent alley belonging to another age.
    Turn right into rue Jonas and left into rue Gérard. You may

                                  22
                                                           \

                                                           yy
                                                         VATA
                                                         eer,


                                                         aesev




                                              Vy


                                 Y BUlYhEcm
                                          °



                                    O eet
                                naYchna
                                 Mo YGS




                       Rue des Cing Diamants

wish to glance at a charming flowery house, draped with creepers,
at nos 46-48, beyond rue Simonet.
   Rue Simonet leads to the shady PLACE PAUL VERLAINE, a
popular spot where the neighbourhood swimming pool, La Butte
Aux Cailles, is situated. It is fed by the artesian well constructed by
the physicist Francois Arago in 1865. The drilling was originally
undertaken to increase the flow of the Biévre and supply it with
more water in case of drought. However, when drilling resumed 30
years later, a sheet of water of 28°C was reached providing an ideal
temperature for bathing. The swimming pool was therefore built
here in 1924 and is now a listed monument.
   Continue into RUE DU MOULIN DES PRES, south of Place
Paul Verlaine, once the old road that connected the windmill Le
Moulin des Prés, and the village of Gentilly. Rue du Moulinet,
running across rue du Moulin des Prés, refers to another of the

                                   23
                    13TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


area’s windmills. Continue beyond rue de Tolbiac and turn right
into Square des Peupliers, yet again a secret flowery enclave, so
easily overlooked and therefore to be cherished. Back on rue du
Moulin des Prés, continue diagonally right into rue des Peupliers
then south to PLACE DE L’ABBE GEORGES-HENOCQUE, a
shady, drowsy round-about, spared by modern times. Turn left
into rue Henri Pape and walk along rue Dieulafoy and back again
along rue du Docteur Leray, a countrified enclave of original archi-
tecture, displaying charming rows of houses crowned with steep
slate roofs.
    Back on Place de l’Abbé Georges-Henocque, take rue de la
Colonie due west, then rue de Bobillot to your left to Place Rungis.
A final remnant of a bucolic past — La Cité Florale — is tucked away
west of Place Rungis, encompassed by rues Brillant-Savarin,
Boussingault and Auguste Lancon. Here each tiny street bears,
deservedly, the name of a flower — Iris, Volubilis (Morning Glory),
Glycines (Wistaria), Mimosa — except for rue des Orchidées, which
has been taken over by unsightly blocks of flats. La Cité Florale is
within a few minutes’ walk of the lovely Parc de Montsouris, but
this is part of the story of the next arrondissement.



                        ‘CHINATOWN’

The Chinese neighbourhood of the 13th is basically a triangle,
bounded by the Avenues de Choisy and Ivry and the Boulevard
Masséna, lying to the south east of the arrondissement.       It has
therefore been dubbed le Triangle Jaune. This is by no means
the Chinatown of San Francisco, nor even of New York, and only
half its population is Asian. However, their presence becomes
predominant on weekend mornings, when they do their weekly
shopping.

Make your way from the junction of AVENUES DE CHOISY
and IVRY into the latter and turn left into the Olympiades at no.
