16th Arr: Through Passy to Chaillot

             THROUGH        PASSY TO CHAILLOT

This walk takes you from Passy to Chaillot in the northern part of
the arrondissement. Passy was first mentioned in the 13th century
as Passius. It was mentioned again at the time of Philippe Le Bel,
who allowed local peasants to kill the rabbits that were ravaging
their fields, a great privilege when one remembers the fate met with
by the peasants of Grenelle, across the Seine, for interfering with
the lord’s game (see chapter on the 15th arr.).

An exciting way of reaching Passy is by Métro from the 15th
arrondissement, south of the Seine. The brief train ride between
Bir-Hakeim and Passy offers a spectacular view of the river and the
                                 133
                     16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


Eiffel Tower, and Passy Métro station is full of charm, set among
greenery on a steep slope rolling down to the Seine. A couple of
paths once ran down the hillside, used by the inhabitants of Passy
to lead the cattle to the river.

A long flight of steps on your left will lead you up to Square Alboni,
a serene nook whose silence is broken only by the arrival and
departure of trains and by the song of birds.
   The Italian soprano Marietta Alboni was one of Paris’s idols in
the 19th century. Her performances at the Théatre des Italiens reg-
ularly brought the house down and fetched her a small fortune of
3,000 francs per night! Alboni was also known for her generosity
and her gracious contributions to social welfare. Residing in these
countrified parts, she decided to finance the square and the street
that runs out of it, in return for which both have been given her
name. They were laid out in 1894, the year of her death, and in good
time for the 1900 World Fair. The square’s opulent blocks of flats
were originally used as hotels to accommodate well-to-do visitors
to the fair. By 1925 the entire neighbourhood had swapped its
greenery for constructions referred to by the writer Julien Green
as ‘Babylonian buildings’ and ‘fortresses of boredom’. There is
worse to come: as you turn right into rue des Eaux beyond RUE
CHARLES DICKENS, you will notice on your left a steep,
crevasse-like passage with a long flight of steps, a dark ravine of
concrete, the continuation of rue des Eaux, so remote from the
days of the fashionable spa of Passy after which it is named.
   To its right stands an attractive neo-Louis XVI house dating
from the early 19th century, where Le Musée du Vin occupies a vast
14th-century vaulted cellar. It is also known as Le Caveau des
Echansons. This was once part of the domain of the Minimes,
whose wine-growing monks kept their wine in these vaults. Here
you can see historical scenes animated by wax dolls showing, for
example, Napoleon tasting a Bourgogne and Balzac walking down
the stairs in his white dressing-gown to escape his creditors’ bailiffs
in his nearby home on rue Raynouard, as well as a display of var-
ious items connected with wine. The bonshommes cultivated their
vineyards roughly on the site of the present rue Vineuse and their
claret was so praised that Louis XIII came over to drink it after the
hunt. Square Charles Dickens, next to the museum, is a charming

                                 134
                        PASSY   — CHAILLOT


nook, whose pretty houses climb on either side of a flight of steps.
Pretty pots of geraniums against bare paving add a bright, some-
what Provencal touch.

Turn right into Avenue René Boylesve and left into Avenue Marcel
Proust which continues into the astonishing RUE BERTON, a
narrow, silent alley, steeped in lush greenery and miraculously
overlooked by the forces of urbanisation. It even boasts the bound-
ary stone that marked the border between Auteuil and Passy in 1731.
The garden of Musée Balzac rolls down to no. 24, but the main
entrance is at 47 rue Raynouard to your right, the oldest road in
Passy, going back to Gallo-Roman days. The museum is located in
a charming, rustic house standing in a lovely, tree-planted garden,
displaying green shutters, a match for any pretty house in the heart
of rural France.
   Balzac’s mistress, the Polish countess Madame Hanska, was of a
different mind and found the house appalling, likening it to a
guinguette. Balzac had more serious preoccupations at the time: he
had moved to this hiding-place in 1840 to escape his creditors and
their bailiffs, of which he had informed Madame Hanska in a letter
dated 16 November: ‘From the moment you receive this letter,
write to me at the following address: Monsieur de Brugnol, rue
Basse (now Raynouard) in Passy-lés (near) -Paris. I am well hid-
den here for a while.’ Thanks to the vigilant housekeeper, Madame
Louise Breugiol, Balzac escaped the bailiffs. Nobody was admitted
without the password — ‘The plum season has arrived’ — followed,
on the first landing, for extra safety, by ‘I am bringing lace from
Bruges’. Through his correspondence with Madame Hanska we
also have a clear idea of Balzac’s timetable: ‘Working, dear Count-
ess, is to get up every night at 12 and write till 8, to breakfast in a
quarter of an hour, work till 5, dine, go to sleep and start all over
the following day.’ Indeed, his output during his seven-year stay
here was staggering and included such masterpieces as Le Cousin
Pons, Les Illusions Perdues and La Cousine Bette. No wonder he
needed his notorious coffee-pot, which never left his desk and
sustained him throughout. It can still be seen in the museum,
alongside a wide spectrum of possessions that accompanied the
author during his prolific career.
   As you visit the museum or stroll in the gardens, you will enjoy,

                                  135
                            Rue Berton


like Balzac, a view overlooking the Hétel de Lamballe, tucked away
among the trees. An aristocratic domain was already in existence
here in 1400, and over the centuries it belonged successively to
various members of prominent families — the Fusée in the 16th
century, Claude Chahu, the Lord of Passy, in the 17th century, the
Duchesse de Lauzan in the early 18th century, when the most
dazzling receptions took place here, notably the one she lavished in
honour of the Duchesse de Bourbon. The main facade at the time
overlooked the Seine. The elegant staircase had a double ramp

                                136
                        PASSY   — CHAILLOT


leading to the gardens and there were three tiered terraces going
down to the river. On ball nights, the palace would glitter above the
water with a myriad of candles.
   At the time of the Revolution, the landlady of the mansion was
the Princesse de Lamballe, the widow of the debauched son of the
Duc de Penthiévres. It was her misfortune to be a member of the
spoilt aristocracy at the wrong time, and worse, Marie-Antoinette’s
closest friend. For this sin she was dragged out of the prison of La
Force in the Marais on 3 September 1792 and massacred by the
savage mob on the corner of rues du Roi-de-Sicile and Malher; after
which her head was impaled and carried by the gloating crowds to
the Temple, to be exhibited in front of the window of Marie-
Antoinette’s cell. Her mansion was sequestrated and, having
changed hands and functions, went into decline and lost the better
part of its grounds. Balzac is said to have nurtured hopes of moving
here one day — he too preferred grandeur to picturesque rusticity.
Instead it became a mental home run by the illustrious Dr Blanche
who moved here from Montmartre (See chapter on the 18th arr.).
   When Blanche’s son inherited the institution in 1852, he turned
it into a retirement home for members of the intelligentsia. Among
its inmates were Gérard de Nerval, who wrote here drafts of two of
his major works Sylvie and Aurélia, Gounod and Maupassant, who
died here in July 1893. The place closed down soon after, Emile
Blanche himself having died the following month. At the turn of
the century both the Hotel de Lamballe and Balzac’s hiding-place
belonged to the Comte de Limur. The hétel was sold to the state
and given to the Turkish Embassy in 1922, in return for the man-
sion in Istanbul offered by the new Turkish Republic to France, but
Balzac’s home was turned into a museum by the Comtesse de
Limur, who gathered an invaluable library and a wealth of docu-
ments which she bequeathed to the City of Paris, a contribution
which helped to preserve the building in an area where developers
and speculators are constantly on the look-out. The story goes that
one developer made the extravagant suggestion to the museum’s
curator of reconstructing the house on the roof of the new block he
proposed to put up in its stead!

As you leave the museum turn left on RUE RAYNOUARD. The
street had several residents of note such as the singer Fodor at no.

                                   137
                     16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


38, the chansonnier Béranger at no. 42 and Benjamin Franklin, who
lived across the street from the museum, on the site of the present
nos 64-70, in a handsome house surrounded by pleasant grounds
and shady trees, part of the estate of the Duc de Valentinois. It was
on the adjacent site of no. 62 that he experimented on and event-
ually installed his first lightning conductor.
   Benjamin Franklin had come to Paris in 1776 as the spokesman
of the budding American Republic and to plead for the support of
Louis XV against the English, their common foe. America was
indeed on the map and Franklin was the pet of the capital. Twice a
week he would walk out of his house in his modest brown garb,
carrying his white walking stick, and head down to Auteuil along
the rue Basse (now rues Raynouard and La Fontaine) to visit the
widowed Madame Helvétius. Totally infatuated with her, he asked
her to marry him, but she wished to remain faithful to her late
husband’s memory and declined. When Franklin left France in
1785, by then an ailing man who had to be carried to Le Havre in the
Queen’s litter, he had on him some mineral waters from Auteuil as
a souvenir. Madame Helvétius was much grieved by his departure,
and her sorrow was compounded when her other faithful friend,
Turgot, died shortly after.

Retrace your steps across the street. At no. 51-55 is a well-known
building of reinforced concrete, the work of Auguste Perret, who
lived here from 1932 until his death in 1954. In the 19th century the
H6tel Delessert stood at no. 19. The Delesserts were a Protestant
banking family who had come from Geneva, to which they had
escaped from Lyons at the time of Louis XIV, when the Protestants
were being persecuted. Their property extended all the way down
to the Seine and had once been the home of Le Ragois, the chaplain
of Madame de Maintenon and promoter of the spa of Passy. It was
in these grounds that in 1720 he discovered three springs of ferrug-
inous water, which he began to exploit in 1725. Enjoying the sup-
port of the medicine faculty, which proclaimed Passy’s water to be
the best in France, Le Ragois’s enterprise became an immense
success, the more so as it was so close to the capital and on the way
to Versailles. Women came to find a cure for sterility, and everyone
else came for the pure air, the fun and simply to keep up with the
trends. The 18th-century counterparts of today’s joggers were just

                                 138
                        PASSY   — CHAILLOT


as committed to their own exercises, which followed a morning
glass of water and consisted of five regular walking steps alternat-
ing with a pirouette. As usual, the chansonniers observed it all with
their sardonic cynicism; in one song, after fruitless endeavours to
find a cure for her ills, a young female patient
             through the rescue of Cupid recovered.
             This is by no means a marvel;
             in Passy, it is said, such things do happen.
   In 1752 a certain Le Veillard took over the resort and added a
games room, a theatre, a puppet theatre and ballrooms. But in 1785
Benjamin Franklin took Le Veillard with him to America, thus
turning on the trickle of the brain-draining that later became a
flood — after which Passy began to decline as a spa. The final blow
came in 1865, when it was decided to distribute the water. . . free of
charge! As if by magic, the waters of Passy lost their virtues and
high society migrated elsewhere to seek cures for its troubles.
   Benjamin Delessert bought the property in 1800, and incorpor-
ated to it the springs in 1803. He had meanwhile invented a method
of extracting beet sugar, and during Napoleon’s Continental ban
on Britain (1801) he erected on his property the first beet sugar
refinery in France (on the site of the convent of the Minimes by the
Seine, now 14/16 quai de Passy). This was a major economic and
political event which allowed France to dispense with imported
cane sugar. Napoleon was thrilled with Delessert’s invention and
when visiting the refinery, took off the croix d’honneur from his
own chest and pinned it on to Delessert’s, at the same time bestow-
ing on him the title of ‘Baron’. Delessert proceeded to construct a
suspension bridge connecting the refinery and his mansion, which
contributed to the development of engineering, and the physicist
Arago sent his students of the Ecole Polytechnique to view and
study the bridge. A cotton mill soon followed. A man of vision,
Benjamin Delessert was appointed head of the Banque de France
before he was 30 and held the post for 50 years. He was also a
philanthropist who founded the Caisse d’Epargne, which today
still enables people of limited means to accumulate some-savings.
    It was in the Hotel Delessert that in 1852 preliminaries to making
a match between Napoléon III and Eugénie de Montijo were con-
ducted. A couple of years earlier the writer Prosper Mérimée had

                                  139
                    16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


introduced Eugénie and her mother to his friend, Madame Gabriel
Delessert, Benjamin’s sister-in-law. By then Benjamin had been
dead four years and buried in the old cemetery of Passy on rue
Lekain (no longer in existence). His remains and those of the other
members of his family were transferred to the new cemetery of
Passy in 1961.

Continue to Place de Costa Rica and on to RUE FRANKLIN
beyond it, if you wish to visit the Musée Georges Clemenceau at
no. 8 (open from 2-5 pm except Mondays, Wednesdays and Fri-
days), home of the Tigre, as he was nicknamed, between 1896 and
his death on 24 November 1929. This nostalgic place, where
France’s leaders met to prepare the peace talks after World War I,
will give you an insight into the life of one of France’s greatest
statesmen, who had forged so much of the public life of the Third
Republic. On display are his ink-well and quill pen, the uniform he
wore when he visited the soldiers in the trenches, the pistols he
used in no fewer than 22 duels (!), the pair of shears he used to
prune his roses and his calendar, on which the entries stop on 24
November 1929.

Retrace your steps to Place de Costa Rica and walk into RUE DE
PASSY, the village high street before its annexation to Paris,
and one of its rare streets to be paved. Turn right into RUE
GAVARNI, named after the 19th-century cartoonist, real name
Sulpice Guillaume Chevalier. Transferred to south-west France in
1850 by his employers, he discovered the spectacular Cirque de
Gavarni near Tarbes and was so dazzled by this rocky beauty spot
that he adopted its name. Eventually he also bartered his trade for
that of an artist and, like Daumier, contributed many of his works
to the Charivari.
   Turn left into RUE CLAUDE CHAHU, named after the Lord
of Passy who turned Passy into a parish. At no. 9, on the corner of
rue Eugene Manuel, stands a stunning Art Nouveau building dating
from 1900, the work of architect Charles Klein and ceramist Emile
Muller, who used fantastic thistle motifs to astounding effect.
   Retrace your steps to rue Gavarni and turn left into RUE DELA
TOUR, where a long-lost medieval tower stood, which was later
surmounted by a windmill. The crenellated tower that now stands

                               140
                            Rue Scheffer


on its site (at no. 86 further down), is a neo-medieval pastiche. An
unassuming door at no. 28 to your right opens on to an astonishing
haven nestling in the silent shade of ancient trees, one of the many
secrets that Paris conceals from the casual eye. Another pretty alley
is situated at no. 70, lined with elegant spacious houses, each
standing in its own tiny garden.
   Turn right into RUE LOUIS DAVID, named after the Repub-
lican painter who voted for the death of Louis XVI and who was
exiled during the Restoration. On the right-hand corner of 13 RUE
SCHEFFER stands another stunning Art Nouveau building, sur-
mounted by spectacular parasol-shaped roofs.
   Turn left into rue Scheffer and left into Square Pétrarque, built
in 1927. Despite its profusion of eclectic ‘neo’ styles, an overall
harmony prevails. Romantic lampposts complete the picture.
   Retrace your steps along rue Scheffer. The famous poetess Anna
de Noailles, née Princesse de Brancovan, lived at no. 40 from 1910
to 1933. A society lady, Anna was one of the backbones of Poiret’s
clientele, but also an active member of the Left Bank literati. Con-
tinue beyond rue Contambert            into Villa Scheffer, at 51 rue

                                 141
                            Villa Scheffer

Scheffer, a leafy alley yet again, enhanced by a picturesque little
house and its adjoining turret, surmounted by a conical roof.
    Retrace your steps, turn right into rue Cortambert and right
again into rue de la Tour. An unattractive block now stands at no.
86, preposterously adjoining the reconstructed tower (now visible
only from rue Desbordes-Valmore). The original medieval tower
may have been used by Philippe le Bel when he came to Passy. A
little further on on your left, the Villa Guibert displays eclectic
architectural styles — from neo-medieval to Anglo-Norman, from
Napoléon III to the 1920s — yet somehow it all fits together.
    Turn right into RUE EUGENE DELACROIX. This was orig-
inally rue de la Croix, simply because it led to a cross on the corner

                                 142
                        PASSY   — CHAILLOT


of rue de la Tour. The cross was done away with during the Rev-
olution. In a neighbourhood that celebrates so many painters, the
shift to Eugéne Delacroix in 1868 went unnoticed. The Villa de la
Tour, on the right, was the home of the radical socialist leader Jean
Jaurés in 1914, when he was assassinated by the extreme-right
nationalist Raoul Villain at the Café du Croissant in the 2nd
arrondissement on the eve of World War I. Next is the Villa
Souchier, at no. 5 on your right, again a lovely, leafy nook.

Continue along rue Eugéne Delacroix and rue Decamps, then turn
left into AVENUE     GEORGES      MANDEL, a broad wealthy, resi-
dential avenue, of little interest to the pedestrian. Across the avenue
is the Lycée Janson de Sailly, known for its academic excellence.
Jules Ferry, the promoter of free education for all, picked out this
site for a school that would pride itself on the teaching of the
humanities, and Victor Hugo attended its inauguration ceremony.
    Beyond rue de la Pompe the avenue is named AVENUE
HENRI MARTIN, which originally was the name of the entire
thoroughfare. Its eastern section was renamed in 1945-after the
statesman Georges Mandel who was assassinated in 1944 by the
militia in the forest of Fontainebleau. On the corner of rue de la
Pompe on your left is the Mairie, erected by the Third Republic,
undoubtedly the most lavish of Paris’s 20 town halls, a match for
the area it serves. Across the avenue, a little further on, lies Square
Lamartine, which commemorates the poet and statesman who
died on 28 February 1869 in a Swiss chalet situated on the site of
107/113 Avenue Henri Martin, conceded to him by the City of Paris.
According to his niece, its well-kept garden was its only asset. The
chalet was replaced by a beautiful hétel at no. 107, which belonged
to the famous art dealers Josse and Gaston Bernheim.
   Square Lamartine contained an artesian well which supplied
water to both the lakes and waterfall of the newly laid out Bois de
Boulogne, and to the local population. Despite the enthusiasm of
Saxon Kind, the initiator of the venture, it proved laborious — it
took 11 years to drill the well (1855-66) and needed the injection of
gas to get the water to spurt out. When it eventually did, it was to
the detriment of the artesian well in Grenelle, the pressure of
which diminished simultaneously for the obvious reason that
Passy and Grenelle were part of the same geological stratum and

                                  143
                     16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


shared the same water table. In the early 20th century locals could
still be seen queueing up with bottles, flasks or pitchers to draw
water, which had a constant temperature of 28°C, but an insipid
taste.


Retrace your steps along Avenue Henri Martin and on to 43
Avenue Georges Mandel. This was still Avenue Henri Martin when
the princely couple Edmond and Winnaretta Polignac were living
in the opulent Hétel de Polignac, on the corner of rue Pasteur-
Marc-Boegue, the centre of musical creativity during the Golden
Age of the early 20th century. Its famous rotunda-shaped music
room, complete with mirrors in the fashion of Versailles, still over-
looks rue Pasteur-Marc-Boegue. Here were performed the works
of Gabriel Fauré, Ernest Chausson, Darius Milhaud, Igor Stravin-
sky and Maurice Ravel, by such artists as Wanda Landowska, to
such guests as Marcel Proust. On one evening in 1927, the Princess
played host to Henry James, Isadora Duncan, Cole Porter and Ezra
Pound. Playing duets at the piano were two fellow-Russians who
did not like each other — Stravinsky and Prokofiev. Winnaretta was
concerned only with the music and ignored personal feuds.
   Born to the American multimillionaire founder of the Singer
sewing-machine factory, she was wealthy enough to be accepted by
the blue-blooded aristocracy and accordingly married Louis de
Montbéliard. However, when it became clear to her that she was
lesbian, the two agreed to part ways and divorced. Divorce, how-
ever, was a drawback for a woman of society, an obstacle removed
by Prince Edmond de Polignac, himself a notorious homosexual.
At the time of their wedding Winnaretta was 28, the prince 59, and
the marriage proved an ideal partnership, leaving the couple
plenty of leeway to lead their own independent lives. Yet it was not
devoid of deep, sincere, mutual affection and a shared love of the
arts, which manifested itself in the quality of the paintings they
collected and, above all, in the music and ballets performed in the
wonderful music room on Avenue Henri Martin.
   It was love of art that brought them together in the first place,
during an auction where they fought tooth and nail over a Monet.
Winnaretta had the upper hand and outbid the infuriated Prince,
who originally cursed her to eternal damnation. Robert de Mont-
esquiou, formerly her friend, took offence at not being invited to

                                144
                        PASSY   — CHAILLOT


her intimate wedding, and called it a marriage between the dollar
and the sou, between the lyre (the Prince was a fine musician) and
the sewing machine! — a most unfair slander, Winnaretta being an
accomplished musician. Cocteau himself entitled one of his poems
machines a coudre (‘sewing machines’), and it was set to music by
Maxime    Jacob. But Winnaretta knew how to rise above such
taunts. When an embittered, impoverished noble acquaintance
protested that his name was as good as Polignac, she retorted, “Not
at the bottom of a cheque!’.
   On the whole she remained aloof to the personal enmities,
mean sarcasm, gossip and slandering that unavoidably peppered
the prodigious creativity of salon life, except in the case of the up-
and-coming Chanel, who was denied access to her home, and the
American composer Thomas Virgil, who was punished for being a
most welcome guest of Gertrude Stein’s. . .
   In 1919 Winnaretta was widowed and free to enter the roaring,
permissive, sophisticated Twenties as the independent and legitim-
ate cornerstone of society, the champion of democratic modernity,
even though her Victorian hairstyle might have suggested other-
wise. Gone were the red velvet and the gold lamé of the old-guard
salons frequented by the aristocracy. After she had promoted the
music of Ernest Chausson and Gabriel Fauré, it was now the turn of
Ravel, Stravinsky, Satie, the Groupe des Six and, of course, Diagh-
ilev’s Ballets Russes, whose productions demanded colossal funds.
Her generosity knew no bounds, notably towards Satie. Following
the premiere of Parade on 18 May 1917, when Jean Poueigh wrote
that the ballet lacked everything — inventiveness, wit and profes-
sional skill — Satie sent him a postcard which read, ‘Monsieur et cher
ami—vousn’étes qu’un cul, uncul sans musique’ (“Dear Sir and friend
— youre nothing but an arse, an arse with no music’). Arguing
that this constituted a public humiliation since the postcard
came unsealed and could be read by all and sundry, including the
concierge(!), Poueigh sued Satie and won the case. Satie had to pay
1,000 francs in damages and serve a week in prison, and it was
Winnaretta who forked out the money. During his first appeal
Cocteau raised his cane in a gesture against Poueigh’s lawyer and
was fined in his turn for ‘making physical threats against a lawyer
during the execution of his office’! Satie won the case eventually. In
a letter written to Winnaretta from his home at Arceuil-Cachan,

                                 145
                    16TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


dated 10 October 1918, he confirmed his outstanding debt of 688
francs and 74 centimes (having paid out 311 francs and 26 centimes)
and meekly asked his benefactress to allow him to keep the sum as
an advance, owing to his poor finances in the wake of the war. Poor
he was indeed, more than any of his friends ever realised, for he
never allowed anyone into his flat. It was only after his death in the
summer of 1925, when his flat was opened for an inventory, that his
friends were staggered to discover the appalling destitution he had
been living in — apart from his piano, a bed and a chair were his only
possessions. Erik Satie had fallen fatally ill the previous January,
after a life of heavy drinking of cheap wine, and it was Winnaretta
who arranged for him to have a private room in the Hépital Saint-
Joseph in the 14th arrondissement.
   Beyond her selfless generosity, Winnaretta’s contribution to
music and ballet in the first few decades of the 20th century cannot
be overestimated. It was thanks to her that many famous pieces
were written, for she encouraged her friends and major musicians
of the time to compose music specifically to be performed in her
salon. Ravel’s Pavane pour une Infante défunte, for example, came
into being in this way. There were also try-outs for Diaghilev’s
Ballets Russes, such as Les Noces. It must also be said to her credit
that whenever she commissioned works, she merely provided the
money and never interfered with the composers’ ideas. The tragic
events of World War II took Winnaretta to England, where she
died in 1943. Today the Polignac Foundation, still based on these
wonderful premises, carries on with her philanthropic work, pro-
viding funds to talented musicians at the outset of their careers.

Further along the avenue, on your right, runs the wall of the Passy
cemetery, which can be entered through rue du Commandant-
Schloesing to the right. Here lie, among others, the musicians
Debussy, Fauré and Yves Nat, the painter Manet, the writers
Tristan Bernard, Jean Giraudoux and Edmond Rostand, the act-
ress Réjane, the couturier Poitou and the ‘king’ of perfume,
Guerlain. Pioneers of the transport revolution are also buried here
— Costes, who in 1930 undertook the first non-stop flight across the
Atlantic from Paris to New York and Georges-Marie Haardt, who
in 1924 headed Citroén’s mission across Asia, the ‘Yellow Cruise’.
Two murdered statesmen also rest here — Sadi Carnot, assassinated

                                 146
by an anarchist in Lyons in 1894, and Georges Mandel, mentioned
above. The delightful Fernandel, real name Fernand Constantin,
died in 1971, aged 68, and is buried here under a pink granite tomb-
stone which cannot obliterate his unforgettable smile and the
savours of his Provencal accent. On the cemetery wall, facing the
Place du Trocadéro, is Landowski’s impressive memorial to the
victims of World War I. Opposite rises a statue of a dreamy Ben-
jamin Franklin seated in an armchair. On the pedestal below can
be read the superlative quote from the eulogy delivered by the
orator Mirabeau on 11 June 1790: Le génie qui franchit !Amérique et
versa sur Europe des torrents de lumiére (“The genius who set
America free and showered on Europe torrents of light’).

Continue to PLACE DU TROCADERO, once the site of the
Couvent de la Visitation, founded by Henrietta Maria of France as
mentioned above. Among other ladies of quality who stayed here

                                147
                    16TH ARRONDISSEMENT


was poor Louise de la Valliére, trying desperately to fight her love
for the young Louis XIV and to escape the poisonous female
tongues of the court. Her persistent royal suitor was hard to resist
when he came to the convent in person and begged her to follow
him back to the court. Twice she ran off, the second time taking
shelter with the Carmelite Order on rue Saint-Jacques (in the 5th
arr.), where she became Soeur Louise dela Miséricorde. By then the
King had switched his amorous allegiance to Madame de Montes-
pan and he made no effort to bring her back.
    The Couvent de la Visitation was swept away during the Revolu-
tion. In 1813 Napoleon intended to replace it with an imperial mon-
ument, to match the Sun King’s Palace of Versailles, above all, to
outshine Russia’s Kremlin — his idée fixe since the disastrous
Russian expedition a year earlier. He instructed his architects
Percier and Fontaine to create something ‘a hundred times more
beautiful than the Kremlin’, an imperial city which was to include a
palace for his two-year-old son, the King of Rome, two additional
palaces for science and art, an imperial university and an archive.
The gigantic project was to extend south to the Champ-de-Mars,
across the Pont d’Iéna and as far as the Bois de Boulogne to the west.
However, by 1815 the Bourbons were back on the throne of France
and in 1823 they inaugurated here instead the Place du Trocadéro,
which commemorated their victorious expedition in support of
their cousin Ferdinand VII, whom they wished to see on the throne
of Spain. In 1827 they put up on this site a cardboard model of the
fort of Trocadero, next to Cadiz, which they had taken, and enacted
that victory so as to efface Napoleon’s project. Showing similar
penchants to his uncle’s, Napoléon III later considered erecting a
bombastic statue — La France Intelligente — to watch over the six
ministries that would be built around her, and also over the Ecole
Polytechnique, which he intended to transfer here. He too, like his
uncle, did not have time to carry out his project.
   For the 1878 Universal Exposition, the Third Republic also
mistook gigantism for grandeur and instructed its official architect
Davioud to put up a 400-metre-long pastiche of a Hispano-
Moorish palace, complete with two unsightly towers, which most
Parisians found ghastly, including Proust, who referred to the ‘ugly’
monument in La Recherche du temps perdu. The monument was
torn down in 1935 and replaced for the 1937 Fair by the present one,

                                 148
                         PASSY   — CHAILLOT


le Palais de Chaillot, the work of Carlu, Boileau and Azéma, an
attractive example of the Modern Art style of the 1930s, and a suc-
cessful companion to the Eiffel Tower. A spectacular show was
staged here for the opening of the exhibition, with performers from
all over the world, who danced against a background of exotic
foreign palaces and the dancing waters of the floodlit fountains.
   Today the western wing of the Palais de Chaillot is home to the
Musée del’Homme and the Musée de la Marine. The sleepy Musée
de ’Homme was brought to the attention of the media in 1995,
when the newly elected President Jacques Chirac proclaimed his
intention to overhaul the museum and transfer here all the French
collections of African, Oceanian and South American art. This is a
pale contribution compared to the splurge of Grands Travaux dur-
ing Mitterrand’s reign, but France is suffering from a persistent
recession and no ruler at present would dare to indulge in prodigal
expenses, all the more so since Mitterrand’s Grands Travaux have
not always proved satisfactory.
   Its eastern wing houses the Musée des Monuments Frangais, the
Théatre National de Chaillot and the Paris Cinémathéque and
museum of the cinema. The theatre, which was designed by the
illustrious Niermans brothers, was previously known as the Théatre
National de Paris (TNP) and gained worldwide fame between 1953
and 1961, at the time of Jean Vilar. The Cinémathéque was initiated
by the enthusiastic film-lover Henri Langlois, after whom the
museum of the cinema is named. Here are on display Niepce’s first
camera, Daguerre’s glass photographic slides, Edison’s kineto-
scope, a reconstruction of Méliés’s studio in the eastern suburb of
Montreuil and legendary sets from such films as Metropolis. Before
you call it a day, go to the centre of the esplanade between the two
wings, an imposing site with its spurting fountain and graceful
gilded statues. Rising across the river is the ‘Iron lady’ in full glory,
particularly at night when set ablaze against the floodlit fountain.
