15th Arr: Overview

    THE 15TH ARRONDISSEMENT
SA egaesin the late 1960s, a new class of young professionals
was emerging from an ageing 19th-century France, they called the
15th arrondissement their own. Lying just across the river from the
opulent 16th and blending into the no less prestigious 7th to its
east, the 15th seemed a suitable address to these up-and-coming
yuppies — not quite the best, yet close enough. The exorbitant
prices of property in the 16th and 7th arrondissements were well
beyond their means. And wouldn’t they in any case have felt out of
place among the old families secure in their social superiority?
Here, in the 15th, ample space was available, precisely because of
the economic and social changes taking place in France just then.
    Previously a lower-class area, much of the land of the 15th had
been occupied by hundreds of factories and workshops — includ-
ing sulphurous gasworks and foul chemical industries, not to
mention the malodorous slaughterhouse of Vaugirard. But now,
with the new policy of economic restructuring and decentralisa-
tion, they were closing one by one — one out of three within 15
years! — to be replaced by as yet affordable blocks of flats and
offices. Totalling an area of nearly 1,000 acres (350 hectares), this
was the most gigantic clearance, the most spectacular and profit-
able real-estate transaction hitherto undertaken in the French cap-
ital. Thus the Vaugirard slaughterhouse was dismantled in 1979
and replaced by Parc Georges Brassens, which commemorates the
self-effacing poet who had ended his life in one of the neighbour-
ing side streets.
   South-west of the Eiffel Tower, the heavy industries which had
developed next to the harbour of Grenelle in the second half of the
19th century were replaced by Le Front de Seine, an unsightly com-
plex of 18 high-rises begun in 1961, a time of poor architectural
achievements, and constituting an eyesore on the riverside. In 1992
a new complex was inaugurated further down the Seine, on the
western edge of the arrondissement, this time to replace the old
Citroén car plant. But times have changed and in an environment-
friendly age, much of the area was given over to a team of land-
scape gardeners, who laid out the spacious Parc André Citroén all

                                 80
                          INTRODUCTION


the way down to the river, and were enthusiastically acclaimed by
the media. Whether or not you like the contrived conception the
French have of landscape gardening and the stylish constraints it
imposes on nature, le Parc André Citroén is worth a visit, for it
heralds the spirit of tomorrow’s Paris, no less than the monuments
erected in the last decade. Besides, Parisians love it.

With the dismantling of factories and workshops, half the
working-class population of the arrondissement was moved out,
much to the satisfaction of the gentrified newcomers, whose num-
bers more than compensated for this loss. With a total of 250,000
residents, the 15th is today the most heavily populated arron-
dissement, 20 per cent of whom are classified professionally as
executives! Moreover, some of the younger natives of the 7th and
the 16th have also moved here: even they can no longer keep up
with the real-estate prices of their own territory. Crossing the river
from the north and spilling over from the east, they have brought
to the 15th a badly needed social aura, but they have not as yet been
able to blot out entirely the proletarian stamp of its past. Short of
wiping out the better part of the arrondissement, it would have
been impossible to do so in sucha short time. As it is, 40 per cent of
its area has already been razed to the ground. Unfortunately, what
has been erected in its stead often leaves much to be desired. . .
    For although the 15th is prosperous, as many of its fashionable
shops testify, it can hardly be called an attractive arrondissement.
Humble dwellings and derelict constructions stand side by side
with modern blocks of flats of variable quality and appeal, never
attaining the magnificence of their wealthier neighbours (except at
the eastern edge of the arrondissement, but then, this border strip is
more of an extension of the 7th). Here and there some streets are
lined with attractive, bourgeois, Haussmann-style, freestone build-
ings which were put up at the turn of the century, but these are not
the rule. Devoid of beauty spots, of architectural harmony, and with
no historical monuments to show for itself, the 15th is hardly a
tourist Mecca. However, it can take pride in its world-famous
Institut Pasteur where the fight against rabies continues, as well as
research into other infectious diseases, notably a1ps, and which is
also a centre for microbiological studies. Likewise, the 15th has a
history of pioneering in aviation. It was on the site of today’s

                                 81
                      15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


heliport, at the south west edge of the arrondissement, which was
incorporated into Paris only in 1925, that such aviators as Blériot,
Roland Garros and the Voisin brothers experimented back in 1905.
On 13 January 1908 Henri Farman was the first to complete a one-
kilometre-long flight, after which le Terrain d’Issy, as it was then
called, became the meeting place of the fashionable — men in
chequered trousers and pointed shoes, with that extra touch of the
light-coloured gaiters and the gloves; women in Liberty satins or
embossed velvets. . . The following year, on 25 July, Blériot became
the first man to fly over the English Channel, while in 1913 Roland
Garros was the first to cross the Mediterranean.
    If the 15th is no great draw for tourists, it is certainly a place of
pilgrimage for mainstream France: year in, year out, following the
cyclic rhythm of the calendar, multitudes of Frenchmen circle
around Paris by way of its Boulevard Périphérique or the inner
Boulevards des Maréchaux (also known as Extérieurs), heading,
unflaggingly, bumper to bumper, towards the Porte de Versailles, at
the southern edge of the arrondissement. After endless hassle and
irritation, they swarm into the Palais des Expositions to visit one of
its annual fairs or shows — le Salon de lAuto, de l’Agriculture, du
Prét-a-porter — above all, La Foire de Paris, the major commercial
event of France. With over a million visitors a year and a turnover of
130 million    francs, with 3,500       exhibitors,   from   75 different
countries, this isa modern version of the Paris fairs held in medieval
times. Every conceivable commodity is on display, from gardening
utensils to jewellery, from the most exciting sports such as Benji, to
traditional wines and gastronomy, from household goods and do-
it-yourself components to international arts and crafts. Nor has
entertainment been neglected — the medieval fire-eater, animal
trainer and acrobat have been replaced by demonstrations of judo,
karate, synchronised swimming and so on. This is also a major
family outing, exhausting to parents and children alike, visited by
people from all over the Paris area, the Ile-de-France, even the
provinces, and, despite the hassle, they will be back next year.
   Crowds also flock to the neighbouring Palais des Sports for the
eternal Holiday on Ice or some other such popular entertainment,
but, at least, with the brighter prospect of being comfortably seated.
   No 36 rue des Morillons, next to Parc Georges Brassens, is
another shrine to be visited by every Parisian at least once in a

                                   82
                         INTRODUCTION


lifetime, not en masse, however, but individually. This is the Lost
Property Office, to which the scatter-brained makes a private pil-
grimage, despondent but with a secret glimmer of hope, hence the
optimistic name of the place in French — Objets Trouvés. This was
one of the last vestiges of pre-war France, where until very recently
each of the 10,000 or so items that arrived here per month was
sorted out manually and tied up with a string to which a hand-
written label was attached — yellow labels for items lost on the
Métro, green on buses, orange in airports and taxis, white in the
street. Nothing seemed to have changed since the 1930s, when this
department of the Préfecture de Police first established itself here.
But the fantastic array of labelled keys is no longer on display.
Computers have at last infiltrated these premises too, depriving
Paris of its last outpost in the battle against modernity.
    Those of you who are fond of statistics may like to know that
nearly 150,000 items await their owners here, roughly 15,000 keys,
closely followed in number by umbrellas. Some of the items vary
with the season — sunglasses in summer, scarves and gloves (pre-
dominantly the right-hand glove, reputedly) in winter, school
satchels in September and toys in December. The RATP, (the Paris
transport authorities) are the main purveyors of the establishment
— 40 per cent of items brought here were found on the public
transport. Foreign passports are also handed in, as well as substan-
tial sums of cash. After one year and one day unclaimed property is
handed over to the finder who becomes its guardian, but who does
not become its legal owner until 30 years have elapsed! If no such
finder presents himself, unclaimed items are auctioned off.
    The annual grape-picking ceremony at the resuscitated vine-
yard of the Clos des Morillons in the Parc Georges Brassens is a
more joyous pilgrimage. It takes place on a Saturday in September
or October. Some 600-700 kilos of grapes are picked that day,
accompanied by folk dancing and music and much rejoicing as the
harvest is loaded on to a brightly decked cart. The following sum-
mer, several hundreds of bottles of Clos des Morillons Pinot Noir-—
a fine vintage, according to connoisseurs — are sold for 50/60 Fr.
each at 38 rue des Morillons. The proceeds go to charity...

The vineyard, with its 700 vines, was planted only in 1985, when
the park was laid out. It was meant to rekindle old traditions, for

                                 83
                     15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


before the Revolution, the vineyards of these sunny, southern
slopes were the pride of the village of Vaugirard. Some malevolent
tongues derided the quality of its wine, the sharpness of which
‘would make a goat dance’. Sheer calumny, apparently, for it was
even marketed abroad. Mention of its export to England goes back
to 1453, when Jehan Legrand, husbandman, resident of Vaugirard,
has received forty francs minted at Tours’. The English must have
discovered the wine during the Hundred Years War that ended
that year. Indeed, we know from the Great Chronicles ofFrance that
the English had occupied the undefended area stretching south of
Paris, which included Vaugirard. An even earlier document, now
kept at the National Archives, goes back to July 1230. This is a sales
deed written on parchment, confirming that Milon Bergen and his
wife Agnés sold one acre of vineyard to Etienne Poirier for the sum
of 15 francs minted in Paris, paid in cash.
  In 1717 as many as 27 of the 95 houses of Vaugirard were taverns,
which meant they served wine. Parisians would come here on Sun-
days and holidays, especially after 1786, when the oppressive toll
walls were built round Paris — in this arrondissement on the site of
the Boulevards de Vaugirard, Pasteur, Garibaldi and Grenelle.
Beyond the walls, wine escaped taxation and entertainment was
cheap. Louis-Sébastien Mercier recorded that ‘one drinks wine,
one eats strawberries and peas. One dances to the sound of fiddles,
musettes and oboes’. However, the prosperity did not last long —
the profit-seeking winegrowers of Vaugirard replaced their wines
with a new stock which yielded much more wine, but of poorer
quality. The demanding consumers would have none of it and by
1810 there were no vineyards left in Vaugirard.

Before the 13th century Vaugirard, or Vauboitron as it was then
called, was just a farm situated on the extensive domain of the
powerful Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, along the ancient
Roman road leading to Chartres and, beyond it, to the south-west.
Today rue de Vaugirard (incidentally, the longest street in Paris)
follows the same route. Like other areas of Paris its development in
the 13th century was due to the religious orders. In 1256 Gérard de
Moret, the Abbot of Saint-Germain, built a convalescent home
and a chapel for his monks here, soon to be followed by a per-
manent establishment for the Benedictine Order, who set about

                                 84
                            INTRODUCTION


clearing the land and planting vines and other crops. This was the
nucleus of the village that was renamed Val Gérard after its found-
ing father, eventually distorted to Vaugirard. Large herds of cattle
grazed on its fertile land and the area became a major purveyor of
meat to the city — hence the Vaugirard slaughterhouse.
   No one knows why the village of Vaugirard was the object of
ridicule. Even Francois I liked to make fun of its inhabitants and
once signed his name as follows: ‘Francois, first in name by the
grace of God, King of France and Navarre, Marquis of Suresnes
and Count of Vaugirard.’ Burlesque literature in the 16th and the
17th centuries depicts it as a ridiculous village, focusing on its court
clerk, a grotesque character who could not write while being
watched. La Fontaine also mentions Vaugirard in one of his fables,
‘Le singe et le dauphin’:
                   ... de telles gens, il en est beaucoup
                   Qui prennent Vaugirard pour Rome
                   Et qui, caquetant au plus dru,
                   Parlent de tout et n’ont rien vu.
                   . . such people, there are plenty
                   That take Vaugirard for Rome
                   And who, prattling nineteen to the dozen,
                   Talk of everything but have seen nothing.
   A commentator on the fable wrote, “Vaugirard: a very vulgar
village on the outskirts of Paris’ — a total misunderstanding, since
La Fontaine simply meant a tiny village in contrast to the city of
Rome. But prejudice dies hard. There was also the saying, ‘I shall
love you to folly’ — a pun on folie, which also meant ‘pleasure
house’ — ‘and forsake you in Vaugirard’, which was put in the
mouths of cynical, fickle lovers, and points to the fact that some
privileged people had country houses there. As a matter of fact, it
was in one of the folies of Vaugirard that the painter Fragonard
celebrated his wedding.

The presence of the privileged in the area was enhanced after Louis
XIV had set up his court in Versailles in 1682. The quai de Chaillot
and the Pont de Sévres had not yet been built, and rue de Vau-
girard, by then the busy high street of the village, became the major
thoroughfare leading to the Court. Courtiers and powdered ladies

                                    85
                    15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


in their stagecoaches could be seen rubbing shoulders with humble
villagers in their carts, carrying wheat to the windmill (next to the
present rue de Dantzig) or grapes to the wine press (on the unlikely
site of today’s Prisunic at 240 rue de Vaugirard).
    Vaugirard and the neighbouring Grenelle were also a hunting
ground for the nobility, who enjoyed exclusive hunting rights in
pre-Revolutionary days. The commoners were obliged to tend the
thickets where the game bred for the sole pleasure of the nobility,
but woe betide a poacher caught killing a rabbit or a pigeon, an
offence punishable by a fine or even imprisonment. This, though,
was an improvement on the days of Francois I, when the first-time
offender would be whipped until he bled, while a second offence
would see him dispatched to the galleys! The hunting was an occas-
ion for a display of magnificent attires, sumptuous embroidery,
colourful feathers and great panache —all to the accompaniment of
the tumult of the pack and the sound of the hunting horn. Both the
Prince de Conti and the Prince de Condé came to hunt here —
Conti from his residence at the Chateau d’Issy, Condé from the
Chateau de Vanves (now Lycée Michelet).

The village of Grenelle too grew out of a religious domain, in this
case the vast domain of the Abbey of Sainte-Geneviéve in the Latin
Quarter. It was given to the abbey in the early 6th century by the
newly christened King Clovis in order to ensure its revenues. But
while Vaugirard developed gradually, Grenelle sprang up over-
night in the late 1820s in a hitherto uninhabited area. The alluvial
plain of Grenelle, which stretched as far as Faubourg Saint-
Germain in the 7th, was still submerged by the Seine in the 14th
century. Its poor soil yielded little more than rye and alfalfa and
did not attract settlers, but the plain contained the purest water
and supplied the entire Left Bank. There were also quarries in
Grenelle, although not to compete with those of Vaugirard, which
provided the stone for the palaces of Tuileries and Luxembourg,
the Invalides and the Ecole Militaire. The name Grenelle may have
derived from garanelle (sand or sandy plain) or garenne (a rabbit
warren) — much the same etymology, since sand is favourable to
the development of warrens — which accounts for its success as a
hunting-ground. The Chateau de Grenelle was the only dwelling
here, the property of the illustrious Craon family. Next to it, the

                                 86
                            INTRODUCTION


farm of Sainte-Geneviéve, with its barns, courtyards, gardens and
dovecote, was the property of the abbey and every Sunday and
holiday a priest would come all the way from the Latin Quarter to
celebrate mass in the chapel. Both farm and mansion overlooked
the Place de Grenelle — now Dupleix — and were bought out at the
time of Louis XV to allow the extension of the Ecole Militaire. The
architect, Jean-Jacques Gabriel, used the Chateau as his head-
quarters between 1756 and 1764.
   But France was heading for a period of turmoil and soon bucol-
ic landscapes and Louis XV shepherdesses would be washed away
by blood. On 29 January 1794 the Chateau became the Revolution’s
powder magazine. Paris had barely recovered from the bloodbath
of the Terror when early in the morning of 31 August it was woken
up by three terrific detonations. Gone was the Chateau de Gren-
elle. A pillar of black smoke coiled up, covering the cloudless, azure
summer sky with a dark veil. Why and how the powder magazine
had blown up was never found out.

The inhabitants of Vaugirard took an active part in the Revolution.
In April 1789 they had gathered to designate their delegates to the
General Assembly and written out their register of grievances,
which was submitted to the Third State. In it they complained
about the monks of Saint-Germain, the administrators of their
village: ‘big tithe-owners of the above-mentioned place, rendering
no service, neither spiritual nor temporal’. As for the uninhabited
plain of Grenelle, conveniently close to the Ecole Militaire, it came
in handy for the setting up of a camp for three revolutionary
battalions. Another camp was set up here during the Directoire* to
defend the new government if the need arose.
   The plain also served as a field of summary executions until 1815.
The condemned were lined up against the toll wall, just where the
ticket office of Dupleix Métro station now stands. Among them
were some émigrés who foolishly came back too soon, notably the
widow of the Comte de Mesnard, who had been the mistress of
George IV during her stay in England. Armand de Chateaubriand,
the cousin of the famous writer, was another victim.

   * French government between 27 October 1795 and 9 November 1799, when it
was overthrown by General Bonaparte.

                                       87
                    15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Grenelle retained its pastoral aspect until the 1820s, much to the
satisfaction of Victor Hugo and his romantic friends — Mérimée,
Delacroix, Vigny, Musset, Nerval — who would          climb up the
heights of Plaisance or Vaugirard to watch the sunset over the
plain, the river and the hills of Passy and Auteuil beyond. It was
those sunsets, transposed to Greece, that Victor Hugo described in
his early poems Les Orientales, in 1829.
    By then the plain had been acquired by the contractor Jean-
Léonard Violet, and was undergoing major transformations. A few
years earlier, Violet had already built up two new developments on
the Right Bank — Europe and Fran¢ois I. Grenelle had the finan-
cial advantage of lying outside the toll walls, while the vicinity of
the river offered further prospects for profit — a harbour for timber
and other building material, a port and a toll bridge that would
link it to Passy. Violet meant the new neighbourhood to be pleas-
ant and even built himself a lovely house here. A 1300-seat theatre,
le Théatre de Grenelle, soon followed suit; it was hoped that this
would enhance the prestige of the new borough, but it also aroused
the jealousy of Vaugirard, whose local councillors voted against
the installation of two street-lamps on the dark rue Mademoiselle
which belonged to Vaugirard and led to the theatre, out of sheer
spite. Violet named the borough Beau Grenelle, never doubting
that before long it would become an insalubrious industrial area,
for the very same reasons that had attracted him to it, namely, the
availability of cheap land and the closeness of the river. He did not
foresee that the port he built would start out as a financial fiasco
owing to the opening up of the canals of Saint-Martin and Ourcq
which linked Paris with the great industrial areas of the north-east,
and also because of the huge investment it would take to improve
the navigation on the Seine upstream and make it profitable. It was
only when the City of Paris took these steps in the 1860s that the
port of Grenelle became a profitable, even thriving enterprise.

The first enterprise in the 15th arrondissement was set up during
the Ancien Régime at Javel, the plain along the river west of Gren-
elle, which also belonged to the Abbey of Sainte-Geneviave
(javelles or javeaux in old French were unsteady islets created by
river floods). There was a well-known windmill at Javel, Le Moulin
de Javel, very popular among Parisians at the end of the 17th

                                 88
                          INTRODUCTION


century, who would come over on Sundays to savour crayfish
freshly caught in the Seine, washed down with wine from Vau-
girard or Suresnes. Couples in illicit liaisons would come here to
avoid preying eyes, as alluded to in a popular play, Le Moulin de
Javelle, produced at the Théatre Francais on 6 July 1696. In 1777 the
younger brother of Louis XVI, Le Comte d’Artois and future
Charles X, bought up the place and built a chemical plant on the
site. He was a prodigal young man, and although his brother the
King provided him with an extremely generous allowance, he was
always short of funds, which he hoped the factory would supply.
He entrusted it to two chemists, Alban and Vallet, who invented
on the premises the famous eau de Javel, cleaning liquid still com-
monly used in many French homes. The factory remained in
operation for 112 years. A Citroén plant was opened on the site
during the Great War, producing 50,000 shells per day. With peace
restored, it was converted into a car plant and in 1919 the first
standard Citroén was run on quai de Javel.
   It was from 1830 on, during the reign of Louis-Philippe, that the
industrialisation of the 15th arrondissement began, as indeed of all
of France. It started modestly with chemical and metallurgical in-
dustries, building industries and textile mills, but it was only after
1860, when the area was incorporated into Paris — against the
protests of its inhabitants — that the new arrondissement became
heavily industrialised, in particular Grenelle (the ‘Beau’ had been
realistically dropped) with its port, railway network, ironworks,
boilerworks, rolling mills, rubber factories and glassworks, not to
mention the putrid gasworks at La Motte Picquet. It was at
Grenelle that the bridge of Arcole that links Notre-Dame and the
Right Bank was built, as well as the bridges of the Lausanne-
Fribourg railway line and, further afield, those of the Moscow-
Novgorod line.
   The technological and scientific progress of the latter part of the
19th century entailed the development of new industries, often
related to construction. The two Universal Expositions of 1889 and
1900 on the nearby Champ-de-Mars gave them a further boost.
Thus the general electricity and telephone companies were estab-
lished in the 15th, as well as the lift company Edoux-Samain, which
built the lifts of the Eiffel Tower, Armand Moisant, which built the
Bazar de |’Hotel de Ville and the Bon Marché,           an industrial

                                 89
                     15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


landscape which remained basically unchanged well into the
1960s, dominated by the Citroén plant with its 17,000-strong
workforce. Citroén outstayed its welcome and moved out only in
1982, marking its departure with a procession of 41 of its models
from 1919 to 1942, along the quai and up the Champs-Elysées. Even
the Eiffel Tower was roped in to this big event, being temporarily
decorated with the shining letters CITROEN.
   Today office blocks have replaced chimney stacks, among them
the 209-metre-high Tour Montparnasse, the tallest building in the
capital. There was an outcry of protest when it was erected between
1969 and 1973, and an over-repeated joke, supposedly invented
spontaneously out of the present circumstances, said that the Tour
Montparnasse was the most beautiful spot in Paris because it was
the only one from which it could not be seen! The joke had in fact
already circulated in the late 1880s, when the Eiffel Tower was
being erected. The tower was followed in 1990 by the new (and
third) Montparnasse railway station, built to accommodate the
South West TGV (high speed train) line to Spain, serving 59
million passengers a year and intended to become the largest
railway station in France and the new centre of gravity of the
arrondissement. As a concession to Parisians, who were totally
disorientated in this surreal environment of concrete, a vast
garden was laid out above the station, bearing the promising name
of Le Jardin Atlantique. Vegetation from both sides of the Atlantic
was planted as an extra gesture. However, it takes a lift and some
corridors through one of the blocks on the Boulevard de Vaugirard
to reach the garden and discover, to one’s dismay, that it is literally
hemmed in on all sides by fortress-like buildings, blotting out the
horizon and fending off any hope of an Atlantic breeze.

The arty and bohemian crowd of pre-World War II Paris would
have felt out of place in this Montparnasse of high-tech and real-
estate speculation, which has shifted from the 6th and 14th to the
15th arrondissement. In those days the 15th served as living quar-
ters on the periphery of Montparnasse for those too poor to live in
the centre of action — the poorer they were, the further away they
lived. The Cité Falguiére on this side of the arrondissement offered
shelter to the slightly better-off; the downright destitute lodged at
La Ruche at Passage de Dantzig, on the edge of the horrific slum-

                                  90
                         INTRODUCTION


belt of Paris known as la zone (see also chapters on the 14th and
19th arrs), and by the Vaugirard slaughterhouse.
   La Ruche was the baby of the pompier sculptor Boucher, the
darling of society though the son of poor farmers, who bought this
piece of wasteland from the owner of the neighbouring bistrot, Le
Dantzig, in order to house fellow artists. The patron of Le Dantzig
was only too happy to be rid of it and sold it for a song. Slaughter-
house or no, the artist community was happy to havea roof over its
head, all the more since Boucher planted the substantial plot of
land with beautiful trees and in no time transformed it into a pas-
toral oasis. In order to extend the lodgings for future tenants, le
Pére Boucher, as he was fondly called, went over to the Champ-de-
Mars and bought some vestiges of the pavilions of the 1900 World
Fair, notably Eiffel’s wine rotunda. This was common practice at
the time and other artist quarters in Paris are still made up of such
pavilions. Although he himself was the academic sculptor of the
establishment, and no great artist, Boucher was fond of his anar-
chical, eccentric residents and overlooked their unpaid 50-franc
rent bills. Few of the tenants were actually French, Fernand Léger
being an exception. Most had escaped oppression and pogroms in
eastern Europe — Lipchitz, Zadkine, Archipenko, Marc Chagall —a
great majority of Jews, who, between the years 1905 and the out-
break of World War I, found at La Ruche the freedom necessary
for creative minds and turned it into the birthplace of l’Ecole de
Paris.    ;
   Even when La Ruche declined during the war, many Jewish
artists went on living there, a fact that did not escape the vigilant
eye of the Gestapo several decades later; Epstein and Granowski
were rounded up from here, never to return.

Those were just drops in the ocean. The big round-up of Parisian
Jews, La Grande Rafle, the one meant to cleanse the city of its
Eastern European Jewry, sadly also took place in the 15th, in the
Vélodrome d’Hiver on rue Nélaton, next to the Boulevard de
Grenelle. In happier times Vél d’Hiv’, as it was commonly called,
had been used for sports and other miscellaneous events — boxing
rounds starring such champions as Marcel Cerdan (also famously
the lover of Edith Piaf), political meetings held by Maurice Thorez
and Léon Blum, and a performance by the legendary tenor
                                 91
                     15TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Beniamino Gigli. Above all, it housed the famous six-day cycling
races, which drew in 15,000 fervent spectators, who would camp
round the clock in the velodrome for the entire duration of the
race. But at dawn on 16 July 1942, a sordid page was to stain the
history of France, when 13,152 Jews were snatched from their sleep
by the French police to be sent to their deaths — a disappointing
figure, considering that 28,000 arrests had been reckoned upon in
the Paris area (the operation was originally intended for 14 July
but, out of fear of public reaction, was deferred by two days).
Adults without children were dispatched directly to the camp of
Drancy, north of Paris, while those with children aged 2 to 16 —
over 8,000 — were transported to Vél d’Hiv’. For two days convoys
of Paris green buses, requisitioned for the occasion, plied the city
with their load of victims, in broad daylight and in view of all,
disgorging them in Vél d’Hiv. Here began a six-day inferno in
suffocating heat up to 40°C, with no amenities, a foretaste of a long
journey to come — children down with measles, pregnant women,
hysterical mothers driven to acts of folly, shrieks of despair and
nauseating smells of excrement that filled the entire neighbour-
hood — all under the callous eye of the police. Occasionally a tear of
sympathy was shed, or a helping hand proffered, but overall the
police were ‘obeying orders’.
  Vél d@Hiv’, like so much of the 15th arrondissement since, was
demolished in 1958 and replaced by a block of flats. The Square de
la Place du Martyr Juif was inaugurated along the quai de Grenelle
to the left on 17 July 1994, endowed with a garden and a moving
sculpture by Walter Spitzer. An annual ceremony now commem-
orates the round-up of Vél d’Hiv, attended in 1995 by the newly
elected President Chirac who, in a courageous speech, acknow-
ledged for the first time in the name of officialdom France’s
responsibility in the crime. He also inaugurated a commemorative
plaque, but despite its plea for remembrance, few people pass by it
and fewer still notice it.

La Ruche too was meant for demolition in 1967, to be replaced by
council flats, and only its artists’ relentless determination, sup-
ported by an anonymous gift from the United States in 1971, saved
it. On the whole, the 15th is not the home of nostalgics but of go-
getting, forward-looking, family-orientated Parisians, the pio-

                                 92
                          INTRODUCTION


neering territory of French yuppies (who have meanwhile spread
elsewhere too), and as such takes pride in its quality of life. This is
exemplified by the spectacular increase in its number of trees and
gardens in the last 15 years: more than 3,400 trees and 27.5 hectares
(68 acres) of new gardens, the most recent of which, the Parc
André Citroén, endows the left bank of the Seine with a third
esplanade, west of the Invalides and the Champ-de-Mars.
    The shops and restaurants of the arrondissement also bear wit-
ness to its prosperity. Of course there are the traditional stalls on
rue du Commerce and rue de Lourmel with their cascades of
colourful, succulent fruit, their tantalising variety of cheeses and
the rest — but it is the increasing number of luxury groceries and
trendy caterers that is striking, along with the fact that practically
all the big names in the capital have opened shops here — Hédiard,
Dalloyau, Le Notre and Flo — as well as the fashionable baker
Poilane. Likewise, the pioneering nouvelle cuisine restaurant Pierre
Vedel was set up in the 15th when this style of cooking became the
rage. The health-conscious inhabitants of the 15th are also fortun-
ate to have a large choice of fitness clubs, first and foremost
Aquaboulevard, designed to meet the modern French craving for
sunshine and tropical shores. The gigantic concrete and glass
centre, which offers them plenty of exotic vegetation and blue
waters (as well as shops and eating-places), is a temple of well-
being. Here the cult of the human body is celebrated with all the
customary rites of the modern           age — jacuzzis, Turkish baths,
biomarine treatments, saunas, sports and games. This dream-
come-true attraction, however, is now in financial straits — once
the novelty was over, and in view of the unavoidably exorbitant
entrance fees, the crowds gradually dwindled.
