18th Arr: Montmartre

                         MONTMARTRE

If you can spare time for just one walk in countrified, away-from-
it-all Paris, Montmartre should be your choice, provided you are
fit— the climb up its maze of sloping alleys and steep flights of steps
can prove quite demanding! Here a picturesque view unfolds at

                                 200
                                   +
                          ——
                          ae
                                   @             ‘ot




                      N¥ if
                          2 Oe
                               J
                                            \voneel




                ¥ Y
                      hil
                      i

                       T            e
                                        g
                                             ei.
                                   ar
                           ie

                               ie!
                               1=




every corner and a new surprise awaits you at the top of every flight
of steps. Here also, above the thick veil of pollution that shrouds
the rest of Paris, the air has remained almost as fresh and the light
almost as limpid as when Renoir painted the healthy, native girls of
the village with their velvety skins. And except for the immediate
environs of the Sacre-Coeur and Place du Tertre, which are packed
with tourists and cluttered with the usual paraphernalia of the
tourist trade, Montmartre is surprisingly uncrowded. However do
not come on a dull day — Montmartre craves for a ray of sun, and if
you can make it in the earlier part of the morning, all the better —
you will capture that unique atmosphere when Parisian life stirs

                                                       201
                                                           B)
                                                       ~        PL. CASADESUS
                                                    R.S_DEREGRSS   >
                                                      SORE S. URES  ~~
                                                us \US585N ZY=
                                                                BRQUILLARDS/S)




                         THEATRE DES
                          DEUX ANES
             PL. DE                    MOULIN
                                       ROUGE




into its daily motion. But then a splendid sunset over the roofs of
Paris can also be an unforgettable sight. . .
   Although the hill of Montmartre covers a very small area in-
deed, it cannot be explored in a single itinerary. Use your sense of
adventure to stroll beyond the suggested walk. And do not feel bad
about leaving out some spots — there will always be ‘a road not
taken’ in Montmartre.

Anvers Métro Station is our starting point. It is situated on the
BOULEVARD DE ROCHECHOUART. At no. 84 is the Elysée-
Montmartre, where La Goulue, once the star of le Moulin Rouge,

                                 202
                                                  CENTS




      CIMETIERE
      ST-VINCENT




                                  DI

              Ne                   |
                           MONTMARTRE
                                     1
                   f COR>         Fefa


             jena)         ac
              ST-RUSF ioe CHEVA ue?
              R.     ST-
                                         - DU




                                                                     MARCHE
                                                                    ST-PIERRE




                                                 PGE BRIQUET




started her career. Today its stage is used by international pop
stars, reflecting the cultural changes that have occurred in the city.
Walk into RUE STEINKERQUE, due north, in whose cheap
brothels Picasso and his friends experienced a certain aspect of
Paris in their younger, bohemian days. Towering pompously
ahead is the Basilica of Sacre-Coeur with the pleasant gardens of
Square Willette rolling downhill at its foot. You will come to
PLACE SAINT-PIERRE, a neighbourhood garden, enhanced by
an antiquated carousel complete with prancing horses, which is
said to be two centuries old. A nostalgic street organ churns out old
melodies as it goes round. Place Saint-Pierre played a more

                                                203
                     18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


strategic role during the 1870 siege of Paris, when Nadar, the
famous photographer and Jack-of-all-trades, used it as a base to
launch a good number of balloons to enable the city authorities to
communicate with the provinces. It was in one of them that Gam-
betta took off in order to reorganise the army of the Loire, while
Clemenceau, then Mayor of Montmartre, and Victor Hugo waved
farewell to him from below. To your right is the celebrated Marché
Saint-Pierre — a bedlam on a Saturday afternoon — offering the
largest and cheapest choice of fabrics in the capital. Black Africans
and white French housewives rub shoulders with dressmakers and
film or theatre dressers, while Arab men buy glittering fabrics for
their women sequestered back home. Pablo Picasso did the same
in 1904, when he came here to glean cheap cloth for his attire.
    Square Willette is named after the Montmartre painter who
helped to promote the romantic image of Montmartre, with its
village shepherdesses, Pierrots and Harlequins; cheap copies of
which have been circulating throughout the world since the turn
of the century. It is a piece of historical irony that his name should
have been given to the gardens of the Sacre-Coeur, in view of his
fierce objection to this house of God: ‘It is not possible that God, if
he exists, should agree to live in there. This stupendous jumble has
been built by the Devil, and for the Devil.’ He entered the basilica
one day, followed by some tipsy fellow-artists, and went round it
chanting: ‘Long live the Devil!’.
    PLACE SUZANNE-VALADON, the strip of garden adjacent
to Square Willette to the west, also commemorates a major mem-
ber of Montmartre’s artist community, a painter in her own right,
but also the model and fickle mistress to several of her fellow-
artists, from Edgar Degas, Puvis de Chavanne, Toulouse-Lautrec
and Renoir to Erik Satie, whose heart she broke beyond repair. She
dealt even more roughly with her own son, Maurice Utrillo, the
Montmartre painter par excellence. Who his father was no-one
ever knew for sure. He became hopelessly alcoholic by virtue of his
grandmother’s habit of putting him to sleep during his infancy
with the help of a little alcohol. Suzanne Valadon had no qualms
 about locking him up in his room, at no. 12 rue Cortot, while she
 shared the fat profits from the sale of his highly appreciated paint-
 ings with her lover Utter, her son’s contemporary. The ménage a
trois with their screams and shouting matches and fits of violence,

                                 204
                           MONTMARTRE


were notorious on the hill. The art dealer Bernheim took pity on
Utrillo and bought a townhouse in his name on Avenue Junot. The
meénage moved to this new address, where Utrillo was sequestered
once more, but at least in greater comfort and with a more enter-
taining view from his barred window.
   It is on Place Suzanne-Valadon that the Montmartre funicular
railway starts its ascent. First built in 1903, it ran on coal and had a
slim chimney that puffed out smoke as it laboured to the top of the
hill. The new funicular, inaugurated in 1991, is not even remotely
romantic, but it has greater speed and greater capacity, and it
spares the feet of those who do not wish to or cannot climb the 225
steps up rue Foyatier, running parallel to the railway. We, for our
part, suggest the long way round.

Retrace your steps on Place Saint-Pierre, continue along rue
Tardieu and turn left into rue des Trois-Fréres. It will lead you to
the picturesque PLACE CHARLES-DULLIN, a typical Mont-
martre square, shaded by trees and home to a pretty theatre, le
Théatre de PAtelier, once the famous Théatre de Montmartre.
Like all the suburban theatres around Paris, it was founded by
Seveste, who had been given exclusive rights over them by Louis
XVIII in gratitude for having found the remains of his brother
Louis XVI. The actor Charles Dullin started out a pauper, reciting
poems by Baudelaire and Verlaine in the neighbourhood’s caba-
rets, to make ends meet. Scorned because of his deformed back and
his nasal voice, he received an unhoped for stroke of luck when the
director of the Théatre des Arts in nearby Batignolles happened to
hear him at the Lapin Agile one night. He hired him on the spot to
play in The Brothers Karamasov, a role that marked the beginning
of a brilliant career. For 30 years his name was associated with the
Théatre de l’Atelier, where he excelled in the roles of Moliére’s The
Miser, Volpone and Richard III. Above all, it was Jean Cocteau’s
Antigone, with costumes by Chanel and sets by Picasso, that made
history on this stage and the entire Tout-Paris was present on the
night of the premiére. Later, it was Charles Dullin in his turn who
introduced an unknown actor by the name of Jean-Louis Barrault,
then as wretchedly poor as Dullin had been and living in the neigh-
bouring Bateau-Lavoir.


                                 205
                     18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


Retrace your steps on rue des Trois-Fréres and turn left into RUE
YVONNE-LE-TAC (previously rue Antoinette). The convent at
no. 9 is located on the supposed site of the decapitation of Saint
Denis, after which he is said to have picked up his blood-stained
head and proceeded up the hill, a miracle commemorated by a
chapel which was probably built in the 9th century. When the new
abbey of Montmartre was built here in the 17th century, after the
rediscovery of the holy shrine (it had fallen into oblivion during
the War of Religions), the chapel became part of the abbey.
  On 15 August 1534 Ignatius of Loyola and his six companions
(from France, Navarre, Spain and Portugal) took a vow of poverty
and chastity in the chapel crypt, with the determination to devote
their lives to the salvation of heathens and Christians alike, making
it the cradle of the Jesuit Order, or the Society of Jesus as they came
to be known in 1537. In 1541 they elected Ignatius their father super-
ior. A 19th-century plaque commemorates the: event inside the
chapel (the original 17th-century plaque disappeared during the
Revolution): “This was the cradle of a great religious order which
acknowledged Saint Ignatius of Loyola as its father, and whose
mother was Paris and the year of salvation was 1534, 15 August.’
    Continue along rue Yvonne-le-Tac. The entrance to the abbey
was located at no. 23. Its grounds extended as far as rue des Abbes-
ses, rue des Trois-Fréres and rue Ravignan up until the Revolution,
when the abbey was looted and desecrated, and its grounds divided
into small plots and sold off. Gone were the magnificent entrance
door and cloister, while the chapel and the sanctum martyrium were
turned into a gypsum quarry, fetching substantial profits for its new
owner. The Jesuits’ efforts to find the legendary crypt were fruitless.
They came back here several times in the 19th century but were
always unsuccessful. Eventually they bought the sacred site where
they put up a wooden chapel. They later conceded it to the Auxiliary
Ladies of Purgatory who replaced it with the present one.

Ahead is PLACE DES ABBESSES, named after the 43 abbesses of
Montmartre, the last of whom, Louise de Montmorency-Laval, was
guillotined on 2 July 1794 — a 71-year-old lady, decrepit, deaf and
blind, she was accused of having ‘plotted deafly and blindly against
the Republic’. This is yet another picturesque corner of Mont-
martre, shaded by trees and decked with characteristic items of

                                  206
                > \fe nS




_            eS.
                  CSF




    MASHA      riAX So              P



                             Place des Abbesses


    Belle-Epoque paraphernalia — a pillar-shaped billboard, known
    after its inventor as Colonne Morris, a graceful Fontaine Wallace
    and, above all, Hector Guimard’s spectacular Métro station.
        Place des Abbesses was still on the edge of civilisation at the
    time. Beyond it lay the wilderness of Montmartre. At this point
    all passengers would alight from their coaches and continue the
    journey on foot, a slippery hazard in winter. The town hall of
    Montmartre stood on the corner of Place des Abbesses and 14
    rue des Abbesses. During the troublesome year of 1870-1 Georges
    Clemenceau was its Mayor. The poet Verlaine married here on 11
    August 1870, aged 26, although he would never become a family
    man.




                                    207
                    18TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Walk into rue des Abbesses and turn right into RUE RAVIG-
NAN, which climbs up into the even more countrified PLACE
EMILE-GOUDEAU, named after Rodolphe Salis’s partner at the
famous Chat Noir. An Edenic garden planted with exquisite fruit
trees lay here in the 19th century, a remnant of the grounds of the
abbey. Among them was a pear tree of such gigantic dimensions
that a famous guinguette (open-air café) was opened under its
branches, named Le Poirier Sans Pareil (The Peerless Pear Tree). It
was closed down because ofa landslide, but a hotel on the corner of
the newly opened rue Berthe perpetuated its name for some time.
   At no. 13 rue Ravignan, just off Place Emile Goudeau, stood Le
Bateau-Lavoir (so called because it resembled a wash-house), the
birthplace of Modern Art. Here in 1907, from the clutter of slum-
my studios and from among an extraordinary jumble of junk,
emerged a scandalous masterpiece, a milestone in the history of art
— Les Demoiselles d’Avignon. Picasso had already painted at Le
Bateau-Lavoir the last of his Blue Period paintings and all those of
his Pink Period. But now, under the influence of Cézanne, the
Fauves, and above all Braque, whose works were deridingly
referred to by one critic as ‘cubist’, a revolution was fermenting
which was to change the very concept of art and have repercus-
sions worldwide. And it was taking place here, precisely in
Picasso’s junk-filled studio, ‘the central laboratory of modern art’,
as Max Jacob described it.
   Unlike Renoir and other 19th-century predecessors, it was not
the pure air and pastoral charm of Montmartre that had attracted
Picasso and his friends to the hill but down-to-earth practicality:
Montmartre was cheap! Here they could find a roof for a song and
a meal for a trifle. Naturally, they were not averse to the genuine
simplicity and lack of conformity of the people, but this alone
would not have kept them here. The fact is that they left Mont-
martre as soon as budding success enabled them to do so, and
although they superficially befriended the locals, they never
became integrated into Montmartre and almost never integrated
Montmartre into their art. It was not the brothels of rue
Steinkerque, that Picasso had in mind when he painted Les
Demoiselles d’Avignon (nor that charming town of Provence, for
that matter) but a bordello he knew in Barcelona; and although the
circus scenes on the Boulevard at the foot of the hill — both inside

                                208
                            MONTMARTRE


Le Cirque Medrano and in the open air — did inspire his work, the
village on the hill hardly ever did.
   Itwas when Picasso was living here that he painted the portrait of
Gertrude Stein. Every day the very overweight American writer
would cross the whole of Paris and climb up the exhausting steps of
Montmartre to sit for Picasso in his studio. The ruthless artist had
no qualms about making his admirer repeat this ordeal 80 times in
a row. On the other hand, he showed great generosity towards le
Douanier (real name Henri) Rousseau because here was someone
he respected. The celebrated banquet that was lavished upon
Rousseau at Le Bateau-Lavoir in December 1908 was instigated by
Picasso and was organised in his studio by his warm-hearted
companion, Fernande Olivier. Apollinaire meant the banquet as a
hoax, for he regarded Rousseau as a second-rate painter and a
simple soul (after all, he had been formerly employed as custom-
house officer at the toll gate of Brancion, hence his nickname Le
Douanier), but Picasso meant it in earnest, as a consecration of his
 career. Apollinaire was dispatched to Rousseau’s house in the 14th
 arrondissement, at the other end of Paris, from where he escorted
 the elderly painter by coach all the way to Le Bateau-Lavoir. The
 entire artistic community of Paris was invited to the banquet, in-
 cluding its international celebrities, Alice B. Toklas and the Steins.
The village scroungers gatecrashed the banquet and made the most
of the occasion, stuffing both mouths and pockets. Meanwhile, the
enchanted Douanier sat enthroned at the table under the
chandelier. As he dozed off in contentment, the wax began to drip
from the chandelier and piled up on his bald head, much to the
delight of the assembled guests. The banquet turned out to be the
major social event of the Paris art world in the first decade of the
20th century and remained imprinted in the participants’ memory
for many years to come.
    André Malraux, de Gaulle’s enterprising Minister of Culture, to
whom we owe much of the restoration of the historic Marais, was
aware that Le Bateau-Lavoir was a historic landmark and intended
to have it listed. Unfortunately, he did not have time to do so, for
on 12 May 1970 the building was devastated by a fire. It took only a
couple of minutes for this wooden structure, the temporary home
of Gauguin, Van Dongen, Aristide Bruant and many others, to
burn to ashes. Among the artists who were living there at the time

                                 209
                    18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


were the sculptor Laurent Guyot and the painter Daniel Milhaud,
son of the composer Darius. A new building now stands on the
site, doing its best to rekindle the flame of the one-time Bateau-
Lavoir.

Continue on rue Ravignan. Ahead to your left is the pretty PLACE
JEAN-BAPTISTE CLEMENT, named after the Mayor of Mont-
martre during the Commune and the author of Le Temps des
Cerises. A cherry tree was once planted here in his honour.
  Turn right into RUE GABRIELLE, a countrified street ending
in a flight of steps among shady trees, from where you can enjoy
the gliding passage of the funicular plying up and down the railway
track. Picasso’s first studio was located at no. 49 and the Jewish
poet Max Jacob’s monastic room at no. 9. When the artistic com-
munity left Montmartre for Montparnasse, around 1910, he alone
clung to Montmartre and wrote on the walls of his room, “ne pas
partir a Montparnasse.’ It was also in this room that he had an
illuminating revelation after which he converted to Roman Cath-
olicism. This did not help him much during World War II — on 7
March 1944 he was deported to Drancy, the antechamber of the
death camps, never to return. He was 68.

Retrace your steps and notice on your right bits of the Sacre-Coeur
rising above the steep slope. Turn right on RUE DU CALVAIRE
—a long flight of steps which will take you further up the hill. It is
named after a cross that stood here when this was the path that led
from the lower to the upper abbey. A breathtaking view of Paris
rewards you at the top, where you will also discover the tiniest
square in Paris, the PLACE     DU CALVAIRE,        exquisitely atmo-
spheric in the morning, before the daily invasion of tourists. No. 3
on your left is a fine example of Art Deco architecture. This was the
home of painter Maurice Neumont, one of whose works can be
seen in the museum of old Montmartre at 12 rue Cortot. La Ter-
rasse Patachou on your right is a delightful place to rest one’s tired
feet in fine weather, steeped in flowers and affording a spectacular
view of the city.

Turn left into RUE POULBOT where at no. 11 you can visit the
Espace Dali, an art gallery devoted to Salvador Dali. The street

                                 210
                           MONTMARTRE


leads to RUE NORVINS, once the village high street, supposedly
some 900 years old and the oldest street in the village. If you turn
left on rue Norvins, you will come to the junction of rues des
Saules and Saint-Rustique, the most famous of Montmartre’s
landscapes, next to the Sacre-Coeur, thanks to Utrillo’s recurrent
paintings of this picturesque spot. La Bonne Franquette on the
corner of the narrow rue Saint-Rustique was frequented by Sisley,
Cézanne, Zola and later Picasso. It was immortalised by Van Gogh
in a painting entitled La Guinguette, which now hangs in the
Musée d’Orsay.
    At no. 22 rue Norvins stands a beautiful 18th-century mansion,
La Folie Sandrin. In the early 19th century it was turned into a
mental home, run by Dr Blanche, among whose celebrated patients
was the poet Gérard de Nerval, who later hanged himself from a
lamppost in one of the narrowalleys east of Place du Chatelet (since
cleared by Haussmann), precisely on the site of the present Théatre
de la Ville. It was during his stay here that he wrote his masterpiece
Aurélia. When the Russian battalion occupied Montmartre in 1814,
its chief had the idea of establishing his headquarters in the beauti-
ful surroundings of this clinic, but the highly-strung inmates, upset
by the din of the battle, raged and fretted and greeted his men with
such hysterical agitation that he gave it second thoughts, packed up
and set up his headquarters elsewhere.
    Retrace your steps and continue along rue Norvins. At no. 6,
La Mére Catherine, founded by Catherine Lamotte in 1792, is
traditionally believed to be the place where the word ‘bistro’ was
coined, as reported earlier. At no. 2 the hotel-restaurant Le
Bouscarat was also frequented by the artists of the hill.

You will now have reached PLACE DU TERTRE, where Mont-
martre’s tourist industry congregates. Multitudes of T-shirts,
Toulouse-Lautrec reproductions and portrait painters mingle in a
sea of red-chequered tablecloths under garlands of electric bulbs,
like some vast backdrop ofa French operetta, punctuated by an old
French song and the drifting sound of a piano or an accordion
wafting through open restaurant windows. In days of yore Place du
Tertre was the village square, where many of its social functions
were filled. This was the site of the village gallows before the
building of the new abbey in the 17th century, where justice was

                                 211
                    18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


dispensed by the Abbess of Montmartre. Likewise, when Mont-
martre was endowed with its first municipality during the French
Revolution, the town hall was established at no. 3. When, in 1920,
following the initiative of Rodolphe Salis, the eccentric commun-
ity of Montmartre declared its independence as the Commune
Libre, they too made Place du Tertre their seat, at no. 19. You may
remember from previous pages that the ‘traditionalist’ electoral
list wanted to limit the number of people allowed into Place du
Tertre at any one time to 100,000 — undoubtedly the most clear-
sighted item on their agenda! Essentially, the main activity of the
Commune Libre was the organising of village fétes such as the
yearly wedding of Poulbot and his companion, a ceremony that
was perpetuated even after the couple had been formally wed. But
the Commune Libre was also a democracy led by a Mayor. All the
people of the hill were encouraged to take part in the elections, as
well as old friends who were living in Montparnasse by then. On 24
December 1898, well before the rise of the Commune Libre, Louis
Renault climbed up the Butte Montmartre in his newly invented
car, finally pulling up in front of no. 21.

Turn left into RUE DU MONT-CENIS. It is believed that back in
1436 the village shop was located on the corner of rues Norvins,
Saint-Rustique and Mont-Cenis and was owned by a certain Jehan
Doulcet. For over a thousand years, from the time of King Dago-
bert in the 7th century up to the French Revolution, this was the
road that led to the Basilica of Saint-Denis. Every seven years, at
the beginning of May, a procession of monks from Saint-Denis
would climb up the steep path to the Abbey of Montmartre. Four
monks dressed in red would lead the procession carrying the head
of the saint, which the abbey’s nuns would come to kiss. The last
procession took place in 1784.
   Before 1686, the entrance to the abbey was on the site of no. 2.
At present the church of Saint-Pierre de Montmartre is its only
vestige, one of the three oldest churches in Paris, along with Saint-
Julien-le-Pauvre in the 5th arrondissement and Saint-Germain-
des-Prés in the 6th. It holds the tombs of Queen Adelaide of Savoy,
the wife of Louis VI who had founded the abbey in 1135, and of
Marie-Louise de Montmorency-Laval, the last Abbess, who was
guillotined in 1794. There are even four marble pillars from the

                                 212
                           MONTMARTRE


Roman temple of Mercury that had once occupied the site. While
work on the Sacre-Coeur was in progress, disfiguring the once-
pastoral hill, someone came up with the extravagant project of
demolishing the old church, so that the newly opened Avenue
Junot could be extended to the Sacre-Coeur. Though unable to
prevent the construction of the Sacre-Coeur, Willette and his
friends at least saved the ancient church of Saint-Pierre.
   In 1794 Claude Chappe’s first telegraphic semaphore was fixed
to the church because of its elevated position. It relayed signals
between Paris and Lille. A second semaphore, installed later, trans-
mitted signals between Paris and Strasbourg in the record time of 6
minutes. When Napoleon came to visit the semaphore in 1804, he
had to leave his horse lower down the hill on what is now Place
Emile-Goudeau, where he tied it up to one of the trees, and make
the rest of the steep climb on foot. Some prominent local figures
are buried in the churchyard, among them the sculptor Pigalle, the
navigator and explorer Louis-Antoine de Bougainville, the first
Mayor of Montmartre, Félix Desportes, and some of the Debrays,
the dynasty of millers who had owned the famous mills of the hill.
The churchyard however can be visited only on 1 November, the
Day of the Dead in the Catholic calendar.

Turn right into RUE DU CHEVALIER DE LA BARRE, on the
northern side of the Basilica of Sacre-Coeur, named after the 19-
year-old knight who in 1766, at the hands of the Church, was
tortured on the wheel and beheaded for having omitted to uncover
his head before a holy procession. By naming the street after the
young knight, who had been the victim of religious intolerance,
Clemenceau and the Montmartre community could at least
symbolically express their fierce opposition to the moral order of
Catholicism and to the Sacre-Coeur that embodied it. Built by the
architect Abadie, in a national bid to expiate the sins of the people -—
that is, the Commune — the National Assembly passed the bill to
permit the building of the Sacre-Coeur in 1873, which proves that
beyond religious fervour lay political interests. The cornerstone was
laid in 1875, but because of the enormous budget entailed in such a
gigantic enterprise, a national subscription had to be launched and
the building was completed only in 1919. The official inauguration
had taken place in 1890, attended by three million of the faithful.
                                  213
                       18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


Five years later, on16 October 1895, the church bell—aptly the largest
in the world, weighing 17,535 kg —was installed; 28 horses anda huge
crowd of people joined forces to haul it up the hill, accompanied by
a procession carrying torches. The local people were unimpressed
and deprecatingly called the campanile ‘the minaret’.
   During the Commune rue du Chevalier de la Barre was still
known as rue des Rosiers due to its abundance of rosebushes. A
cottage stood at no. 36, in the backyard of which the first bloody
incident of the Commune took place, the execution by the
Communards of the Général Lecomte and of Clément Thomas on
19 March 1871. After his victory Thiers deliberately set up a court-
martial in this very house, where the bookbinder Louis-Eugéne
Varlin, one of the founders of the First International, was con-
demned to death. He was shot a couple of metres away, probably
on the corner of rue de la Bonne. His last words were, ‘Vive la
République! Vive la Commune!

Retrace your steps and turn left into rue du Cardinal Guibert
towards the entrance to the Basilica of the Sacre-Coeur, which
affords one of the most spectacular views of Paris.
    Having taken the measure of the colossal monument, retrace
your steps and turn right into rue du Mont-Cenis, then left into
RUE CORTOT. Erik Satie, the musician and desperate suitor of
Suzanne Valadon, lived in a tiny room at no. 6* from 1890 to 1898,
only a few houses away from his heart’s desire, who lived at no. 12.
Today no. 12 houses the Museum of old Montmartre, well worth a
visit. The lovely old house belonged in the 19th century to Claude de
Rosimond, an actor who, like Moliére, wrote many of the comedies
he acted in. On 31 October 1860 he collapsed and died on the stage
while playing the lead in Moliére’s Le Malade Imaginaire — just ‘as
Moliére had departed two centuries earlier! The list of artists who at
some point lived or had their studios here is quite impressive —
Renoir, who painted Le Moulin de la Galette and La Balangoire here,
followed by Gauguin’s disciple Emile Bernard, and later still by Van
Gogh. Othon Friesz lived here at the same time as the turbulent trio
of Suzanne Valadon, her lover Utter and her son Maurice Utrillo,
and would undoubtedly have had some juicy stories to tell. Another
neighbour, the painter Galanis, recorded an incident that was
             * Can be visited by appointment. Tel. 01 42 78 15 18.

                                     214
                            MONTMARTRE


typical of the notorious ménage: ‘One dayInarrowly escaped being
killed by an iron flung at full swing through the courtyard by
Utrillo. The iron went smashing through the glass roof of my studio
and landed on my drawing table.’ Raoul Dufy, André Salmon and
Francisque Poulbot also lived here. Today the museum houses
nostalgic memorabilia and organises temporary exhibitions in the
cosy setting of a private home. You can see a reconstruction of
Gustave Charpentier’s music room, in which he had composed his
operetta Louise, depicting the life of Montmartre. Charpentier
never lived here but he used to come up to visit his friend Renoir.
You can also see the original sign from the cabaret Le Lapin Agile,
which was painted by the cartoonist André Gill (the one at the en-
trance to the cabaret is a copy). There are also some original posters
by Toulouse-Lautrec of La Goulue and le Moulin Rouge, as well as
furnishings from famous Montmartre cabarets. There is the extra
pleasure of a delightful view overlooking rue Saint-Vincent and its
vineyard, and of the museum’s exquisite garden where youcan rest.
   Continue along rue Cortot, which becomes RUE DE
L’>ABREUVOIR beyond its intersection with rue des Saules. On
the right-hand corner is a bright pink cottage with bright green
shutters, red geraniums and coloured electric bulbs, like some-
thing out of an operetta once more. This is La Maison Rose, where
Picasso stayed when he first arrived in Montmartre in 1902; ob-
viously the premises have been spruced up since. Rue de l’Abreu-
voir has retained the rustic aspect and quiet atmosphere of the days
when horses were brought to drink in its trough(abreuvoir) at the
bottom of the street. When you reach it, turn round for a lovely
view of the street, climbing up the slope. At the intersection of rue
Girardon, rue de l’Abreuvoir narrows down into a mere alley,
L’Allée des Brouillards, leading to the ‘chateaw’ by the same name
—a bourgeois, sleepy, provincial dwelling steeped in greenery and
much appreciated by Gérard de Nerval, who wrote, ‘What seduced
me in this stretch of land sheltered by large trees was, first of all, the
remnant ofa vineyard, which brought to mind Saint Denis.’ Later,
the Casadesus family of musicians came to live here; they are
remembered in the tiny Place Casadesus on your right. Left of the
alley is the Square Suzanne-Buisson. Its fountain, supposedly the
one where Saint Denis cleansed his blood-stained head, has recent-
ly received a statue of Saint Denis carrying his head to remind us of
                                   215
                      18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


the miracle. It seems, however, that the fountain was actually
situated north of the garden, in what is now the Impasse Girardon.
If you step back left of the statue, you will notice the tip of the sails
of le Moulin de la Galette above the tree branches.
   Cross the garden and turn left into AVENUE          JUNOT, along
the afore-mentioned Impasse Girardon. On your left is PLACE
MARCEL-AYMEE, home of the author of Le Passe-Muraille,
hence the sculpture built into a wall, a tribute by his friend Jean
Marais. Both Marcel Aymée and the musician Inghelbrecht, the
founder of the National Radio Orchestra, the ORTF, lived in the
corner house at no. 2.

Continue along rue Norvins and turn left into RUE DES SAULES,
named after the willow trees that once grew on this watery spot. On
your right is Montmartre’s vineyard, a neat, bright-green patch
cheerfully tilted downhill towards rue Saint-Vincent, but against all
logic, exposed to the north! This is because it was planted in 1934 by
Montmartre’s merry yet incompetent intelligentsia to revive old
traditions. Their knowledge of wine growing was limited indeed,
and unaware that grapes need four years before they can be pressed
for wine, they went on to organise the first grape-picking ceremony
the following year. The ceremony was held all the same and was
honoured by the presence of both the President of the Republic,
Albert Lebrun, and the Minister of Agriculture, Henri Quenille,
who were offered the first two bunches of grapes. The grape-picking
ceremony has been repeated every October since, except during
World War II. The wine is pressed in the cellar of the Mairie and
sold at auction in April. The labels of the bottles are painted by local
artists and the money raised is used for charity, a tradition initiated
by the artist Poulbot for the children of the hill, whom he had loved
and fostered, and immortalised in his paintings.

Opposite the vineyard across rue Saint-Vincent, at no. 4, stands
the most famous of Montmartre’s cabarets, the legendary Lapin
Agile, once the hub of bohemian nightlife. Outsiders also came
here at times to bawl out bawdy songs, even students from the
distant Latin Quarter; but the man who stole the show was le
patron himself, Frédéric Gérard, better known as le Pare Frédé,
who leased it from Aristide Bruant, its owner since 1903.

                                  216
                          MONTMARTRE


   When it opened in 1860 it was called Au Rendez-Vous des
Voleurs, and later Le Cabaret des Assassins. However, when the
painter André Gill painted the famous sign of the funny-looking
rabbit jumping out of the saucepan with a bottle of wine in its
hand, the place was renamed Le Lapin A. (=André) Gill, eventually
corrupted to Le Lapin Agile. André Gill was also a poet who com-
posed and sang protest songs bashing the bourgeois, the police and
the establishment at large, in good old Montmartre tradition.
Frédé also used to sing, scraping an accompaniment on an untun-
ed guitar. Originally a fishmonger, he would go down to les Halles
every dawn, dressed as a Breton fisherman and accompanied by
Lolo, his donkey, which would help him carry his fish up the hill.
When Frédé turned innkeeper, Lolo was made redundant and be-
came the mascot of the cabaret. Frédé grew a fantastic beard and
wore a red scarf around his head in summer and a Trappist fur hat
in winter. His Burgundian wife Berthe was a wonderful cook and
prepared a two-franc menu, which, though cheap, was well be-
yond the means of most local clients. The warm-hearted couple
never turned away hungry mouths. Frédé was very friendly and
said tu to everyone, but kept an eye on both drunkards and thugs —
he did not want to get into trouble with the police, who had already
closed down his previous Montmartre cabaret, Le Zut, and he had
no hesitation in throwing Modigliani and Utrillo out when he
deemed it necessary. Even he could not altogether eradicate brawls
and fights, often ignited by alcohol. Frédé’s own son-in-law, Vic-
tor, was shot dead one fateful night, “. . . shot down at the counter
by a bullet right in the head; they [the cops] turned a deaf ear’,
according to writer Dorgelés. Victor apparently had encroached
upon the pimps’ territory.
   A warm, cosy atmosphere permeated the cabaret on cold winter
nights, with the fire glowing in the hearth and the snowflakes fall-
ing outside. Pictures lined the walls, masterpieces such as Picasso’s
Harlequin side by side with unspeakable rubbish — Frédé was not
exactly a discerning connoisseur. When he was a little short of
money a few years later, he simply sold the Harlequin for the
ridiculous sum of 5,000 francs. The fortunate buyer was Rolf de
Marée, the founder of the Ballets Suédois.
    The chapter cannot be closed without mentioning the greatest of
all hoaxes perpetrated in the history of modern art, and the hero of
                                 217
                      18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


the hoax was no other than Lolo! The writer Dorgelés did not think
much of the Cubists and the Fauves and believed that any ass could
produce the same results. In order to prove his point, he tied paint-
brushes to Lolo’s tail and stuck a canvas underneath. Lolo obliged
by swishing his tail energetically, probably just to get rid of the un-
comfortable burden, but as a result created an impressive abstract
work of art, although some unkind witnesses claimed that the art
critic André Warnod, who was present, contributed by guiding the
donkey’s tail. Be that as it may, the painting was certified by a bailiff
and dispatched to the 1910 Salon des Indépendants, under the title
Sunset over the Adriatic and signed by a fictitious Italian painter
named Boronali. It seems that one dictionary of painting, published
in1939, mentions him asa1g9th-century painter of the Italian school,
born in Genoa, but with no date of birth. . . Lolo’s work attracted
press reviews that referred to ‘Un tempérament encore confus de
coloriste’ and ‘un excés de personnalité’ (‘His: palette betrays a
temperament that is still confused’ and ‘an exaggerated
personality’). Today the painting belongs to a private collector,
whose name has not been disclosed. It was exhibited at the Grand
Palais in 1955, during an international exhibition entitled Le faux
dans l’Art et dans Histoire.

Turn right on RUE SAINT-VINCENT and walk along the vine-
yard to RUE DU MONT-CENIS. The drab corner block of flats
at no. 24 is a shameful replacement for the one-time lovely house
and garden of Hector Berlioz. His Romantic friends — Chopin,
George Sand, Liszt and Delacroix — used to come up from the 9th
arrondissement to visit him here, and it was also here that he
composed Harold in Italy and conceived the idea of the opera
Benvenuto Cellini.
   Retrace your steps and continue down rue Saint-Vincent beyond
rue des Saules. On your right is the old cemetery of Saint Vincent,
which in 1831 replaced the churchyard of Saint-Pierre de Mont-
martre. The entrance is on rue Lucien-Gaulard down the road.
Many of Montmartre’s artists rest here — the writers Marcel Aymée
and Dorgelés, the musicians Inghelbrecht and Honegger, the
painters Boudin, Steinlen, Utrillo, Emile Goudeau from Le Chat
Noir, to mention some.
   As you leave the cemetery, cross Place Constantin Pecqueur

                                  218
                            MONTMARTRE


ahead and walk into AVENUE JUNOT, the most elegant street on
the hill and a delight for lovers of Art Deco. Turn right into Villa
Léandre at no. 25, once the home of Max Ernst. This is a gorgeous
little alley, lined with impeccably kept gardens and houses, mirac-
ulously kept open to the visitor. Its dark, shady, unkempt neighbour
at no. 23 is just as delightful and leads directly to rue Lépic (the gate
down the steps is always kept open). However, you should first have
a look at no. 15, the best example of Art Deco in the avenue. It was
built by the Viennese Adolf Loos in 1926 for the Dadaist Tristan
Tzara. No.13 was the home of Francisque Poulbot, akindly man who
set up a playground for the children of Montmartre in the garden. Le
Hameau des Artistes at no. 11, another lovely alley, is hermetically
sealed to outsiders; so is the adjoining luxury residence, which has
incorporated the historic windmill, le Moulin de la Galette, once a
place of pleasure for the youths of the hill anda source of inspiration
to artists such as Renoir and Toulouse-Lautrec. Today, the property
(and the windmill) are surrounded by a high-tension electric fence
and guarded bya radar. At least it was saved from demolition in1979
by a group of determined local residents.
   The first written mention of a windmill in Montmartre dates
from 1344. By the 17th century there were about 30 windmills on the
hill. Itwas at that time thatsome miller had the idea of serving home-
made pancakes (galettes) to the clients, while they were waiting for
their flour to be milled (see also chapter on the 14th arr.). The idea
caught on and wine was soon added to the menu, so that the wind-
mills attracted revelling youths, for the wine ‘set their hearts, heads
and legs astir’. Le Moulin de la Galette, known at the time as Blute-
Fin (for the fine sifting of its flour) was notorious for its goings-on:
‘Il se fripe plus de jupons qu’il ne se blute de farine’ (“More skirts are
crumpled than flour is sifted’), as one contemporary observed.

Retrace your steps to no. 23, walk down the steps to RUE LEPIC
and turn left. At no. 83 stands the only other surviving windmill of
Montmartre, Le Moulin du Radet, now a restaurant, La Cuisine de
Jeanne, a charming place where in good weather one can eat in the
little garden. This is a good place to stop before you make your way
towards the extensive and less appealing foot of the hill. La Divette
du Moulin across the street, at no. 98, isa more modest restaurant
but pleasantly unpretentious and caters to genuine locals.
                                   219
                     18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


   As you retrace your steps and make your way down the steep rue
Lepic, try to picture the car race held here during those eccentric
days — the winner was the one who arrived last! No. 64, on the
corner of rue Tourlaque, displays an early 19th-century white fag-
ade with graceful niches, quite unusual in these parts. If you want
to spare a thought for Vincent Van Gogh, you may push on as far
as no. 54, where he lived with his brother Theo, before you turn
into RUE TOURLAQUE. At no. 22, la Villa Fusain is yet another
famous artists’ quarters, its shady garden dotted with sculptures.
Many of its picturesque studios were recovered from the 1889
World Fair. Renoir had a studio here at one time, Steinlen, Derain,
Bonnard lived here, while other artists, Picasso and Vlaminck
among them, visited the place regularly. Hopefully you will find
the entrance door to this exquisite nook unlocked.

From here on, proceed only if you are interested in exploring the
historical and cultural merit of the area.
   Retrace your steps to RUE CAULAINCOURT and turn right.
Continue downhill to the junction of rue Joseph Maistre which
runs along the cemetery of Montmartre on your right. In his
younger days Fritz Lang lived in a wretched room at no. 14, drawing
and selling postcards in order to make ends meet. Continue along
the steel bridge that hangs over the cemetery of Montmartre, built
on the outskirts of Paris in the early 19th century, when the cemeter-
ies of the capital were closed down. Situated north ofthe city, it was
then called le Cimetiére du Nord. A flight of steps leads to the en-
trance at no. 10 Avenue Rachel, named after the great actress who is
buried here, alongside many of France’s artistic and literary set,
from painters such as Degas and Fragonard to theatre men such as
Lucien and Sacha Guitry, Louis Jouvet, Frédérique Lemaitre — the
idol of the Boulevard du Temple — and the two masters of vaude-
ville, Feydeau and Labiche. Among the musicians is Berlioz, laid
next to both his wife and mistress Harriet Smithson, the librettists
Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halévy who collaborated on such
favourite opéra bouffes as La Belle Héléne and La Vie parisienne, as
well as Jacques Offenbach, who composed the music.

As you leave the cemetery, turn right into Boulevard de Clichy,
diagonally right into rue Forest, and on to rues Cavallotti and

                                 220
                                MONTMARTRE


Hégésippe-Moreau, where the famous Villa des Arts is located. The
painters Corot and Théodore Rousseau lived here in the 19th cen-
tury, followed later by Cézanne and Signac. Cézanne’s well-known
dealer, Ambroise Vollard, endured here an ordeal similar to
Gertrude Stein’s at Le Bateau-Lavoir, being required to sit for
Cézanne in his studio 114 times. At least he did not have to climb so
many steps.
   Retrace your steps and turn right into Boulevard de Clichy and
on to PLACE         DE CLICHY.          At no. 14, the historical Brasserie
Wepler was very popular with Picasso and his friends who preferred
it to le Lapin Agile with its second-rate artists. The establishment
has kept its typically gigantic Belle-Epoque dimensions and décor.
    Retrace your steps. On the corner of rue Caulaincourt and
BOULEVARD DE CLICHY stood the famous Hippodrome
until 1931 — a gigantic establishment that could seat up to 5,000.
Like today’s Palais Omnisport at Bercy, its range of shows was
extremely varied — from animal taming and ju-jitsu, to Erik Satie’s
Parade: the first Cubist ballet, with choreography by Massine and
sets by Picasso. But already in 1910 huge crowds came here to be
thrilled by the early motion pictures. The Gaumont cinema re-
placed the Hippodrome. In 1945 it put on a ballet called Les
Forains, a tribute to Picasso in his Blue Period, which had been
inspired by this neighbourhood. At no. 62 was the cabaret Les
Quatre Gats, where many a chansonnier began his career. This
place too was frequented by Picasso and his friends, and in 1907
Alfred Jarry’s Ubu Roi was premiéred here. At no. 100 Boulevard de
Clichy a well-known chansonnier cabaret, Le Théatre des Deux
Anes, still stands, one of the last heroic survivors of a glorious past,
where social protest and satire blend with exuberant joie de vivre.
   As you reach PLACE BLANCHE                   at the end of the next block,
you will notice on your right the bright red sails of le Moulin
Rouge, rotating as if in slow motion to beckon the passer-by. The
presence of this shrine of sex in the heart of the red belt contrasts
sharply with the lofty Sacre-Coeur at the top of the hill.
   Of all the figures associated with Le Moulin Rouge, La Goulue
was unquestionably the most famous. Having run away from
home and dried glasses in the taverns of the ‘fortifs*’, she fetched
up one day at the Grand Véfour at the Palais-Royal, where a crowd
   * The fortification walls built around Paris in 1841 by Adolphe Thiers.

                                       221
                     18TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


of admirers offered her champagne and poured gold coins on her
hair. From there they took her to the Elysée-Montmartre on
Boulevard de Rochechouart, where she became a dancer until in
1889 Zidler swept her off and catapulted her to stardom at Le
Moulin Rouge. By that time PElysée-Montmartre was no longer
the fashionable dance hall it had been before the Communards
turned it into a revolutionary club.
   With La Goulue as the star of the opening show at le Moulin
Rouge, PElysée-Montmartre was definitively dethroned. All the
upper crust of Paris, financiers and artists, were invited to the
opening, and everybody turned up. With its lavish setting, its
exquisite garden and exotic dancers moving about inside a huge
model elephant, Le Moulin Rouge was to put Montmartre on the
map like never before. Everything about it seemed to hit the right
note: its sails were a reminder of the pastoral past, while their
bright red colour signalled the promise of fun and entertainment;
this was just what Belle-Epoque Paris was seeking, and La Goulue
was going to give it to them. Dancing a wild and uninhibited
chahut, a provocative form of French can-can, she was an
electrifying presence and brought down the house when, with a
stretched leg raised, she knocked off one of the men’s hats. She is
said to have even favoured the Prince of Wales with this treatment.
