18th Arr: Overview

      THE LOTH ARRONDISSEMENT
leethis age of assembly-line tourism, no package tour worthy of
its name will bypass the 18th arrondissement, despite its inconven-
ient location on the northern edge of Paris. La Butte Montmartre,
129 metres above sea level and the highest summit in the Paris area,
had offered the traveller a unique panorama of the city well before
man-made monuments set out to compete. But when, at the turn
of the century, it was further topped by a gigantic piece of neo-
Byzantine architecture in the shape of a wedding cake, it became a
tourist shrine. At its feet lies Pigalle, a rough designation for the
boulevards that extend east and west of Place Pigalle, a nocturnal
shrine of luring, flashing, neon lights, of sex and vice, an inevitable
stopping-place on any ‘Paris by night’ tour, where coachloads of
tourists are disgorged into the plush Moulin Rouge or, for those of
scantier means, into some garish striptease joint.

The 18th arrondissement has been a place of pilgrimage since the
dawn of time. Hill tops and summits had always aroused the imag-
ination of people, who believed them to be the abode of divinities.
The ancient Celts are believed to have attributed mystical powers
to the hill of Montmartre and to have erected ritual megaliths on
the sacred hill, under the guidance of the Druids. This was also a
place of worship for the Romans who built here temples for the
gods Mars, Mercury and perhaps Jupiter. But it was above all the
martyrdom of a Christian, Saint Denis, that put Montmartre on
the map as a sacred place of pilgrimage (martyrium was a cemetery
for   persecuted   Christians,   hence   Montmartre     and   rue   des
Martyrs). The story of Saint Denis picking up his head after it had
been cut off struck a chord wherever it circulated throughout med-
ieval Europe, transmitted by troubadours and minstrels who sang
in courts and castles. The story went that Saint Denis came to
preach the gospel in Lutetia with his two companions Rustique
and Eleuthére. The three men were arrested on the site of 25 rue
Henri Barbusse, next to the Val-de-Grace in the 5th arrondisse-
ment, the first of the seven stations of their martyrdom, during
which they covered the area of the city from south to north. They

                                  187
                     18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


were to have been put to death at the temple of Mercury at the top
of Montmartre, but the soldiers, tired of climbing the steep slope,
beheaded them halfway up the hill, on the site of the present 9 rue
Yvonne-le-Tac. And there, lo and behold!, the holy man picked up
his head, continued to ascend the hill till he came to a fountain on
the site of what is now the Impasse Girardon, where he stopped to
wash    his blood-stained   head, and then    carried   on   north   for
another ‘good league’ (roughly 6.5 km or 4 miles). Only then did
he collapse, expiring at the feet of the pious widow Catulla, who
buried him on the site. No sooner was this done than corn grew on
the grave, concealing it from those who would profane it, but not
from Saint Genevieve, the patron of Paris, who had no difficulty in
locating it two centuries later. Around ap 475 she set-up an oratory
on the grave, which became the nucleus of the famous Basilica of
Saint-Denis. So much for historical accuracy!
   According to other traditions, the bones of Saint Denis were
found on the above-mentioned site of his execution. The remains
of Christians were indeed concentrated in a quarry here, but
whether Saint Denis was one of them cannot be verified. A chapel
was erected over the quarry, probably around the 9th century,
although the first mention of sanctum martyrium appeared only in
1096.
   The identity of the Saint and the era when he lived (probably in
the 3rd century) have given rise to similar confusion. In Hilduin’s
Chronicles of Saint Denis the name is spelt Dionysii, which suggests
that the original Denis may have been no other than Dionysus, the
god of wine, a plausible assumption in an area renowned for its
wine. Could the names of the three evangelists, Denis, Rustique
and Eleuthére, have been derived from a dedication on his temple
— Dionyso rustico eleuthero (“Dionysus, rustic and free’)? Or maybe
Dionysus had simply lost his head from too much heavy drinking?
In which case he would have plunged his head into the fountain to
wash away his sin, or more prosaically, to recover froma hangover.
The purifying quality of those waters was common belief at the
time, as is attested by the saying: Jeune fille qui a bu l’eau de Saint
Denys, sera fidéle a son mari (‘A damsel who has drunk from the
water of Saint Denys will be faithful to her husband’). Be that as it
may, the chapel on rue Yvonne-le-Tac became a place of
pilgrimages, the earliest of which dates from 1096. Among the

                                 188
                          INTRODUCTION


innumerable pilgrims was Charles VI of France who came here
twice, in 1391 and 1392, hoping to find a cure for his madness.
    In 1133 an additional shrine was provided for pilgrims when the
women’s abbey was founded on top of the hill by Adelaide of
Savoy, wife of Louis VI and sister of Pope Calixtus II. Pilgrims
came to Montmartre not just from France but from all over
Europe, among them Pope Alexander III, the Italian Saint Thomas
Aquinas and Thomas 4 Beckett, the Archbishop of Canterbury. On
18 November 1169 Louis VII of France invited him and King Henry
II of England to the Abbey of Montmartre in an unsuccessful effort
to reconcile the two men. There were also magnificent processions
between the Basilica of Saint-Denis and Montmartre every seven
years, which were perpetuated from the time of Dagobert I, in the
7th century, until the Revolution. Most important of all, it was at
the chapel on rue Yvonne-le-Tac that on 15 August 1534 the Jesuit
Order was founded by the Spaniard Ignatius of Loyola and his
companions.
   In 1611, while repairs were being conducted after the destruction
caused by the Wars of Religion, a flight of old steps leading to a
vault was discovered. The words MAR CLEMIN DIO, engraved in
the rock, gave rise to feverish excitement. Nobody questioned the
authenticity of the inscription, which had to mean ‘martyr,
Clement (the Pope at the time of Saint Denis), and Denis’. This
must surely be the place of martyrdom of Saint Denis. As many as
60,000 members of the court, led by Marie de Medici in person,
came to pray at the holy shrine. A new abbey was built at the spot,
which eventually took the place of the less accessible abbey on the
top of the hill, founded back in the 12th century.

While the Butte Montmartre served the purpose of the religious
authorities in times of peace, its strategic advantage could not be
overlooked in times of strife. Thus, when Henri de Navarre set out
to besiege Paris, he placed his battery on the top of the hill, which
provided him with the opportunity to make the acquaintance of
the Abbess of Montmartre, a 17-year-old brunette called Claude de
Beauvilliers. A passionate liaison ensued, soon to be followed by
many others, as the young nuns, inspired by the example set by
their Mother Superior, surrendered their virtue to the valiant
soldiers of the future Henri IV. These going-ons on the Butte
                                 189
                      18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


shocked the righteous and the self-righteous down below, who
referred to the abbey as ‘le magasin des putains de ’armée’ (‘the
depot of the army’s harlots’). It is reported that during mass at
Lent the preacher castigated the young Vert Galant (Henri de
Navarre) for having dallied with the Mother of the Church and
cuckolded God! This affair soon came to an end, however, Claude
de Beauvilliers having been foolish enough to introduce her phil-
andering lover to her fair cousin, the blue-eyed blonde Gabrielle
dEstrées. ..
   When Napoleon’s allied foes defeated him and occupied Paris
in 1814, they naturally took up position on the Butte Montmartre;
8,000 English troopers were stationed there as well as many
Russian Cossacks. According to one story (challenged by some
historians) their legendary penchant for alcohol led them to gather
at La Mére Catherine’s where they demanded a drink in Russian:
‘bistro! bistro!’ (quick! quick!’), unwittingly introducing a new
institution, which is still going strong to this day.

The topographical features of Montmartre and its remoteness
from the centre of action had shielded it from most social
explosions. But in 1871 a new page was turned in the history of the
hill, hitherto reputed for its fresh air and rustic life. It was precisely
its strategic position that now projected it into the limelight of
French history and turned it into the tragic and bloody scene of the
first act of the Commune.
    In early March, infuriated by Thiers’s humiliating capitulation
to the Prussians, the people of Paris got hold of his troops’ guns at
Place Wagram and hauled them up the Butte Montmartre to safe
haven. The Prussians did not stay in Paris, but the people of Mont-
martre would not return the guns. This constituted an alarming
threat to the authorities sitting in Versailles. On 18 March 1871,
Thiers dispatched the 88th Brigade to Montmartre, but his soldiers
defected to the rebels. Their General, Jules Lecomte, was arrested by
the rebels and sentenced to death, after a show trial at the dance hall
of Chateau-Rouge, (now 42/54 rue de Clignancourt), together with
Général Clément Thomas. The latter was recognised by a child
while strolling on Boulevard de Rochechouart in his morning coat
and bowler hat, and was promptly assaulted and knocked out byan
angry mob, unwilling to forgive his harsh conduct back in June

                                  190
                         INTRODUCTION


1848. Clemenceau, the Mayor of Montmartre at the time, could not
contain the inflamed mob, who threatened him in his turn: ‘Down
with Clemenceau! Shoot him with the others. Go look for your
whores, dirty bourgeois!’ The dance halls of Montmartre — le
Chateau-Rouge, l Elysée-Montmartre, la Boule-Noire, le Moulin
de la Galette — were converted into military headquarters and
makeshift hospitals, while Montmartre itself became an entrench-
ed camp. The skies of Paris were ablaze, for after the bombardment
of the capital by the Versaillais, the Communards retaliated by
setting fire to the Tuileries, to Thiers’s mansion on Place Saint-
Georges (in the 9th arr.), to the Hétel de Ville, to the Cour des
Comptes (replaced by the Gare, now Musée d’Orsay) and to other
monuments. Reprisal was quick to follow— The Federal troops, led
by Mac-Mahon, stormed Montmartre and turned it into a blood-
bath. Louise Michel, the schoolteacher who had headed the Com-
munards in this part of Paris (see also 17th arr.), and who had been
seen on the last barricades at Place Blanche, wrote in her Souvenirs
dela Commune: ‘. . . the Elysée-Montmartre was packed with dead
bodies. . . And then, the Tuileries, the Conseil-d’Etat, the Légion
d’Honneur, the Cour des Comptes, lit up like torches. .~’.
   When in 1868 Jean-Baptiste Clément wrote the famous song Le
Temps des Cerises, little did he imagine that three years later he
would be elected Mayor of Montmartre and that his song would
become the hymn of the Commune. In 1885 he dedicated his song
‘to the valiant citizen Louise, the ambulancewoman of the rue
Fontaine-au-Roi [in the uth arr., one of the focal points of the
Commune], Sunday, 28 May 1871.’

The enthusiastic support of the people of the 18th arrondissement
for the Commune can be accounted for only by the social changes
that had taken place there in the course of the 19th century, in
particular during the Second Empire. As long as a scanty rural
population lived here in harmony with the environment, however
simply, there was no way it might have joined the political move-
ments in the centre of the city. But when the Industrial Revolution
was beginning to hit north-east Paris, the gateway to the. big min-
ing and industrial areas of the north and of the east, this section of
Paris was doomed. Poor people thronged to these outlying fau-
bourgs from the provinces, providing the necessary workforce for
                                 191
                     18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


the new industries and hands and servants for the privileged bour-
geoisie, comfortably accommodated within the city toll walls, the
frustrating Mur de l’Octroi. To the east of the Butte Montmartre
once lay the village of La Goutte d’Or, renowned for the quality of
its wine, as its name indicates, and the village of La Chapelle, no
less noteworthy for its beautiful roses. But now a Dickensian land-
scape had swallowed them up, shut off from Paris by the toll wall.
It was a desolate wasteland covered with networks of railway-
tracks, ominous chimney stacks belching their black smoke into a
leaden sky, decrepit hovels in which the dregs of society huddled at
night to escape the cold and criminal hands; a nerve-racking envir-
onment, punctuated by the chugging of trains to and from Gare du
Nord, soon to be joined by the rattling of the elevated Métro. This
lumpen proletariat often existed on an empty stomach, inhaling
the poisonous air, polluted by factories and steam-engines and
reeking with the putrid smell emanating from industrial, chemical
waste and the slaughterhouse of La Villette. What else could they
do but fuel their bodies and drown their souls in absinthe, the
plague of i9th-century working-class Paris.
   In L’Assommoir Emile Zola describes with photographic precis-
ion the life and environment of the 18th arrondissement. It was his
intention, he said, ‘to paint the fatal degeneration of a working-
class family in the foul environments of our faubourgs’. The life of
the heroine Gervaise rotates around the red-brick wash-house of
La Goutte d’Or, the centre of working-class life, where among
laughter and giggles, gossip, bickering and even vicious wrestling,
cocky, sharp-tongued, sturdy laundresses tried to preserve moral
integrity, a hopeless attempt in a depraved world on the verge of
decay and disintegration. Seeing the glittering wealth displayed
shamelessly on the Grands Boulevards beyond the wall, only a few
blocks away and yet so far beyond their reach, the poor girls of the
faubourgs inevitably ended up on the streets. There they became
ready prey for brutal, callous pimps, while their male companions
got sucked into a life of crime, protected by the dark recesses of the
wall and by the veil of the pitch-black night. Gervaise could hear
the piercing screams of victims being murdered behind the wall,
and when her man, Lantier, failed to return one night she dreaded
finding him stabbed to death in one of its damp, dark recesses.


                                 192
                         INTRODUCTION


In 1860 the walls were pulled down, the outer faubourgs were in-
corporated into Paris; La Goutte d’Or, La Chapelle and the Butte
Montmartre, became its 18th arrondissement. Like the Grands
Boulevards, which had replaced the city walls at the time of Louis
XIV, the Boulevards Extérieurs became a new pleasure-ground,
catering overall, though not entirely, for the masses. Some adven-
turous bourgeois liked to come here at night, to rub shoulders with
the riff-raff and experience new emotions. Hence the Boulevards
that girdle the 18th to the south became the thrilling meeting place
of the rabble and the middle classes. Here, for the moment, they
could secretly transcend all social taboos and pair off with the
forbidden mate — the bourgeois husband with the enticing demi-
mondaine, the bourgeois wife with the virile hunk. In Manet’s
painting Le Pére Lathuille, the stuck-up, primly dressed young
woman in the café (mentioned in the 17th arrondissement, but
situated practically on the edge of the 18th) is wooed by an im-
passioned young man wearing a moustache — a symbol of virility at
the time, to the extent that Maupassant devoted an entire short
story to this facial decoration. Maupassant likewise tells us in Bel-
Ami of Madame de Marelles’s irresistible attraction to this neigh-
bourhood and its places of pleasure, such as the shady Reine
Blanche, where she finds thrills mingled with terror, an escape
from the posh, uneventful Café Anglais on the Grands Boulevards.
    Paris society had always thrived on new thrills and Tout-Paris
thronged to the opening of the new cabaret, Le Chat Noir, in 1880.
Its founder, the bohemian Rodolphe Salis, collaborated with Emile
Godeau, who brought with him from the Latin Quarter its literary
spirit and humour, adapting it to the new environment. The
Montmartre genre, with its crude, cocky wit was born: ‘God
created the world, Napoleon the Légion d’Honneur, but I made
Montmartre!’ Salis rightly claimed. Debussy, Steinlen and
Willette, who had painted the famous poster for the cabaret, could
be seen here, as well as the future Edward VII, who seems to have
frequented every establishment of Belle-Epoque Paris. However,
Le Chat Noir was located next to the Elysée-Montmartre and the
Boule-Noire   on the Boulevard de Rochechouart,        and.this was
lower-class territory. If a bourgeois wished to come here, he had
better keep a low profile. Pestered by undesirable visitors, Salis
eventually moved his cabaret a few blocks south, to the safer

                                 193
                     18TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


environment    of rue Victor-Massé     in the 9th arrondissement.
Aristide Bruant, who was one of the performers at Le Chat Noir
and was immortalised by Toulouse-Lautrec in his black, wide-
brimmed felt hat and red-neck scarf, took over the old premises on
Boulevard de Rochechouart where he opened his own cabaret, Le
Mirliton. This time there was going to be no social segregation and
the bourgeois rushed in, delighted to be the butt of Bruant’s jokes.
Night after night, top-hatted, monocled men had their airs and
graces dragged in the mud in his verses, while their bejewelled
companions were urged to dump their strait-laced gentlemen and
instead go after one of the he-men that were prowling around.
When one such woman, with her husband’s encouragement, did
just that, it ended in a bloodbath: disgusted both by her husband,
who was hoping vicariously to regain his failing virility, and by the
common brute, she ended by murdering them both in the beauti-
ful setting of her hétel particulier.

Le Chat Noir made a splash but it was the opening of the Moulin
Rouge, on 5 October 1889, that was to mark Montmartre as the
Mecca of pleasure and entertainment, literally the world over.
    The Moulin Rouge was a sensation from the very start, and its
opening was no less a historic event than the completion and in-
auguration of the Eiffel Tower. Both were timed to coincide with
the 1889 World Fair, a key date since it also commemorated the
first centenary of the French Revolution. The nightclub’s founder,
Charles Zidler, was a brilliant entrepreneur who had started out as
a butcher on the oozing banks of the Biévre, in the 13th arrondisse-
ment. By choosing the year 1889, Zidler and his partner Joseph
Oller (who a few years later opened the prestigious Olympia in the
9th arrondissement) turned the opening of the Moulin Rouge into
a national event! The same nationalistic fervour that surrounded
the technological excellence of the Eiffel Tower surrounded the
glamour of the female bodies at the Moulin Rouge, as they paraded
to the sound of the Marseillaise, all decked in tricolours for the
occasion. Outside, on the Boulevard, the bright red mill with its
rotating sails was an irresistible invitation. the Montmartre writer
Mac Orlan described ‘the vermilion mill with its slow turning,
blood-coloured sails... One felt snapped up by the inexorable
jaws of the night.” The Moulin Rouge offered “Gay Paris’ what it

                                194
                          INTRODUCTION


really wanted — not social protest but glitter and flash and, above
all, a display of female flesh — the exotic flesh of belly dancers
within a huge model elephant (there was an elephant fad in 19th-
century Paris), and frilly thighs furiously beating out a provocative
French cancan known as chahut. The Boulevards outside the
Moulin Rouge, with their treacherous, flashy electric lights, where
scandalous luxury mingled with utmost misery, were bound to
deprave and corrupt. Sex and crime could provide easy money and
abolish social barriers. Many a wealthy, foolish gentleman, washed
by champagne and wheedled by a coquette, found his hétel broken
into within the next few days. Many a bejewelled lady, drawn irres-
istibly into the arms of an unknown seducer, found herself strip-
ped of her valuables by the break of dawn. It was Edith Piaf’s job in
her earlier days to spy out the land, spot out a likely prey and
inform her man of the victim’s whereabouts; after the initial
seduction, she would be stripped of her booty, not without first
putting up a useless struggle. This was the price paid for poaching
in underworld territory.

For underworld territory it was and still is. With a fluctuating
population, constantly replenished by fresh arrivals from the
provinces and foreign countries, and having for address but some
dubious hotel, the 18th arrondissement inevitably prospered on
crime. There was the notorious bande a Bonnot, who organised the
first bank robbery on rue Ordener, on 21 December 1911, and the
no less notorious apaches, who terrorised the eastern half of Paris,
using knives rather than revolvers, which they spurned, because
they liked their victims to bleed properly (‘il fallait que ¢a saigne’).
There were sleek, black-haired, black-suited Argentines who
tangoed the first part of the night away before carrying out their
evil designs. During the Great War and soon after American
soldiers became engaged in racist brawls with Senegalese and other
Blacks. There were gigolos and there was an international white
slave trade, whose victims were carried off to the heart of Asia and
to the pavements of Cape Town, often with the help of ageing ex-
prostitutes. But all this was child’s play, according to Jack Dia-
mond and other Chicago gangsters who toured Europe in 1929 in
order to extend their network and find new outlets. On visiting the
18th arrondissement, they commented on the phoney band from

                                  195
                     18TH   ARRONDISSEMENT


Pigalle trying to emulate Al Capone but never even matching
Borsalino. When absinthe and ether gave way to cocaine, and
when the Corsicans entered the scene after World War II, then you
were talking big crime and big money, crime on a professional
scale that could at last rival Chicago.
   An international community of anarchists moved about in this
underworld, feeling at one with the population that had ignited the
Commune. Indignant at the shrieking social injustice that stared
them in the face, they were determined to bring about the fall of the
corrupt society that permitted it by blowing up as many of its
members and institutions as possible. Although their initial motiv-
ation was noble, it was not always easy to distinguish between them
and common criminals, nor between them and the poverty-
stricken artist community of Montmartre. Thus Picasso’s ‘band’
was put on the file by the police, while the Cubist painter Juan Gris
was arrested when he was mistaken for one of the daring bank
robbers on rue Ordener.
   The environment of the 18th arrondissement favoured crime
and dirty dealings: warehouses stood empty beside railway tracks,
stretches of wasteland covered the east of the arrondissement, and
in the west there was the steep maze of narrow streets of the Butte
Montmartre. The Butte also provided ample hiding space in its
quarries and caves, which had been the den of
                                            bandits and runaways
throughout history. Political opponents also sought refuge here,
among them Marat, when for a while the tide of the French
Revolution turned against him. As a result Montmartre was even
renamed Mont Marat fora time. During the June 1848 insurrection,
the dictatorial Cavaignac sent his troops to the quarries of
Montmartre to quash the last pockets of resistance still holding out.

Although thugs and ruffians scoured the hill, making use of its
nooks and recesses and causing disturbances at the Moulin de la
Galette (especially at weekends), and despite occasional stabbings
or fatal shootings, the Butte Montmartre preserved the countri-
fied, homely simplicity that had already appealed to Jean-Jacques
Rousseau in the 18th century. When in the first half of the 19th
century the brilliant society of finance and the arts settled in and
around the newly opened quarter of La Nouvelle Athénes at the
southern foot of the hill (see the chapter on the oth arr.), the Butte

                                 196
                       La Butte Montmartre

Montmartre exerted an appeal on those in search of a secluded
getaway. While the poet Nerval stayed on the Butte for a year only,
Berlioz made it his permanent home. Later Degas liked to walk up
the hill and observe the laundresses, who loathed the man and
called him ‘a dirty old voyeur’. Van Gogh lived on rue Lepic for a
while, but it was Renoir, more than any of his contemporaries,
who found on the Butte his ideal of a harmonious village life,
unspoilt as yet by the encroaching progress of the city. Here he
found vigorous, rosy-cheeked people soaking up the fresh air, as

                               197
                    18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


opposed to their depraved, sallow-faced, sickly counterparts
drowning in absinthe down below. It was these idealised people,
with their velvety complexions and best Sunday clothes, that he
painted in his Bal du Moulin de La Galette.

When, at the turn of the century, a wave of artists flooded the hill,
it was as much the availability of cheap housing that determined
their choice as the pleasant environment or the genial, classless
population. For they were a bunch of bohemians living from hand
to mouth, who had to make do with seedy, musty hotel rooms
infested with fleas, hardly better than what they would have found
at La Goutte d’Or or La Chapelle: colourless, peeling walls, faded
bed sheets, or no sheets at all, foul and fetid mattresses, not to
mention the latrines... The artists’ headquarters, Le Bateau-
Lavoir, where Picasso and others were living, were hardly more
inviting — no wonder Picasso left them and moved to a spacious
flat on Boulevard de Clichy as soon as he could afford to do so.
    Unlike Mac Orlan, Poulbot and Maurice Utrillo, who remained
in Montmartre all their lives, capturing its atmosphere in their
works, Picasso, Matisse, Modigliani, Braque, Apollinaire and Max
Jacob had much more universal preoccupations and were never
part of the village. Montmartre offered them cheap food and
board, as well as models among the congenial local people — or on
the models’ market of Place Pigalle when they could afford it — but
it was totally alien to the revolutionary fermentation that was tak-
ing place at the Bateau-Lavoir, which led to the birth of Fauvisme,
Cubisme and abstract art, and culminated in 1907 in Picasso’s
outrageous Desmoiselles d’Avignon (painted in his studio at the
Bateau-Lavoir). Besides, except for Max Jacob, they remained here
altogether for less than a decade and by 1910-11 had migrated to
Montparnasse.
    In 1920 a bunch of genial, free-spirited, somewhat eccentric
villagers of Montmartre followed the desire of Rodolphe Salis and
declared the hill a free commune, to be headed by a democratically
elected Mayor. The old friends, by now residing in Montparnasse,
were called upon to participate in the elections. Several electoral
lists were made up, among them the Cubist list with Picasso, Max
Jacob and Archipenko. A monkey by the name of Existence was
also on that list... The Dadaist list was led by Francis Picabia,

                                 198
                           INTRODUCTION


André Breton and Tristan Tzara. On their programme were the
following steps to be taken: ‘to remove, to wipe out, to destroy, to
wreck, to eliminate.’ The Cubists wanted skyscrapers but the
traditional locals — Suzanne Valadon, Poulbot — opposed them and
suggested instead cancelling the months of December, January
and February, installing an escalator uphill, a chute downhill anda
conveyor from one bistrot to another! Their party obtained 57,835
votes! They also wanted to put an end to the tourist invasion by
restricting the number of visitors allowed into Place du Tertre to
100,000 at any one time!

The tourist invasion had in fact taken on alarming proportions.
The trouble began in 1919, with the completion of the gigantic,
meringue-like Sacre-Coeur. This national shrine was conceived by
the Church to expiate the crimes of the Commune; the locals re-
taliated by simply ignoring it and continuing to worship in their
old parish church of Saint-Pierre de Montmartre, one of the three
oldest churches of Paris (1134) and the only vestige of the first
abbey. But the nation supported the project, funded through
national subscription. Since the ‘conservationists’, led by
Clemenceau, failed to defeat the bill in the National Assembly, and
the lovely hill of Montmartre was clearly doomed to eternal
punishment and disfigurement, the ‘Savagists’, one of the electoral
lists of the Commune of Montmartre, now suggested transform-
ing it into a swimming pool!
    Visitors seem to like the shrine: postcards bearing its picture top
the sales list among Paris monuments. They also do not seem to
mind being penned into kitschy Place du Tertre, perhaps because
they are unaware that just around the corner lies a heavenly village
of pastoral charm, inhabited by genial locals or discerning out-
siders, often from the world of the arts. Olivier Messiaen and
Arthur Rubinstein were once among them. It is also one of the rare
spots in Paris relatively safe from the covetous designs of building
companies — the danger of landslides as a result of the unrestrained
exploitation of its quarries in the past preserves it from excessive
constructions.

Down the hill, traditions have also been maintained. The bright
red sails of the Moulin Rouge still rotate slowly every night, even

                                 199
                    18TH ARRONDISSEMENT


though today they lure busloads of grey-suited Japanese rather
than Anglo-Saxons or Russian dukes. The sex industry flourishes
conspicuously along the Boulevards, while the central island is
periodically occupied by. fairground stalls, a hangover from the
early years of the century when Picasso used to come down the hill
to the celebrated Medrano Circus, next to which lion tamers, box-
ers and wrestlers displayed their muscular bodies. The cabaret Les
Deux-Anes maintains the old chansonnier witty tradition of
Montmartre, whereas the Elysée-Montmartre and La Cigale,
further east, offer pop concerts. The music shops of Pigalle sell
electric guitars and drumkits to suit modern tastes. A century ago a
‘musicians’ market’ was held here, where conductors would
recruit players for their orchestras.
   Petty and serious crime still abound here too — from pick-
pocketing and the sale of stolen goods on the ‘thieves’ market’ of
La Goutte-d’Or (including stereo systems and video machines) to
the more sophisticated forging of identity papers, carried out at the
back of some café, not to mention drug dealing.
  Above all, this has remained a neighbourhood of a floating,
migrant population, as can be deduced from the incredible array
of cheap luggage on sale along the Boulevards. No fewer than 30
nationalities are living at La Goutte-d’Or, at present predomin-
antly from Black Africa. With their colourful costumes, and the
multitudes of traditional fabrics piled up in their shops or dangling
from street stalls, they have added a new touch to the overwhelm-
ingly rich palette of Paris. However, like the rest of Paris, which is
in the process of gentrification, La Goutte-d’Or is intended for
demolition. Another ‘village’ is to be wiped off the map of Paris in
the name of safety, hygiene and social fumigation.
