THE NOTRE-DAME EQUATION
TO THE SMALL NUMBER of questing spirits whose daily perambulation in Paris was
a divinatory walk through a sacred labyrinth, and whose indoor activities–despite fumes
in the hallway and strange lights under the door–were a complete mystery to their
neighbours, the change, which was both subtle and profound, appeared to have occurred
at about the time of the First World War.
     Their ancient science expressed only its most basic precepts in words, and so they
would not have been able to offer much in the way of evidence. If they had been willing
or able to convert their knowledge into the simple currency of fact, they might have
adduced some apparently insignificant phenomena: an alteration of the light that fell on
certain buildings at certain times of day, a modification in the nesting habits of birds or
an imperceptible shift in the anatomical geometry of Parisians as they walked along a
street or looked to the sky to see what the weather was going to do. They might have
hinted at something more devastating than the annihilation of a million soldiers and
civilians. But no one would have believed them anyway, and it was only when modern
science had progressed to a point where the insights of the two disciplines became
mutually comprehensible that one of those questing spirits (the subject of this story)
tried to warn his contemporaries. By then, the world was once again on the brink of
catastrophe, and although the ancient science proved its practical worth in unexpected
ways, few people had any use for its wisdom.
     As for the rest of the population, only those who had emerged alive from the
horrific crucible of war had any inkling of the change. Paris had sat out the
conflagration like a medieval citadel, suffering little more than a chipped turret and a
dented portcullis. It was this near-total preservation of the city that alerted some people
to the fact that the capital of France had disappeared, along with the old world, and
been replaced by an almost perfect copy of itself.
     If any single event had the power to reveal the change to ordinary eyes, it was the
great Peace Conference, which, from January 1919 to January 1920, turned Paris into a
gaudy bazaar of foreign dignitaries. Delegates came from east and west to redraw the
map of the world and to share the spoils of war. Many saw their hopes squashed and
smeared across marble floors by the patent-leather boot of international diplomacy.
While Georges Clemenceau, Woodrow Wilson, David Lloyd George and Vittorio
Orlando held stately discussions in sumptuous hotels, ‘flooded after sundown with
dazzling light, and filled by day with the buzz of idle chatter, the shuffling of feet, the
banging of doors, and the ringing of bells’,* other emissaries, from countries whose
names were known only to scholars, envied the waiters and chambermaids who had
access to the tables and beds of the mighty, and as they laid their glittering robes of state
on the dusty coverlets of cheap hotels, felt themselves shrivel up into illegible footnotes
in the history of Europe.
     Little attempt was made to sustain the illusion of lasting peace. Recently installed
dictators sought to confirm the advantages they had gained by the massacre of
neighbouring populations. Others, whose star was in the descendant, blew vigorously
on the embers of their ambitions, and quietly pondered future policies of assassination
and deceit. Mortified to be assigned to the depressing Hôtel des Réservoirs and to be
forced to carry their own luggage, the German mission observed how much influence
attached to the House of Rothschild, and was struck by the bitter conviction that the war
had been staged by Jews and Freemasons, and that the United States of America had
intended all along to play the role of deus ex machina.
     Though their fortunes varied enormously, victors and vanquished alike took part in
the same unconscious conspiracy to revive the glories of the past, and to behave as
though the capital of Europe had never seen her luxury grow dim. In the ballroom of the
Hôtel Majestic, while the pavements outside were rutted with frozen snow as sharp as
steel, the British delegation held an extravagant party at which ‘the latest forms of
dancing were to be seen, including the jazz and the hesitation waltz’. At such events
were policies discussed that would decide the destinies of millions. Men who were
called upon to exercise the power of rational thought with purity and precision pored
over dinner menus as long as treaties. They whirled their unidentified foreign partners
across the floor and fell prey to the collective madness. Many of those who observed
these spectacles of wild dissipation as they passed in the street, begging for relief from
cold and hunger, gave voice to the sentiment expressed by Cicero: ‘Quam parva
sapientia regitur mundus!’*
     Yet even the conquerors were strangely muted in their exultations. As Dr E. J.
Dillon, an eye-witness and participant, observed, ‘the smile of youth and beauty was
cold like the sheen of winter ice. The shadow of death hung over the institutions and
survivals of the various civilizations and epochs which were being dissolved in the
common melting-pot.’ Less than two hours away by motor car, black hordes, whose
limbs stuck out of shell-ploughed fields, were a ghastly scene from a medieval tarot,
convincing those who made the journey from Paris out of curiosity that nothing would
ever change, that dominions would continue to flourish and decay, and that the means
would always be found, in spite of everything, to prevent any conspicuous diminution in
the sum total of human misery.
WHEN THE DELEGATES of the Peace Conference had returned to their homelands
and places of exile, they left behind them an atmosphere of half-reality in which
preposterous things were strangely plausible. It rose like a miasma from the Seine,
drifted past the fluted columns of the Assemblée Nationale, and crept along the
corridors of power. Parliamentary debates went on as before, but now Truth wore a
garb that made her fiendishly difficult to identify. Thus it was that a group of republican
députés, moved by the pleas of the exploited people of Poldavia, took up their cause
against the capitalist oppressor and were about to petition the Foreign Ministry when
the true status of Poldavia was revealed, and the letters signed by Lineczi Stantoff and
Lamidaëff of the Poldavian Defence Committee were found to have been written by a
member of the extreme-right Action Française movement. Only then was the name
Lamidaëff seen to be L’Ami d’A.F. and the exotic syllables of ‘Lineczi Stantoff’ to
contain the words ‘l’inexistant’.
     Radiant particles of wisdom were always surrounded by clouds of ignorance. A
few men, such as the enigmatic figure whose intervention in the affairs of the world is
the basis of this true story, realized that the Great War and its political consequences
were a distraction. Or rather, he saw that the ruination of Europe, perpetrated in the
name of a cause that remained obscure, was merely a side effect of the confusion that
had entered men’s minds. The war to end all wars was just the most recent of the
‘violent storms and tempests that attend the collision of the volatile and the
incombustible, the Universal Solvent and the lifeless body’, when, in layman’s terms,
the material composition of reality itself evolves new configurations that elude the
control of the civilized mind.
     There was surely some cruel significance in the fact that the change had manifested
itself in a city that had been the refuge of wisdom since the end of the Dark Ages. Even
before the war, the humming hive of laboratories and lecture rooms had also been a
magical place where people came in search of non-existent treasures. More than a
century after its disappearance from the Sainte-Chapelle, when the sans-culottes had
waged their mindless war on gullibility, there were sightings of the Holy Sponge of the
Passion, which Louis IX had purchased for an exorbitant sum from Baudouin II,
Emperor of Constantinople, in 1241. According to some lovers of the city who claimed
to remember this as a golden age, Paris was a treasure house where manuscripts of
unknown ancient texts, maps of vanished continents and authentic sacred relics could be
bought at flea markets for next to nothing. They were remembering a time when
everything had been at once believable and incredible. Every day at Les Invalides,
veterans with wooden arms and legs persuaded visitors to wait, sometimes for hours, to
see the invalid with the wooden head, who had been there just a moment before and had
probably gone for his shave but would be back directly. At the Bibliothèque Nationale,
librarians were often importuned by bogus readers poking about in the flower-beds,
looking for Cleopatra’s mummy, which, having been deposited in the archives by
Napoleon Bonaparte, was said to have been removed from the cellars when her
fragrance began to spread through the stacks, and to have been buried in the inner
courtyard one rainy evening in 1870.
      Most troubling of all, the very embodiment of mortal beauty had been veiled with
suspicion and was no longer the object of unquestioning devotion. In August 1911, Da
Vinci’s masterpiece, La Joconde, disappeared from the Louvre. An exhaustive search
turned up the frame but not the painting, which had gone home on the bus with the Italian
carpenter who had made the glass case that was supposed to protect her from anarchists
and vandals. She spent more than two years in a garret, smiling enigmatically at her
abductor and sharing the warmth of his stove, and was only recovered when the
carpenter tried to sell her to the Uffizi. But in the meantime, rumours had spread of an
American collector who commissioned perfect copies of stolen paintings and then
pretended to restore the originals to the grateful museums. The new science of
fingerprinting proved its worth, and photographs were presented that showed every
crack and wrinkle of the original painting, yet no one could quite summon up the
conviction that the recovered Mona Lisa was the real one. The more means there were
of determining authenticity, it seemed, the more doubt was cast on the artefact. And even
if it was the original Mona Lisa, how was one to judge her timeless beauty, since even
men with long experience of such things had recently admired, at the Salon des
Indépendants, an Adriatic Sunset painted by Lolo the donkey from the Lapin Agile in
Montmartre?
      Reality itself fell into decay, and in that darkness, luminous spirits such as Marie
Curie and Henri Poincaré, who alone appeared to understand the muddled workings of
the universe, became the objects of religious veneration. Others, to whom mathematical
equations were meaningless hieroglyphs, longed for the old-fashioned certainty of a
sacred miracle. Every day, hundreds of pilgrims queued at the Chapelle de la Médaille
Miraculeuse in the Rue du Bac, where the Virgin Mary had commanded a young novice
to have a medallion struck–the medallion, bearing the Virgin’s image, to be reproduced
as many times as required, and each one to be as genuine as the next. Unfortunately, the
market in fake medallions flourished as never before, and even those glinting, tangible
icons of cosmic truth were contaminated with doubt.
      Sceptics might have sneered at what they called ‘superstition’, but how could
anyone be expected to distinguish fantasy from reality when things that happened in
broad daylight in front of large crowds were called into question? The Tour de France–
the great sporting symbol of national unity that began and ended in Paris–should have
been immune from the corrosive effects of incredulity. It seemed to represent a simple
application of human will and elementary mechanics. Yet even those who witnessed it
could not trust the evidence of their eyes. Some of the riders were known to have
boarded trains and to have pedalled away from quiet stations in the night. Others were
thought to have shared the impossible burden with identical twins. In 1904, the first four
riders to finish–who ever after asserted their innocence–were disqualified for cheating,
and the victory went to Henri Cornet, who was only twenty years old and who, for a
reason that has been lost to history, was known as ‘Rigolo’ (‘the Joker’). Some of those
who had actually seen the riders struggle into Paris on flat tyres or on foot, with a
mangled bicycle frame around their neck, firmly believed that the Tour de France was a
lucrative fiction, cooked up every July by the journalists of L’Auto, who had been seen
drinking in the back room of a café at Montgeron, writing Homeric reports of fantastic
exploits in the Alps.




IN THAT AGE OF rampant unreality, when the supposedly deranged Surrealists of
Montmartre and Montparnasse were simply the faithful chroniclers of what remained of
reality, it might be thought that the sleepless seekers after truth who studied the ancient
science of Hermes were suffering a crisis of confidence. Yet even one of the more
conservative estimates puts the number of practising alchemists in post-war Paris at
about ten thousand. Since so much trade and manufacture had moved out to the suburbs,
this would make alchemy one of the city’s leading industries between the wars.
     The alchemists themselves could be found in poky ‘esoteric’ bookshops with names
from Egyptian mythology and shy but hostile owners huddled over huge bronze ashtrays,
and in university laboratories, where they worked as assistants or attended public
seminars. Most of them were thin, bearded and anxious, and remarkably slow of speech.
Old-fashioned alchemists still spent long evenings at the Bibliothèque Nationale or the
Bibliothèque Sainte-Geneviève, deciphering unreliable editions of medieval texts with
a pocket French–Latin dictionary. They had the doleful, watery eyes of the mad. Without
the occasional gas explosion or spilling of toxic chemicals, they might have been
described as ‘harmless’. One luckless adept, well known to his younger colleagues, had
chanced upon a convincingly antiquated edition of a work attributed to Paracelsus, in
which a mistranslated passage advised the student to refine his base metal in a small
oven for forty years (instead of ‘days’). The next stage was to have been the distillation
of the Universal Panacea or elixir of long life, but as he contemplated the charred nugget
that had been the focus of his yearnings since adolescence, he saw with the bitter clarity
of a true philosopher that the process of acquiring immortality was too lengthy to be
contained within the span of a human life.
     Such men were increasingly rare. Alchemy had entered a thrilling new age, and
there was as much difference now between the old and new type of alchemist as there is
between a shopkeeper totting up the day’s takings and a mathematician calculating the
proof of a theorem. To anyone unfamiliar with the science, it might seem ironic that such
a far-fetched discipline should have enjoyed a renaissance in the twentieth century, but
to those who took a scholarly interest in the subject, alchemy’s achievements were
evident and substantial. For centuries, alchemy had kept alive the spirit of
experimentation, and it was only recently that it had been overtaken by chemistry.
Alchemists had produced the first descriptions of several elements; they had established
the existence of gases, and developed molecular theories of matter; they had discovered
antimony, zinc, sulphuric acid, caustic soda, various compounds used in medicine, eau
de vie and the secret of porcelain. And it was while searching for the philosopher’s
stone in his urine that an alchemist discovered phosphorus, which means ‘bringer of
light’. Many other discoveries had certainly been lost or had disappeared with the
knowledge of the hieroglyphic languages in which they were recorded.
     On the evening on which this story begins, an alchemist known only by a florid
pseudonym, which was probably invented by his publisher, was deciphering one of
those cryptic texts that are often misconstrued as primitive ornamentation. A tall, elderly
man of aristocratic appearance, he stood in silent contemplation at the west front of
Notre-Dame. From the three great portals, graven figures looked down on him with the
mysterious serenity of their sightless eyes. Without his air of analytical inspection, he
might have been mistaken for one of the old brotherhood of obsessed insomniacs.
Throughout the Middle Ages, the alchemists of Paris had gathered every Saturn’s Day
afternoon at the cathedral dedicated to Our Lady of Paris. The square on which they met
had been sacred long before the cathedral was built. It was there, in 464, that Arthur,
son of Uther Pendragon, had invoked the Virgin Mary, who offered him the protection of
her ermine cloak, and thus enabled him to defeat the Roman tribune called Flollo. That
was a relatively recent event in the history of the site. Archaeological excavations had
uncovered pagan altars beneath the square, and the early Gallo-Roman temple on the
island had certainly replaced an even earlier building sacred to gods whose very names
had perished.
     The crowd of tourists was growing thin, and the late sun etched deep shadows into
the carvings of the west front. Details that were usually invisible were emblazoned with
the sun’s dazzling gold, and it was possible to imagine the sight when the wooden
scaffolding was first removed and the heavenly host shone forth in all the mesmerizing
colours that medieval alchemists had purified in their crucibles.
     The man who gazed on this glorious spectacle from another age was one of the very
few who knew what they were seeing. He knew not only the harmonious confusion of
antagonistic beliefs that had formed the great cathedral, but also its modern history,
which lovers of the past thought too recent to be of interest. Ninety years before, the
architect Viollet-le-Duc had immersed himself in the mysteries of early Gothic art. He
had questioned archaeologists, and sent librarians deep into their archives in search of
manuscripts that showed the cathedral in its original state. He had tracked down the
statues that had been stolen in the Revolution or spirited away to Versailles. The
Perpetual Secretary of the French Academy had mocked him for trying to revive an art
that predated the Renaissance, but to Viollet-le-Duc, the thirteenth century was not an
age of fumbling infants; it was a forgotten world whose peculiar wisdom had been lost.
     He had noticed, for example, like the alchemist, that the towers and portals of the
great cathedral were not symmetrical, and that its solid structure was a subtle
configuration of forces and imbalances. Instead of seeing those anomalies as marks of
barbarism, he realized that he was faced with something foreign and unexplained. He
saw that Gothic architecture was a language with its own vocabulary and grammar. In
an act of faith rarely found in conjunction with precise scholarship, he ‘humbly
submitted’ to the incomprehensible beauty of the vanished age. And because he was
inspired by love, the sneering of the Perpetual Secretary only spurred him on. He
ridiculed the man’s ignorance with the cheerfulness of a true believer: ‘It is tempting to
suppose’, he wrote in Du style gothique au XIXe siècle, ‘that the only stained-glass
windows the Perpetual Secretary has seen are those that one finds in the kiosks and
public toilets of Paris’.
     As a connoisseur of Gothic arcana, Viollet-le-Duc refused to allow any genuine
relics of the early cathedral to be ‘improved’: he preferred mutilated sculptures to ‘an
appearance of restoration’. Though many of the riddles would remain unsolved, he
would at least restore the pieces of the puzzle. The result of his labours was almost too
strange and pristine in appearance to be appreciated by anyone who had known the
cathedral in its muddled, palimpsestic state. Viollet-le-Duc had allowed Notre-Dame to
find her way back to the thirteenth century, accompanied, it is true, by several of his
own petrified fantasies. To the man who stood there that evening, reading the portals
like the pages of a giant book, it was as though the architect had been tinkering with a
machine abandoned to time by an earlier civilization, and, by accident or design, had
supplied the missing parts that would bring it back to life.




IN ORDER TO UNDERSTAND what set this man apart from other admirers of Notre-
Dame, and why he himself was under observation, it is necessary to say something of
the more common forms of esoteric curiosity inspired by the great cathedral. More than
a decade after the Peace Conference, Paris was still the centre of the world’s attention.
Every year, despite the Great Depression, more than one hundred thousand tourists came
from the United States alone to feast their eyes on Paris and to wonder how such an
obstreperous race could have created such a beautiful city. Almost all of them, if they
only spent a day in Paris, went to gaze at Notre-Dame.
    Many of those secular pilgrims were fans of Victor Hugo’s bestselling novel,
Notre-Dame de Paris. Having enjoyed what they took to be the true adventures of
Quasimodo the hunchback, Esmeralda the gypsy-girl and Frollo the mad archdeacon,
they pored over the runic stones and looked for gnostic clues in the stained-glass
windows. They discovered pagan riddles in Latin funerary inscriptions and pieces of
ecclesiastical furniture that were not much older than themselves. When they climbed
the towers, they saw with a thrill the enigmatic graffito, ANAGKH,* with which the
novel begins, and noticed with disappointment that mischievous hands had scratched the
same puzzling characters in every nook and cranny.
     Some who had made a special study of the matter felt quietly superior to their
fellow tourists who failed to realize that the nave and chevet of the cathedral formed the
ancient Egyptian symbol of the Ankh. Since the demonic priest of Victor Hugo’s novel
had–correctly, as it happened–identified Notre-Dame as ‘a summary of hermetic
science’, they followed the priest’s example and searched for the crow on the left-hand
portal of the west front, ‘in order to calculate the angle of vision of the crow, which
looks at a mysterious point in the church where the philosopher’s stone is certainly
hidden’.* The legend had been recorded in Gobineau de Montluisant’s work of 1640:
Explication très-curieuse des énigmes et figures hiéroglyphiques au grand portail de
l’église cathédrale et métropolitaine de Notre-Dame de Paris. If the tourist-pilgrims
had pursued their studies a little further, they might have discovered that the alchemical
crow symbolized putrefaction and the caput mortuum of the Magnum Opus–a stage in
the purification of the metal and of the alchemist’s soul–and that the crow was in fact a
death’s-head. (The location of the skull and the object of its gaze are best left to
individual curiosity since the present occupants of the site in question would not
welcome the attention, and because they have the means to make their displeasure
lastingly apparent.)
     Strange to say, apart from a few alchemists, no one seems to have pursued the most
obvious clue of all. On the gallery of the south tower, two hundred feet above the
square, a human figure stands among the gargoyles and chimaeras. It leans on the
balustrade, gazing over the roof of the nave towards the Marais or–since the gaze of
such figures is often oblique, like that of a bird–through the corner of its eye over some
dog-ravaged flower-beds at a point of no apparent significance. The figure’s long hair
and beard, its Phrygian cap, its long laboratory coat and above all its knitted brows,
show this to be the Alchemist of Notre-Dame. The expression on the stone face is one of
astonishment bordering on horror and dismay, as though he were about to be consumed
by something emerging from his crucible.
     The apparent aimlessness of the figure’s gaze is misleading. In 1831, just before the
publication of Victor Hugo’s novel, the archbishop’s palace that used to stand between
the cathedral and the river was destroyed in a riot. The much older medieval chapel
around which the palace had been built, and which predated most of Notre-Dame, was
also destroyed, and its treasures were thrown into the Seine. Later, the rubble was
cleared away, leaving the space now occupied by flower-beds. If the ancient chapel
once contained the philosopher’s stone, it must now lie somewhere under the Pont de
l’Archevêché or, more likely, under some northern field or landfill site along the Seine.
Meanwhile, the Alchemist of Notre-Dame still ponders with knitted brows the
priceless, vanished treasure.
      These things, and many more besides, were known to the mysterious viewer. He
knew that the anonymous architect of Notre-Dame, and the craftsmen of the powerful
Masonic guild that built the cathedral, had inscribed the procedures of the hermetic
science where none would expect to find them–which is to say, in full view–and that,
furthermore, they had encoded and engraved their knowledge in buildings that would
outlive tapestries and manuscripts, and whose ecclesiastical owners would want to
keep their pagan significance a secret. If a literal-minded scholar had objected that
many of those stone figures had been placed there, or recarved, by Viollet-le-Duc, he
would have retorted that no modern architect, consulting his imagination alone, could
have produced that mysterious combination of scientific accuracy and simple faith.
      Though there was no other sign of agitation in the elderly gentleman, anyone who
happened to notice him as they left the cathedral might have seen an expression similar
to that on the face of the stone Alchemist. But if they searched for the cause of his
consternation, they would have seen nothing in particular, and might have assumed that
he was one of those melancholy lost souls who haunt the religious sites of Paris. While
the few tourists who remained on the square scanned the gallery of the Kings of Judah
and Israel, and, guide book at the ready, identified the signs of the Zodiac and the
labours of the months on the pillars of the left-hand portal, the gentleman stared almost
straight ahead of him at a row of square medallions. The medallions were sheltered by
little arches at the feet of the saints and angels. They depicted a series of rather murky
scenes in low relief. Compared with the larger statues above them, they were
unremarkable, and few people spared them a glance.
      The sun was sinking behind the Préfecture de Police, and dark shadows moved
across the cadaverous face of the cathedral. The gentleman turned away and walked
slowly across the square. A bell in the north tower tolled the hour, and some pigeons
clattered away from the black louvres that are like the lowered lashes of the cathedral’s
eyes. Without looking back, he turned towards the river and disappeared in the direction
of the Right Bank.
      As he left the square, a man who had been waiting a short distance away came and
occupied the spot where the gentleman had just been standing. The superior quality of
his suitcase, his Kodak camera and his travelling cloak–and the interest he aroused in
the beggars–marked him out as a wealthy tourist. He placed his suitcase on the ground
and set his camera on a tripod. He adjusted the screw, raised the lens almost to the
height of the medallions and proceeded to photograph each one in turn. A group of
people stopped to watch, and, following the angle of the lens, were struck by all the
unsuspected details that suddenly burst into blinding clarity as each flashbulb exploded.
      The scenes had no apparent connection with the Bible. In one, a man armed with a
shield and a lance was protecting a citadel from a savage-looking sheath of flames
protruding from the top-left-hand corner of the frame. Next to it, a man in a long robe
was rushing into a sanctuary that already contained a huddled form. On the other side of
the central portal known as ‘The Judgment Portal’, a group of well-preserved figures
appeared to sympathize in advance with the future effects of time and vandalism on a
mournful seated figure with a mutilated, three-fingered hand and flaking flesh.
     The medallion that seemed to have been a particular object of scrutiny was such a
peculiar composition that it was hard to believe it belonged to the original cathedral;
yet there was no sign of any modern restoration. On the far left of the doorway known as
‘The Virgin’s Portal’, it showed a winged figure with its right arm raised in a gesture of
aggression. Most of the panel was filled with a cloud that rose from the earth in a funnel
or from an oddly shaped gourd. A small creature with a human torso and a reptilian
head–perhaps a salamander–was falling headlong out of the cloud. The cloud itself was
filled with six-pointed stars as though it contained a universe, though no constellation
was recognizable in the arrangement of stars.
     After photographing the last of the scenes, the photographer dismantled his tripod
and placed the camera in his suitcase. Then he walked across the square in the same
direction as the elderly gentleman. The sun was now eclipsed by the buildings on the far
side of the square. Its gorgeous radiance gave way to the wan glow of street-lights along
the quai, and the details of the medallions shrank back into darkness. A few stars
glimmered in the gas-lit skies above the Île de la Cité.



THE ORIGINS OF NOTRE-DAME might have been ‘lost in the night of ages’, as the
tour guides liked to say, but most of its history is easier to trace than the comings and
goings of certain individuals who lived in its shadow.
     Paris was no longer the biggest city in continental Europe, and it was less than half
the size of London. Its eighty quartiers–even Montparnasse, where almost every vacant
building was being converted into an American bar–were like villages in which
everyone knew everyone else’s business. There was a buoyant and extrovert
bureaucracy that would have delighted Napoleon. Names were listed at the entrances of
apartment blocks, and there were increasingly comprehensive telephone directories.
Hundreds of thousands of fiches filled in by hotel guests were periodically scanned by
the unhappy squad of policemen known as ‘les garnos’ (from hôtels garnis). Despite
all this, a man who wished to remain anonymous could pass through that teeming mass
of information like a ghost through a hail of bullets.
     It has, not surprisingly, proved impossible to determine exactly when a foreign
agent first picked up the trail of the gentleman who was observed at Notre-Dame. Nor is
it known how long the search continued. By 1937, the Nazis’ secret intelligence agency,
the Abwehr, was on the case, and the gentleman’s addresses and regular haunts–but not
his identity–were certainly known. Later, the trail went cold, and spying operations
became more difficult as the European powers prepared for war. It was several years
later, when the German armies were in retreat, that urgent attempts were made by the
American Office of Strategic Services to revive the search. At about the same time,
Paris booksellers and auctioneers noticed a surge in the demand for alchemical
manuscripts, which anonymous collectors were buying ‘á prix d’or’ in American
dollars.
     Given the fantastic nature of certain espionage operations undertaken by the Nazis,
and in view of their farcical attempt in 1925 to fill the party coffers with alchemically-
produced gold, the base of Paris operations for the Abwehr agent is likely to have been
the Hôtel Helvétia at 51, Rue de Montmorency. It was recommended to German tourists,
and it occupied the oldest stone building in Paris, which was known as ‘The House of
Nicolas Flamel’. A wealthy dealer in manuscripts, Flamel had built the house in 1407
as a hostel for the poor. He himself never lived there, and, despite his later reputation,
was never an alchemist. This had not prevented seekers of the philosopher’s stone from
demolishing half the building in their futile search for gold. Blinded by greed, they
ignored the most basic precept of alchemy–that the scientist himself must be pure of
heart. Evidently, they also ignored the inscription on the wall that said,

          Chacun soit content de ses biens,
          Qui n’a souffisance il n’a riens…*


     It was there, one might imagine, that the man with the camera pondered the scraps
of information he had been able to obtain. What follows is not necessarily a complete
list of these gleanings, but it gives a fair idea of his line of enquiry:



          –Some undeveloped rolls of film, including photographs of the west front of
          Notre-Dame.
          –A copy of a book on Gothic architecture called Le Mystère des
          Cathédrales, published in 1925, and a modern reprint of the Livre des figures
          hiéroglyphiques, misattributed to Nicolas Flamel.
          –An illustrated Pilgrims’ Guide to Notre-Dame, with a fold-out map of the
          cathedral.
          –A notebook containing some addresses, including those of an institution
          called the Sacré-Cœur (59, Rue Rochechouart), the offices of the Paris Gas
          Company (28, Place Saint-Georges) and various academic and
          pharmaceutical laboratories on both banks of the Seine.
          –Baedeker’s guide to south-western France, ‘from the Loire to the Spanish
          frontier’.



     There was also an old cutting, with underlinings in pencil, from a popular magazine
called Je Sais Tout, bound sets of which could easily be found in book-boxes along the
quais.
     The article, dated September 1905, was more intimately connected with the case
than might appear, and it merits a careful reading. It was an interview with a Dr
Alphonse Jobert, who claimed to be an alchemist. There was a picture of a late-middle-
aged man sitting by a stove. The caption said, ‘Dr Jobert continually conducts new
experiments in his alchemist’s laboratory’. Other pictures showed ‘the transmutation of
metals performed under the supervision of a chemist’, and something that looked like a
gigantic pile of guano threatening to engulf the Paris Stock Exchange: this was supposed
to show the total volume of ‘all the gold currently in circulation throughout the world’.
The doctor bore some resemblance to the gentleman at Notre-Dame, but since the
picture was at least thirty-two years old in 1937, and the doctor was already getting on
in years when it was taken in 1905, the resemblance was no doubt fortuitous.
     Dr Jobert had evidently enjoyed a healthy sense of humour, and one senses that the
interviewer was less sceptical after the interview than before. (The foreign agent’s
opinion can only be guessed, though the underlinings indicate his interest.) Much of the
interview was devoted to one of the doctor’s friends, who, having produced a certain
quantity of gold by the alchemical method, had taken it to the Paris Mint. (It was
strongly suggested that the ‘friend’ was the doctor himself.)

          ‘At the Mint, they asked him how he had come into possession of such a
     quantity of gold, and he told them–in his naivety–that he’d made it himself…And
     do you know what they said?’
          ‘No.’
          ‘They said–I’m quoting their actual words–“You ought not to know how to do
     that.”’


    It is worth pointing out that Dr Jobert was not the first alchemist to visit the
imposing palazzo on the Quai de Conti with a sample of home-made gold. In 1854–
seventy years before the first serious claim to have produced artificial gold in a
laboratory*–a former laboratory assistant called Théodore Tiffereau persuaded M.
Levol of the Paris Mint, who was responsible for assaying precious metals, to allow
him to conduct some experiments on the premises. The first two experiments were
inconclusive. Tiffereau believed, however, that when the aqua fortis or nitric acid had
reached boiling-point, the gold must have spurted out onto the floor. The third
experiment had to be left to simmer overnight, and when Tiffereau arrived at the Mint
the next morning, he was told that the test-tube had cracked. Only a few tiny particles of
gold were visible on the glass. M. Levol, obviously unimpressed by low-yield
miracles, then said, ‘You can see that there really isn’t any appreciable quantity of
gold.’
     Much later, the governors of the Mint seem to have taken a more enlightened view
of the matter. In the early 1930s, recognizing the enormous changes that had taken place
in chemistry, they appointed as their expert a noted French physicist called André
Helbronner. This appointment, which seems to have escaped the attention of the Abwehr
agent, was not without significance for the future of the civilized world.
     The rest of the 1905 article was devoted to the alarming implications of Dr Jobert’s
alchemical activities. Spurned by the French authorities, he had apparently received
offers from Spain, where the gold market was less strictly regulated. But the doctor’s
main ambitions lay elsewhere. He pointed out that if the secret were revealed to all the
world, and it became possible for anyone with a stove and a test-tube to transmute base
metals into gold, this would have ‘a somewhat unsettling effect on our institutions, the
social question would make a great leap forwards, and the old world would crumble
and collapse’.
     This was enough to convince the interviewer that Dr Jobert was a dangerous
socialist. His suspicions were confirmed by Jobert’s sympathy with Pierre Curie, who
was known to hold subversive views and who, despite the Curies’ pioneering studies of
magnetism and radioactivity, had never been accepted by the scientific establishment.
     None of this would have surprised a true alchemist. Like the elixir of long life, the
production of gold was merely a stage in the Magnum Opus, and every alchemist knew
that a man who was motivated by personal gain would never reach that stage in any
case. The article’s interest to the foreign spy was presumably the evidence of alchemy’s
recent modernization. One of Jobert’s colleagues, for instance, employed a chemical
engineer in his laboratory and had published a book on ‘how to become an alchemist’
that might easily have served as a chemistry textbook.* In Jobert’s view, if alchemists
were now the students of modern chemists, the scientists themselves had much to learn
from their ancient predecessors. To prove his point, he quoted the fifteenth-century
alchemist-monk Basilius Valentinus, implying that the monk’s description of the catalyst
known as ‘universal mercury’ had something to say about the mysterious properties of
the Curies’ discovery, radium. The foreign agent or his controller had marked this
passage with thick pencil lines in the margin:

        Our mercury is luminous at night…It has such dissolvent properties that, in its
     ambiance, nothing can withstand it, for it destroys all organic matter. Universal
     Mercury has in addition the property of disintegrating all metals that have first
     been opened, and of bringing them to the point of maturation.


     In view of what is now common knowledge, it seems obvious that if these scraps of
information had been properly analysed, they might have encouraged the Nazis to renew
their search for the philosopher’s stone. But since, in their megalomaniac eyes, alchemy
was nothing but an accelerated fund-raising device, they missed the golden opportunity
that might have presented them with the most horrific and lasting revenge for the defeat
of 1918.
     The fact that the meeting to be described in this story took place at the same time as
the Abwehr investigation–the early summer of 1937–suggests that the elderly gentleman
knew that he was under observation and that time was running out. He disappeared after
the meeting, and the only plausible sighting of him was many years later, in Spain. This
had led some to suppose that the elderly gentleman and Dr Jobert were one and the
same, but until further evidence comes to light, this can only be a matter of speculation.




THAT EVENING, Professor Helbronner left the Mint and headed for the Pont Neuf to
return to his laboratory at 49, Rue Saint-Georges. As he passed in front of the
magnificent view of medieval towers rising over the Île de la Cité, he could not have
suspected that there was any meaningful connection between the Gothic cathedral, the
alchemists he occasionally met at the Mint and his own work on nucleonics. It had
occurred to him, however, that several amusing and, he might almost have said,
intriguing parallels existed between the art of the alchemist and the latest discoveries in
chemistry and physics.
     Some of those gold-seekers were clearly insane, and although they were
surprisingly well informed about modern science, they were incapable of distinguishing
experimental results from wild fantasy. Their methods appeared to involve very little
trial and a great deal of error. The particles of gold, for instance, nearly always turned
out to have been present in the base metal. They seemed particularly attached to the idea
that certain molecular transformations produced in laboratories were somehow tied to
the future of the human race, and that certain ill-advised experiments had already altered
the nature of reality itself. This was, to say the least, pushing the Theory of Relativity to
the limits.
     What struck Helbronner was not so much the idea itself as the fact that it was
shared by several individuals who knew nothing of the others’ work. A well-organized
conspiracy of lunatics was obviously out of the question, and so he was forced to
conclude that, however shaky its foundations, alchemy was still a living science.
     In fact, Helbronner had more sympathy with the inter-disciplinary delusion than a
professor of the Collège de France could safely admit. He knew that the Curies had
derived some sort of inspiration from alchemy, and that other colleagues had found it a
fruitful source of analogies for their work on the atomic structure of matter. He might
also have known–though there is no evidence that he did–that the Oxford chemist
Frederick Soddy, having previously derided alchemy as ‘a mental aberration’, had more
recently commended it in public as an untapped source of practical insights. Professor
Soddy had made a special study of the notion of transmutation. From his careful reading
of hermetic texts, he had come to suspect that, some time in the distant past, a vanished
civilization had developed a technology based on some poorly understood and probably
accidental molecular processes. This technology, in Soddy’s view, had left shadowy
traces in alchemical allegories. Remarkably, it was only after his discovery of alchemy
that Soddy and his collaborator, Ernest Rutherford, recognized, to their astonishment,
that radioactive thorium was spontaneously converting itself into a different element.
Soddy is said to have cried out, ‘Rutherford, this is transmutation!’ To which Rutherford
replied, ‘For Mike’s sake, Soddy, don’t call it transmutation! They’ll have our heads off
as alchemists!’
     When he reached his laboratory that evening, Professor Helbronner was told by the
concierge that an elderly gentleman had called to see him. Finding the Professor out, the
gentleman had left a message. Helbronner recognized the name as that of an alchemist
who had previously introduced himself at the Mint, and who had shown a keen amateur
interest in Helbronner’s work on polonium. In his message, the alchemist asked
Helbronner to meet him in one of the testing laboratories of the Société du Gaz de Paris,
which had its headquarters a few doors away in the Place Saint-Georges. Helbronner
alerted his young associate, Jacques Bergier, and the two men set off for what they must
have thought would be a curious diversion.
     Certain details are missing from the next part of the story, largely because, six years
later, André Helbronner was arrested as a member of the Resistance and deported to
Buchenwald concentration camp, where he died of pneumonia in March 1944. In the
last months of his life, he applied his genius to writing cryptic messages on the printed
postcards that prisoners were allowed to send to their families. The only echo of the
meeting that comes from Helbronner himself consists of some experimental notes that
were submitted in sealed envelopes to the Académie des Sciences in the spring of 1940,
a few weeks before the Nazis entered Paris. The main source of information, therefore,
is the account published by Helbronner’s associate in 1960.
     According to this account, the alchemist who asked to meet them that evening in
June 1937 was the author of Le Mystère des Cathédrales et l’interprétation ésotérique
des symboles hermétiques du Grand Œuvre. The book had been published in 1926
under the unlikely name ‘Fulcanelli’. Only five hundred copies were printed, and they
are now almost worth their weight in gold. At the time, the book had sent ripples of
excitement through the tremulous world of Parisian alchemy. It was an erudite but by no
means flawless account of alchemical symbols in religious and domestic buildings of
the Gothic period, with particular reference to Notre-Dame and to the writings of
Basilius Valentinus, Gobineau de Montluisant and Victor Hugo. It owed its charm to its
elegant prose, its careful description of the carvings of Notre-Dame, which the author
had consulted for his own alchemical experiments, and to an unusual mixture of
scepticism and faith. While insisting that certain pseudo-alchemists should be read ‘not
just with a pinch of salt but with the entire salt-shaker’, Fulcanelli had also defended
the scientific integrity of his discipline:

         Our science is as concrete, real and precise as optics, geometry and
     mechanics, its results as tangible as those of chemistry. Enthusiasm and faith are
     stimulants and precious auxiliaries, but they must be subordinate to logic and
     reasoning, and subjected to practical experiment.


     By the time Fulcanelli contacted Professor Helbronner, his book no longer
represented his current thinking. In 1926, he had been too easily distracted by the
esoteric ramblings of post-medieval alchemists. In 1937, he had returned to his original
inspiration, and especially to what he had described in his book as ‘a truly curious little
quadrangular bas-relief’ on the west front of Notre-Dame.
     The abiding interest of the book has proved to be the enigma of Fulcanelli’s
identity, which has kept thousands of occultists and conspiracy theorists fruitlessly
amused for the last eighty years.* A more useful question–one that Professor Helbronner
must have asked himself–is this: what was an alchemist doing in a gasworks? To judge
by the extensive travels mentioned in his book, Fulcanelli was not short of money and
had no need of a job. But when Helbronner and his associate walked over to the quiet
Place Saint-Georges and looked up at the amazing building that housed the Paris Gas
Company, directly above the old entrance to the Nord-Sud Métro, they might have
reflected that this was, after all, an appropriate setting for a practitioner of the hermetic
science. The Hôtel Païva had been built in 1840 in what was then a quartier of
expensive curiosity shops, self-employed courtesans and wealthy artistic types
pretending to be recluses. A sculptor noted for his allegorical scenes of animals had
covered the facade with wonderfully superfluous figures. One of the statues appeared to
be Hermes, equipped with his masonic tools. Blackened by a hundred years of smoke,
the building was an eerie sight at dusk, and the yellow gleam that came from some of the
blinded windows suggested something more interesting than the production of domestic
gas.
     In fact, Fulcanelli’s reasons for taking a job with the Gas Company were probably
entirely practical. As the Office of Strategic Services discovered after the war,
radioactive thorium was imported into France for use in cigarette lighters and gas
mantles, and not, they concluded, to make thorium piles. A gasworks, in other words,
was one of the few places where a man with no academic position could unobtrusively
obtain some of that mysterious element whose transmutation Professors Soddy and
Rutherford had observed.
     The meeting took place in one of the laboratories at the back of the building. The
two scientists were dressed in everyday clothes; the alchemist wore a lab coat. He had
a strange tale to tell–a tale that would have seemed utterly fantastic without his detailed
knowledge of their work on nucleonics, and in particular their detection of radioactive
emissions during the volatilization of bismuth in high-pressure liquid deuterium. It
turned out that the alchemist had been a friend of Pierre Curie, and had a good
grounding in the subject. He spoke in a clear, metallic tone, with the concision of a
lecturer addressing intelligent students. There was a hint of impatience in his voice,
which contrasted with the old-fashioned courtesy of his diction.
     ‘You are very close to succeeding in your experiments, as indeed are several of
your contemporaries. Might I be allowed to utter a word of caution? The work on which
you and your colleagues are embarked is fraught with terrible dangers. They threaten not
only you but also the entire human race.’
     An ironic smile formed on Bergier’s face, which the alchemist either ignored or
didn’t notice.
     ‘It is easier than you think to release the energy of the nucleus, and the artificial
radioactivity that would be produced could poison the Earth’s atmosphere within a few
years. It is, I might add, entirely possible, as alchemists have known for some time, to
manufacture atomic explosives from a few grams of metal that could eradicate entire
cities.’
     Bergier had been a student of Marie Curie and still had much to learn about the
unpredictable world of nuclear physics, but perhaps he felt that his days of being
lectured were over. He was about to interrupt when the alchemist raised a magisterial
finger:
     ‘I know what you are going to say, but it is of no interest. Alchemists knew nothing
of atomic structure; they were ignorant of electricity, and they had no means of detecting
radioactivity. But I must tell you, though I can offer no proof, that geometrical
arrangements of extremely pure materials are capable of releasing atomic forces,
without the need for electricity or the vacuum technique.’
     He paused, as though to allow the concept of a home-made reactor to sink in. There
was a strangely indifferent or perhaps mildly psychotic expression on his face. Neither
of the scientists said anything. Bergier looked at the charlatan in the lab coat and
seemed to observe the beautiful, fleeting effects of some unrepeatable experiment. The
man’s words had set off a chain reaction in his mind. Though it now seems barely
credible, until Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann discovered nuclear fission in Berlin the
following year, almost no one had considered the destructive potential of nuclear
energy, and it was not until 1942, when Enrico Fermi’s atomic pile went critical under
the football stadium of the University of Chicago, that anything remotely corresponding
to the alchemist’s ‘geometrical’ bomb existed.
     Somewhere in the building, a door closed. Helbronner and Bergier exchanged a
glance, as if to reassure themselves that objective reality was still the prevailing force
and that nothing unaccounted for was interfering with their perceptions.
     ‘I would ask you to concede’, the alchemist went on, as though oblivious to the
effect of his words, ‘that there might once have existed a civilization that knew about
atomic energy and was destroyed by its misuse, and’–his eyes now seemed to
sparkle–‘that a few partial techniques survived.’
     By now, Bergier was intrigued. It was not impossible that someone whose mind
appeared to function like an uncalibrated cyclotron might have stumbled on some
interesting permutations of ideas. He asked politely, ‘You yourself, Monsieur…you
have undertaken research in this domain?’
     The alchemist smiled as though at a distant memory. ‘You are asking me to give you
a potted history of four thousand years’ philosophy and a summary of my life’s work…
And’, he added, as Bergier shrugged apologetically, ‘even if that were possible, you
would be asking me to translate into words concepts that do not lend themselves to
language.’
     ‘So’, said Bergier, ‘if I understand correctly, we are talking about the philosopher’s
stone…’
     ‘And the production of gold?…Those are merely particular applications,’ said the
alchemist with a wave of his hand. ‘The essential point is not the transmutation of
metals but that of the experimenter himself.’ He directed his gaze at the younger of the
two scientists. ‘There is something that I would ask you to consider: alchemists never
dissociated moral and religious concerns from their research, whereas modern
physicists such as yourselves are children of the eighteenth century, when science
became the pastime of a few aristocrats and wealthy libertines.’
     The conversation ended with this sobering homily. No doubt the alchemist felt that
he had said enough, and that any attempt to explain how he had reached his conclusions
would only baffle the two scientists or leave them completely incredulous. He
conducted them to the laboratory door and left them to make their own way out.
     When they looked back at the building, no light was shining from any of the
windows, and they never saw the alchemist again.
     No one, including the British and American agents who searched for ‘Fulcanelli’
after the Liberation, has ever been able to explain how a Parisian alchemist employed
by a gas company, with a scholarly interest in Gothic architecture, managed to acquire a
reasonably accurate understanding of nuclear physics at such an early date. It was not
until the following August that Albert Einstein wrote his famous letter to President
Roosevelt, warning him that the creation of a devastating bomb had become feasible
‘through the work of Joliot[-Curie] in France as well as Fermi and Szilard in America’.
     In 1937, the only other person to have warned of the dangers of atomic research
was that self-taught student of alchemy, Frederick Soddy, who had spoken in public
lectures of the possible future development of unimaginably powerful weapons.
Fulcanelli lacked Professor Soddy’s resources and expertise, but he had the advantage
of a lifetime’s alchemical experience. From his own experiments and observations, he
understood the process of ‘projection’, the role of what medieval alchemists called eau
pesante or ‘heavy water’, and the difference between the ‘humid way’ and the ‘dry
way’, which took days instead of years. Unlike Professor Soddy, he knew that
alchemy’s secrets could no more be explained in words than mathematical equations
could be translated into Romantic prose.
     So many obscure and symbolic disasters had been depicted in the superstitious
past–plagues, massacres and divine conflagrations–that it had been no simple matter to
relate the experimental evidence to the visible record. It had taken time to see that some
of the most puzzling allegories were those that displayed the literal truth. The sequence
of carvings had survived for seven centuries on the west front of Notre-Dame where
thousands of people could (and still can) see it for themselves, but until the threat had
become a reality once again, it was just another historical curio that served as a
background to countless tourists’ snapshots.




DESPITE THE INCREASING polarization of rich and poor in purpose-built suburbs,
much of the population of Paris was still arranged vertically by wealth. A seamstress, a
poet, a bank manager, a fortune-teller and a nuclear physicist might tread the same stair
carpet every day of their lives and sometimes even exchange a few words on the subject
of the unseasonable weather, the pigeons in the courtyard or the latest inexplicable
rumblings of the plumbing. The apartment blocks of Paris were a gigantic university of
trades and disciplines. Remarkable encounters, such as this meeting of two sciences
separated by thousands of years, were not uncommon, and there is nothing odd in the
fact that the meeting has never before been mentioned in any history of Paris.
     Bergier and Helbronner may or may not have heeded the alchemist’s strictures on
the amorality of modern science, but they certainly pondered his technical hints. The
notes that the two scientists submitted to the Académie des Sciences in sealed
envelopes in 1940 were opened in 1948 and proved to contain calculations of self-
sustaining chain reactions in deuterium and uranium-238.* These notes do not, as some
have claimed, show that the laboratory in the Rue Saint-Georges was on the brink of
assembling the world’s first hydrogen bomb, but they do demonstrate the surprisingly
advanced state of French nuclear research.
     This only makes Fulcanelli’s actions all the more puzzling. He warned of
catastrophic forces soon to be unleashed upon the world, and yet, by describing what
was in effect an atomic pile, he set Bergier and Helbronner on the shortest path to
nuclear fission.
     The Paris Peace Conference had shown that morality was a spent force in
international politics. It was hard now to imagine that a chemist had once demonstrated
to Louis XV ‘an inextinguishable fire’ that could destroy a city, and been paid out of the
royal purse to eradicate all traces of his horrible invention, or that an engineer had once
presented Louis XVI with a crank-action machine-gun that could kill an entire regiment,
and been angrily dismissed as ‘an enemy of humanity’.
     The agents of the OSS who arrived in Europe in the wake of the Allied armies
rushed about the Continent like bargain hunters. The official story was that they were
looking for missing American soldiers. Their real aim was to track down atomic
scientists and to prevent whatever fissionable material the Nazis had produced from
falling into the hands of the Soviets. Some of the agents set off for German cities that
were about to come under French jurisdiction. Others searched for Fulcanelli and one
of Helbronner’s former associates, an Indian called Eric Edward Dutt who had dabbled
in alchemy and particle accelerators. But Fulcanelli had vanished without trace, and
Dutt had been shot by French counter-espionage agents in North Africa.
     In Paris, the operation’s main focus was the Collège de France and the laboratory
of Frédéric Joliot-Curie. The Curies’ son-in-law was known to be an ardent communist.
He had thrown petrol bombs at German tanks in the battle for the liberation of Paris. He
was believed to have obtained several tons of uranium during the war, and there was
some surprise and alarm that French scientists working in such primitive conditions had
made such spectacular progress. A recently declassified report on ‘Atomic Experiments
in France’ mentioned Joliot-Curie as a possible threat to security:

         A reliable source reports that there has been a rumor circulating to the effect
     that French scientists have the formula and techniques concerning atomic
     explosives, and that they are now willing to sell this information. They allegedly
     do not wish to sell to the Allies or to their own government for political reasons…
     They are supposed to be desirous to sell the discovery to one of the smaller
     nations.*


    It would be interesting to know whether or not Joliot-Curie ever discussed the
matter with the alchemist who had been a friend of his father-in-law. Perhaps
Fulcanelli, like Joliot-Curie and other French scientists, realizing that the secret would
soon be known to several powerful nations, thought it better to spread the knowledge as
widely as possible. By then, of course, the alchemist, wherever he was, would have
seen the astonishing images of what might have been a mythical catastrophe from a
medieval depiction of Hell. He would have seen, this time in black and white, the
shattered sanctuaries, the fleshless faces that resembled badly eroded bas-reliefs and
the towering cloud that contained a million suns. Even he might have found it all very
hard to believe.
