LOVERS OF SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉS
Black and white, 35 mm.
Silence; no titles.
Fade in to:


                  1. PLACE DE LA MADELEINE.
    The cobbles on the square.

    JULIETTE’s point of view:

    Drab figures carrying bags, going about their own business. One or two cars;
       bicycles everywhere; a vélo-taxi pedalled by a young woman in culottes. If
       possible, no pigeons.
    Medium long-shot: CHARLOTTE emerges from the thin crowd on the Rue
       Royale and waves at the camera. She begins to cross the square, moving
       purposefully, carrying a shoulder-bag. The sunlight shines through her white
       skirt; her hair is blown by the breeze; she looks young and cheerful.
    Camera pulls back and zooms in: CHARLOTTE seems quite close when she still
       has some way to go before reaching the camera.
    A black Citroën enters the square behind her to the left. Sound of doors banging.
       Three men in gabardines and fedoras grab Charlotte and bundle her into the
       car.
    CHARLOTTE screams.
    The car drives off. Juliette runs into shot, racing after the car.
    JULIETTE, banging on the windows: That’s my sister! That’s my sister!
    Close up: Charlotte’s face stares back from the retreating window in wide-eyed
       terror. The car brakes and swerves to a halt. The door opens; an arm pulls
       Juliette into the car.
    Zoom back: the black car accelerates away towards the Place de la Concorde.
    Close up: cobbles in the foreground.
                         2. INSIDE THE CAR.
Two men in front; two behind, Charlotte wedged between them. Juliette sitting
  on the knee of one of the Gestapo officers.
JULIETTE, giggling: It’s ages since I had a ride in a car!
The officer punches her very hard in the back. Pain and shock on her face.


               3. PLACE DE LA MADELEINE.
The black Citroën accelerating away; pedestrians still going about their own
  business. The car is increasingly hard to pick out from the background.
The solo trumpet begins–one long note, then the melody–brash, almost
  slapdash, but forlorn; it sounds like an empty room. The title scrolls rapidly
  across the screen: LOVERS OF SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉ S…


4. TITLE SEQUENCE: LEFT BANK AND SUBURBS.
Fade to: face of JULIETTE, staring out of the car window. Her black fringe and
   long, straight hair make her look like a child, but her expression is that of an
   adult.
While the TITLES appear, street scenes are reflected on the window and pass
   over Juliette’s face. The trumpet continues, with bass and cymbal.
NB: this should be the real route, as taken in September 1943 to Fresnes (they
   were first taken to Avenue Foch, but that route would be too short and
   familiar). Film practically the whole stretch from Place de la Concorde,
   across the Seine, down the Boulevard Saint-Germain and Boulevard Raspail
   to Place Denfert (the car is moving at speed); empty shops and café windows.
Fade twice to increasingly deserted scenes of suburbs–walls; isolated, scraggly
   trees; vacant lots…Bleary sunlight. Children playing among ruins or
   whatever else happens to appear.
Trumpet stops. Silence.
Black screen for four seconds.


            5. AN OFFICE, 84, AVENUE FOCH.
Sound of a typewriter.
The typewriter, with an apple next to it on the table.
WOMAN in uniform, typing; hair in a bun. A SOLDIER standing by the door.
   JULIETTE sits in the corner. Ornate fireplace, Second Empire mirror; the
   incongruous paraphernalia of military administration.
Juliette looks down at the bag between her legs (the bag her sister was carrying
   in the opening scene). She looks up; the typist sees her looking and pushes
   the apple towards her across the table, and starts typing again.
Juliette steals a glance at the contents of the bag–papers rolled up–and quickly
   looks up away. She raises her hand, with a meaningful expression.
JULIETTE: Madame? My tummy’s hurting…
The typist nods to the soldier, and gestures at a wooden door.
TYPIST, to Juliette: Don’t lock the door, and don’t be long.


                             6. TOILET.
Art deco tiles; stained glass showing a beautiful woman in a garden full of
   flowers. Two polished wooden steps lead to the toilet seat.
JULIETTE opens the bag, removes the papers, flushes the toilet, rolls up her
   sleeve, and begins to stuff the papers into the bowl as far as she can reach.
   Then she flushes the toilet again. Loud sound of flushing.
Close up of papers (a glimpse of handwritten lists of names and addresses)
   swirling in the water.


                             7. OFFICE.
SOLDIER goes to the door; opens it. JULIETTE descends from the toilet and
   goes to sit in the corner. The woman typist has disappeared.
Close up of clock (11.05). Occasional sounds of someone falling, crying out.
JULIETTE (sitting) and SOLDIER (standing), with an oak-panelled wall
   between them.
Close up of the empty bag between Juliette’s legs.
Close up of clock (2.30).
Black screen for three seconds.
Sound of heavy boots on metal walkways. Echoing voices.


                           8. FRESNES.
Echoing, metallic sounds continue.
The brick facades and perimeter fence of Fresnes prison, seen from a slow-
  moving vehicle.


                 9. CONSULTATION ROOM.
A hand in a plastic glove with blood on the fingers.
JULIETTE, from behind, putting on her skirt, then her sweater.
Female ORDERLY wearing a white coat over her uniform, removing the glove.
   She goes to a shelf and hands Juliette a towel, a folded blanket and a face-
   cloth.


                          10. SHOWERS.
JULIETTE under the shower, seen from behind. Her black hair falls down to her
   waist. The scene is cruelly lit and wholly unerotic. Inarticulate women’s
   voices shouting.
Close up: water, with dark streaks, running down the drain-hole.
Juliette under the shower, out of focus, behind the rain-like curtain of shower
   water. Loud sounds of gushing water…


                       11. PRISON CELL.
JULIETTE, and four slatternly prostitutes pretending not to be frightened.
  Camp-beds; slop-bucket. Tall windows with frosted glass and iron bars.
WHORE 1:…then he called me a filthy fucking bitch and buggered off without
  paying–and bugger me if he wasn’t back a week later with his friends!
WHORE 2, nods in Juliette’s direction, as if to say, ‘Hush; she’s just a kid.’
WHORE 1: Bah! She’ll find out soon enough–if she hasn’t already…
WHORE 4, inspecting Juliette: Chubby little thing…
WHORE 3, singsong voice: Chubby little thing with a big fat nose.
WHORE 1: Huh! She’s not hiding much under all that hair…If they did to her what
  they did to me…
WHORE 4, greedily: So what did they do, then?
 Raucous voices continue. Improvised jazz trumpet, intermittent throughout the
    following scenes, except the flashbacks.
 Close up: Juliette bending over her blanket, which she holds on her lap. Big
    tears slither down her eyelashes. She begins to tease out loose threads from
    the hem of the blanket, and places them next to her on the bed.


12. CHILDHOOD HOME: PLUSH APARTMENT IN RUE
    DE SEINE NEAR SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉS.
 JULIETTE as a little girl: shorts and blouse, tights, plimsolls, pageboy haircut.
    Her mother and father are shouting at one another. M. GRÉCO (Corsican, 30
    years older than his wife) hits Mme GRÉCO across the face. She screams,
    falls to the floor.
 Little JULIETTE watches this in silence. She seems to be invisible to her
    parents.
 Mme GRÉCO: Get out! Get out!
 Sound of door slamming. Then more banging and echoing shouts, which turn out
    to be noises heard in the cell.


                         13. PRISON CELL.
 Prostitutes lounging about, dozing or engaged in grooming.
 JULIETTE drags her camp-bed to one of the windows, stands on the bed, cranes
    her neck and looks through a pane that has lost some of its frosting.
 Lingering shot–blurry at the edges but clear in the centre–of a white GOAT
    tethered to a post in a scrubby field beyond the perimeter fence. The goat
    seems to raise its head once or twice towards the prison. (Film several
    minutes in daylight and again at dusk.) The goat appears to be munching
    quite happily. Eight seconds.
 Cut to: Juliette’s blanket, in tatters. She ties the threads together and uses them
    in place of curl papers.
 Close up: JULIETTE twisting the threads into her hair.
 Tethered GOAT, munching. The light is fading.
 JULIETTE lying on the bed, her hair in papers.
 Black screen.
       14. CHILDHOOD HOME, RUE DE SEINE.
The tall window of a drawing-room opens. Sounds of the city as heard from an
   inner courtyard; faint breathing. The camera pans across the windows
   opposite on the same floor, then looks down from the sixth floor to the
   courtyard far below.
JULIETTE as a little girl. She steps out onto the narrow ledge that runs all
   around the sixth floor. She places her feet in second position like a ballet
   dancer. Her eyelashes brush against the wall. She begins to move along the
   ledge.
The rest of the scene is through Juliette’s eyes: she looks through the
   neighbours’ windows, then the wall and downpipes appear as she passes on
   to the next window.
–A sparsely furnished room: a man and his wife staring at each other glumly
   across a table, eating.
–Wall.
–A soldier’s uniform hung on the back of a chair; the foot of an unmade bed with
   a woman’s clothes draped across it.
–Wall.
–A little boy holding a teddy bear, looking straight at the camera. He holds the
   bear out to the camera.
–Wall and drainpipes.
–A room full of packing crates and luggage.
–Juliette’s plimsolled feet and the courtyard below. Sound of breathing
   continues.
–A woman with a cat on her lap, under the photograph of a cat. She looks
   vacantly at the camera as though watching someone go past on the ground
   floor.
–Wall.
–An old man sitting very close to the window, mending a watch.
–Wall.
–A hand comes out, pulls Juliette into the room, and slaps her across the face.
Mme GRÉCO: I’ll kill you if I catch you doing that again!
Black screen.


                   15. INTERVIEW ROOM.
Bare walls. Short MAN in jaunty suit and polka-dot tie behind a desk, with
  papers in front of him; JULIETTE on a wooden chair.
 MAN, prodding the papers: Your papers aren’t in order. What’s your real name?
 JULIETTE: Gréco. Juliette.
 MAN: You’re lying. These are false papers. What is your real name?
 JULIETTE: My real name? Juliette…What’s yours?
 Close up: the man’s face, his eyes narrowing, moves towards the camera.
 Black screen.


                         16. PRISON CELL.
 Juliette sitting on her camp-bed, her knees pulled up to her chest. Her face is
    badly bruised. (Film her in this position for ten minutes. Reduce to fifteen
    seconds with dissolves.)


                            17. FRESNES.
 View of the prison walls from the road, as in scene 8, but stationary. Sound of
    rooks cawing. Five seconds.
 Black screen, fading to light grey. Sounds of the city and the chattering of
    sparrows.


                        18. AVENUE FOCH.
 JULIETTE sitting, clutching her knees, but this time on a bench, wearing a coat.
    She looks up.
 Creamy mansions on the Avenue Foch and the tall trees in the lovely light of
    morning. Juliette, dressed as in the opening scene, stands up and begins to
    walk along the avenue. Faint trumpet music. Passers-by look at her. (Do not
    use extras.)
 (MUSIC: This should not interrupt the images but seem to accompany Juliette
    along the street: something like Miles Davis’s ‘Générique’–long, lonesome
    notes. If possible, show him the whole take, uncut, and get him to improvise.)


19. HÔTEL CRYSTAL, BEHIND SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-
                    PRÉS.
 Natural sound.
 Full-frame shot of the dingy hotel entrance: grubby, half-length curtains; dirty
    windows; bucket of detergent outside.
 Zoom out: JULIETTE walks into shot. She stands looking into the dark brown
    interior of the hotel.


              20. HÔTEL CRYSTAL, INTERIOR.
 JULIETTE climbs the staircase (iron banister, brown carpet, embossed velvet
    flock wallpaper). The hotel owner (shirtsleeves, stained waistcoat) appears
    at the bottom of the stairs.
 HOTELIER: Where do you think you’re going?
 JULIETTE, descending the stairs: I’ve come for my things.
 HOTELIER disappears, comes back with battered suitcase; dumps it on the hall
    carpet: There…
 JULIETTE: Is that all?
 HOTELIER: Hey! ‘Is that all’…Who does she think she is?…Try the pawn-shop…
 JULIETTE stares at the hotelier.
 HOTELIER: What am I? A Sister of Mercy? You left without paying.
 JULIETTE kneels on the carpet, and opens the suitcase.
 Close up: countless tiny moths flutter out of the suitcase; the remains of a dress
    are just visible.


21. STREETS AROUND SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉS.
 Long take: camera follows JULIETTE, who is carrying her suitcase. Rue Saint-
    Benoît, left along Boulevard Saint-Germain, past the church and the little
    park. People are talking animatedly. Three young German soldiers go by,
    looking like nervous schoolboys in their cheap wool uniforms. Posters have
    been pasted on the tree-trunks: AVIS À LA POPULATION, with ‘FFI’ daubed
    over it in black paint; TOUS AU COMBAT! and LA VICTOIRE EST
    PROCHE!, with a printed red band pasted across it signed by General von
    Choltitz threatening the destruction of Paris.
 Juliette turns left down Rue de Buci and threads her way through the market
    stalls towards the building on the corner of the Rue de Seine.
 Close up: the severed, golden horse-head of the boucherie chevaline next door to
    the hotel. A plaque beside the door advertises ‘Chambres á la journée’.
Juliette looks away from the head and walks into the dark hallway. The screen
   continues to show the hotel entrance for four seconds.
Loud explosions and shouting.


                       22. HOTEL ROOM.
JULIETTE opens the sixth-floor window, steps out onto the leadwork.
Rooftop view. Smoke rising from certain parts of the city.
Archive footage: posters being torn from walls; civilians in suits and ties
   carrying rifles; barricades; people taking cover in doorways; a tricolor
   flying from the Préfecture de Police, and the towers of Notre-Dame from a
   sandbagged window in the Préfecture; armoured cars racing along the Rue
   de Rivoli; bodies and debris lying on the Place Saint-Michel; General von
   Choltitz emerging from the Hôtel Meurice, lighting a cigar and having it
   crushed into his face by a woman in the crowd; American tanks festooned
   with cheering girls.
Rooftop view of Paris.
JULIETTE withdraws into the room and lies down on the bed, staring at the
   ceiling.
White plaster ceiling and light-bulb. Sounds of gunfire and cheering.
Ceiling fades to bright sky with white clouds.


                   23. JOËL’S APARTMENT.
Medium close up: a mountain of miscellaneous clothes.
Zoom out: a large studio apartment that looks like the property room of an
   abandoned theatre. Joël, a very tall, myopic young man, quite camp, opens
   the door:
JOËL: My God! Is it really you?
JULIETTE, smiling faintly: I don’t know…Perhaps it is…Can I come in?
Joël ushers her in. They sit; he hands her a cigarette.
JOËL: Where have you been? No one’s seen you for ages!
JULIETTE: On vacation…at Fresnes…(Silence.) They took my sister. And my
   mother, because, you know, my mother liked adventures…(Shrugs her
   shoulders, pulls on her cigarette and blows out a torrent of smoke.) But she’s
   only my mother, and she always said she bought me from the gypsies…
JOËL, inspecting Juliette with amiable distaste: Yes, and she bought your clothes
   from the gypsies, too. I can see that. Now we shall have to see what we can do
     for you. (Waves an arm at the clothes racks and the mountains of material.)
     My family, too…Their business was confiscated, and now (in a posh, 16th-
     arrondissement accent) I have come into possession of the family fortune!…
     (Pulls a green loden overcoat from the racks.) The only problem is, they
     specialized exclusively in men (arches his eyebrows). It runs in the family, you
     know! But now that we’ve all been ‘liberated’, we don’t have to worry
     ourselves about such petty distinctions!…Here, try this on!
  JULIETTE tries on the coat and shrugs it onto the floor. Then she explores the
     racks and piles of clothes, and ‘models’ various outfits: a khaki uniform, a
     black gabardine, which she takes off again quickly after looking in the full-
     length mirror; then a hefty pullover and a large tweed jacket which she pulls
     about her and smells with an air of contentment.
  (NB: this is not the Juliette Gréco of later years. She looks more like a chubby,
     street-wise teenager than a fashion model, but she wears even the most
     ludicrous combinations with a certain style.)
  Two of her girlfriends enter and join in the fashion parade. Improvised, saucy
     conversation on the subject of men’s clothes. (Interview the actors; film in a
     single take, and edit out the interviewer’s questions.)
  JULIETTE: I’ll never get used to buttoning it up the wrong way.
  JOËL: You’d be surprised, my dear…
  Juliette plunges back into the coat-racks. Before she re-emerges, the camera
     turns to the smiling faces of her two friends, applauding:
  LUISA, laughing, in mock-indignation: You’re not going out dressed like that!…


         24. PLACE SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉS.
  Two WOMEN of a certain age, swathed in funereal black, carrying handbags,
     looking scandalized.
  JULIETTE and her two FRIENDS standing in front of a bar, all three wearing
     men’s jackets with wide shoulders, and trousers with the legs rolled up.
     Juliette begins to unbutton her jacket.
  Close up: a pair of boots on display outside a shoe shop; legs walking past on
     the pavement. From one pair of legs to the next, the boots disappear.
  JULIETTE buttoning her jacket over something bulky, and the three girls
     walking smartly away into the crowd on the Place Saint-Germain-des-Prés.


25. LUXURIOUS DRAWING ROOM, FAUBOURG SAINT-
                 GERMAIN.
 Ironic, light chamber music.
 An elegantly dressed LADY in pearls and turban, looking supercilious but
    alarmed. Sitting opposite her: JULIETTE, with very long, uncombed hair,
    wearing a black figure-hugging woollen dress and the leather boots from the
    previous scene.
 LADY, to Juliette: Do you have much experience in the profession?
 JULIETTE: Oh yes, a lot of experience.
 LADY: You have worked as a maid before?
 JULIETTE, looking around the drawing room: Yes…Have you?
 Close up: horrified look on the lady’s face.


26. STREETS AROUND SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉS.
 A wet evening; lights shining on the pavement. JULIETTE and her FRIENDS
   walk along, discussing films. The camera follows the conversation as though
   it is one of the group.
 JOËL:…But it’s about a capitalist. It’s a glorification of America.
 LUISA: Can’t a communist make a film about a capitalist? In any case, it’s
   allegorical.
 ANNE-MARIE: So is practically everything!…Lang, Welles, Renoir…It’s all
   allegory.
 JOËL: Allegory of what, might one ask?
 They reach the corner of the Rue Dauphine and the Rue Christine, and stop in
   front of a bar.
 JULIETTE, looking up at the plastic letters above the entrance, ‘Le Tabou’: It’s
   all real…And when you go outside into the rain, you start to fade away,
   because the film was more real than you are…
 LUISA, cheerfully: Poor thing! She doesn’t know who she is, do you, darling?
   This afternoon, she thought she was a chambermaid…
 JOËL, pushing open the door, dramatically: Scene Two: they enter a disgusting
   little bar called ‘Le Tabou’, where Joël buys everyone an exotic cocktail, and
   Juliette thinks she’s in Tahiti…


                          27. ‘LE TABOU’.
 Inside: bulky men drinking at the bar–warehouse porters and newspaper-
    delivery drivers in fur-lined jackets. They look round at the group entering.
JULIETTE and FRIENDS walk to a stairwell and descend to a long, vaulted
  cellar full of little stools and tables. Lights shine through African masks on
  the wall. They sit down at one of the tables.


                       28. RUE DAUPHINE.
Close up of bar entrance outside. It looks cleaner and snazzier than before. The
   sign, ‘Le Tabou’, is now in blazing neon. A cat runs across the street as a car
   pulls up. Well-dressed people are entering the bar.
Crescendo of voices and jazz music.


                          29. ‘LE TABOU’.
In the vaulted cellar: women dressed in New Look clothes, and their lounge-
   suited chaperones. They look inquisitive and slightly apprehensive. Some of
   them are pointing at people in the cellar and especially to a motley group of
   intellectuals at the far end, bathed in smoke.
JULIETTE and LUISA stand near the entrance, apparently invisible to the
   people coming in. They pinch the ladies’ bottoms and point derisively at
   their expensive clothes. A po-faced man in black-rimmed spectacles enters
   the club. Juliette slides a notebook out of his back pocket. Luisa takes it from
   her and reads…
LUISA: ‘Le Tabou, 33 Rue Dauphine, Tel. DANTON 53–28. All night…
   (imagine!)…drunken philosophers, illiterate poets, Africans, long-haired
   adolescents…’(To Juliette:) That’s you! I bet he’s got a photographer with him!
   Try to look like a savage…You should go and sit with your intellectual friends
   over there. You’re their little pet!…
They walk over to a table where a black man is playing records. Men stare at
   Juliette; she stares back. She bends over the turntable and tries to read the
   label.
Close up: a blurred reflection of her face on the black vinyl. The record is Miles
   Davis–something casual and hypnotic (‘Deception’).
BORIS VIAN (realistically larger than life, debonair and slightly manic; leans
   over, close to Juliette): It’s Miles Davis…He’s in Paris, for the jazz festival.
   Do you want to go and hear him?
JULIETTE looks up at Vian.
VIAN: We’ll take you if you like. He’s rehearsing at the Salle Pleyel.
JULIETTE nods her head.
VIAN, hands on hips: She never speaks! Why do you never speak? (Fixes his eyes
   on her.) We’ll take you there on one condition: you have to let us hear your
   voice.
JULIETTE shakes her head, looks awkward. No.
VIAN: OK. You can use someone else’s words. It’s like ventriloquism…(Taking
   her over to the smoke-shrouded table.) You know these alcoholics, don’t you?
   (They greet Juliette. Vian gestures grandly:) Mademoiselle Gréco is in search
   of a song.
BEAUVOIR (striped pullover, hair tied back, red fingernails; to Sartre): You
   said Gréco ought to be a singer. Why don’t you give her a song?
SARTRE, thinking: What about ‘La Rue des Blancs-Manteaux’? I wrote it for
   Huis Clos, but (raising his vodka glass to Juliette), I hereby offer it to
   Mademoiselle.
BEAUVOIR: That’s nice! A song about an executioner…Find something better…
   Imagine her on the stage.
SARTRE, inspecting Juliette: ‘Juliette’…rhymes with…fillette…Ah!…‘Si tu
   t’imagines, fillette’. Raymond Queneau. (To Juliette:) You know Queneau?
JULIETTE nods her head. Yes.
BEAUVOIR, leaning over the table towards Juliette, smiling tipsily: ‘Your rosy
   cheeks’, ‘your slender waist’…(To Sartre:) What else?…
SARTRE, merrily: ‘Your twinkling feet, your sylph-like thighs…’ We can get
   Kosma to write the music.
All look at JULIETTE. Contra-zoom: she suddenly appears, as if in her mind’s
   eye, in the pose of a singer standing at a microphone. She stares at the
   camera with the shadow of a smile. The music has segued discreetly into
   something more gentle and romantic–‘Moon Dreams’ or ‘Générique’ again.
The merry group at the table continue reciting phrases of the poem: ‘A triple
   chin, a muscle turned to flab…’ ‘Gather the roses, the roses of life!’ ‘If you
   think they’ll last forever, you’ve got another think coming, little girl!’


                      30. SALLE PLEYEL.
The dilapidated, art deco facade of the Salle Pleyel. Music, at first indistinct
  and echoing, becomes gradually louder during the following sequence.
The camera moves through the white columns of the foyer.
The auditorium. On the distant stage: a bass-player, a drummer and the pencil-
  thin figure of Miles DAVIS (23 years old). He wears a white shirt, black tie
  and a sharply tailored linen suit. His dazzling trumpet catches the light.
Seats in the auditorium and scattered listeners; JULIETTE sitting a few rows
   from the front, her hands clasped around her left knee, listening intently. She
   is dressed simply but strikingly in black, with more mascara than before.
Dissolve: people here and there in the auditorium, this time in different seats;
   JULIETTE as before. During the dissolve, the music changes to a slow,
   poignant tune reminiscent of the opening sequence. While the music plays:
   close up of Juliette staring past the camera.
Music stops.
DAVIS and the other musicians resting between numbers; a photographer taking
   pictures of Davis, a journalist scribbling notes.
DAVIS, to one of the musicians, jerking his head: Hey, who’s that girl over there?
   The one with the long black hair?
MUSICIAN: That one over there? What do you want with her?
DAVIS: What do you mean, what do I want with her? I want to get to know her.
   She’s been sitting there all day…
MUSICIAN: She’s not for you, man. She came with Boris Vian and that crowd.
   She’s one of those ‘existentialists’…
DAVIS: Man, I don’t care about all that shit. She’s beautiful. I want to get to know
   her. (Quietly.) I ain’t never seen a woman look like that before.
Davis beckons to Juliette with his index finger. She walks slowly up to the stage
   and climbs the steps. They stand looking at each other, smiling warily.
DAVIS: You like the music?
JULIETTE: Si j’aime la musique?…(She looks closely at his trumpet, then runs
   her finger softly along the tubing.) Comme vous voyez…
DAVIS, readjusting his stance: OK, so you don’t speak English, huh? That’s
   cool…We’ll improvise!…(Waves the trumpet.) You play? You play an
   instrument?
JULIETTE purses her lips, mimes playing a trumpet: Montrezmoi…
DAVIS: Here, put your fingers here.
Close up: Juliette presses the valves as Davis blows the trumpet. Beautiful,
   brazen sounds come out. Her face lights up; she laughs out loud.
DAVIS, laughing: That’s not bad at all! (To musician, swaggering:) Hey, man! I
   just played a duet with an existentialist! (To Juliette:) You wanna go for a
   coffee?…Café?
JULIETTE: Oui, mais pas ici…(Takes his hand silently and leads him off the
   stage.) Venez…
MUSICIAN: Hey, Miles!
DAVIS, turning round: You just keep working on those changes, man!
                  31. BANKS OF THE SEINE.
Close up: a pigeon pecking between the cobblestones. The pigeon flies off.
Zoom out–camera close to the ground: a beggar with a crutch, chasing away the
   pigeon. Legs and feet of JULIETTE and DAVIS–her sandals, his shiny leather
   boots, walking along the Seine embankment, upstream of the Pont des Arts.
   Sound of walking feet.
Zoom out: a bridge at an oblique angle, half-hidden by the branches of a
   willow; Juliette and Davis in a tight embrace; Davis with his back to the
   river. A coal barge comes into shot. On the barge, standing by the geranium-
   bedecked cabin, a little girl watches the lovers.
They continue their walk along the embankment. Silence.
DAVIS starts to say something.
JULIETTE, glancing down: Je n’aime pas les hommes…mais vous, (looking at
   Miles) vous, c’est différent…
DAVIS: You don’t like men? Is that what you said? Well, I’ll tell you, in America, I
   ain’t a man. (Displays his fingers.) I’m a nigger! (Juliette strokes his fingers.)
   I’m an entertainer… (Davis flaps his hands, minstrel-style.) An Uncle Tom–
   you know what I mean?
JULIETTE: La Case de l’Oncle Tom, oui, je sais…
DAVIS, looking almost shy; walking on: There’s some kind of special smell here
   I ain’t smelled anywhere else. (Sniffs the air. Juliette looks amused and
   surprised.) It’s like coffee beans…and coconut and lime and rum all mixed
   together, and…like eau de cologne…Heh! This must be ‘April in Paris’…
   (singing) pap, pap, pap, pap, pap…
JULIETTE stops, pulls his arm, points at his face: La trompette…tu fais
   comment?…
DAVIS mimes trumpet playing; JULIETTE stands on tiptoe and kisses him on the
   lips.
Long take: they continue walking along the Seine. A few people pass–no one
   pays any attention to them (use extras), except an angler worried about his
   jars of bait.
Music: faintly recognizable improvisation on the tune of ‘April in Paris’.
They reach the steps that lead back up to the street near Place du Châtelet.
   Davis looks out along the river, then runs to catch up with Juliette.
DAVIS, taking her hand: Say, what is an existentialist, anyway?
JULIETTE smiles inscrutably.
Music continues as they walk up to the busy street.
                          32. NEWSREEL.
(Faster film stock; grainy.)
Blank screen, numbers counting down. 7, 6, 5, 4, 3…
Voice-over: suave, becoming increasingly sarcastic.
NARRATOR:
The quartier of Saint-Germain-des-Prés…
The square and the church. Close up of crumbling, ivy-covered walls.
The remains of the oldest abbey in Paris. A corner of the provinces in the heart of
    the city. Here, time passes more slowly.
Place de Furstemberg; pushchairs; an old woman feeding pigeons, another
    knitting on a park bench.
In this quiet little square, one can visit the studio where Delacroix revolutionized
    the art of his time. Sometimes, it seems as though nothing has changed…
Pavement in front of café. Respectable bourgeois men and women reading
    newspapers, stirring cups of coffee.
There’s the Café de Flore…
A teenage girl and boy walk past: she wears a sweater, Capri pants, sandals
    laced above the ankle, pony-tail; he has an open-neck shirt, beard, cigarette
    dangling from his mouth. The camera lets them pass, then swivels quickly to
    follow them. Lingering shot of girl in centre of screen. She tears the wrapper
    from a chocolate ice cream and drops it on the pavement.
Did I say nothing had changed?…The Café de Flore is now a temple–a temple
    whose high priests are called Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir.
Café table with empty coffee cup and overflowing ashtray, and two books: Le
    Deuxième Sexe and Les Mains sales.
And the name of this cult? EXISTENTIALISM!
Frantic trumpet and cymbal.
Bookshop: young people picking through books; handwritten posters–‘Are you
    for or against?’, etc.
The Club Saint-Germain, underground dance-floor. Men in sunglasses, women
    in split skirts. Fast jazz music.
Close up: crude painting on wall based on le Douanier Rousseau’s The Muse
    Inspiring the Poet: Sartre in dinner jacket with pipe in mouth, next to a long-
    haired figure resembling Juliette Gréco.
Some say that this misty philosophy, which no one understands, not even its
    exponents, is essentially Germanic; others that Sartre and his acolytes are the
    Trojan Horse of ‘the American way of life’. And who could deny it?
More scenes of dancing.
Jazz…the jitterbug…American cigarettes…
Relaxed, laughing faces, chewing gum.
Those GIs feel quite at home at the Club Saint-Germain!
Close up: young man wearing flat cap, sunglasses, toothy smile.
‘Homo existentialis’ wears sunglasses and lives underground. His bookstores,
   bars and, yes, his ‘discothèque’, are all several metres below sea-level–
   probably because of his morbid fascination with the Atom bomb. And, of
   course, he–and she–wears black…Black (slight cough) is his favourite
   colour…
Black American enjoying the music and the dancing.
Cut to: Sartre walking along a pavement talking to an earnest admirer.
Who is that man who looks like a gargoyle come to life, or a grocer going back to
   his shop?…You don’t know? Why, that’s the man who started it all!–Jean-Paul
   Sartre. He’s the one those long-haired adolescents call ‘master’. The author
   of…‘Being and Nothingness’, ‘Nausea’, ‘Dirty Hands’–well, you get the
   picture…
News footage of Sartre talking to Simone de Beauvoir at a literary party.
Ask any of the young women who’ve been invited up to the master’s room…I’m
   told on reliable authority that there’s a distinct smell of Camembert chez Jean-
   Paul Sartre…
13. The floods of 1910 and the Nord-Sud Métro before its
          inauguration. Maurice Branger (1910).
14. Le Corbusier, ‘Plan Voisin’ (1925). ‘How can we deal
     with the problem of Paris? The ‘great East–West
throughway of Paris offers the City Council the chance to
launch a gigantic financial enterprise.’ The two tiny blobs
  in the central square are the Porte Saint-Denis and the
                    Porte Saint-Martin.
 15. Albert Speer, Adolf Hitler and Arno Breker being
filmed on the terrace of the Palais de Chaillot, 23 June
             1940. By Heinrich Hoffmann.
16. ‘Playground. Children only. No Jews.’ November
                      1942.
    17. Statues used as p metal during Occupation. he
  foreground: he Marquis Condorcet, acques Perrin. he
statue was er recast and stored to the uai de Conti. Pierre
                       Jahan, 1941.
18. The Liberation of Paris: FFI Resistants at a window of
        the Préfecture de Police, 25 August 1944.
19. Mona Lisa returns to the Louvre from a castle in the
                 Quercy, June 1945.
20. Juliette Gréco and the church of Saint-Germain-des-
              Prés. By Georges Dudognon.
21. Barricade on the Boulevard Saint-Germain near Rue
      Hautefeuille, May 1968. By Alain Dejean.
22. Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir selling La
               Cause du peuple, 1970.
23. The Arc de Triomphe, from ‘Le Plitch’, in Mémoires
d’outre-espace (1983) by Enki Bilal. ‘The Government
 and I shall soon be in a position to offer you rational
       explanations for this delicate problem!…’
24. The Sacré-Cœur de Montmartre and the route of the
  Eurostar, looking west from the Col de la Chapelle.
25. President Nicolas Sarkozy inaugurating the ‘Historial
Charles de Gaulle’ at Les Invalides, 22 February 2008. By
                      Melanie Frey.
Po-faced NARRATOR of documentary sitting at café table: chequered suit,
   black-rimmed glasses, trying to look older than he is; waiter removes his
   cup. Narrator speaks to camera: zoom from across the street–vehicles and
   pedestrians pass in front of him in a blur.
Well, it’s not what I was brought up to think of as French literature…The only thing
   resembling an idea I could find in all this ‘philosophy’ seems to be this: we’re
   all free to do whatever we like…Well, then…(Picks up the books from the
   table.) I, too, am an existentialist…(Stands up, tosses the books into a dust-
   cart, and walks off down the street.)
Jazz music.
Blur of windows: camera whizzes back along the shop-fronts to:


                       33. CAFÉDE FLORE.
(Higher quality film stock, as before the newsreel.)
SARTRE, BEAUVOIR, DAVIS, JULIETTE. A continual stream of words. The
   conversation goes on, almost too fast to be followed, above the sound of
   other customers (including the director), the garçons shouting orders,
   twirling trays; mobylettes, car horns, police whistles, etc.
JULIETTE follows the conversation but also looks around at the other tables
   and the life of the street. Her silence and facial expressions area continual
   counterpoint to the conversation.
SARTRE talks with DAVIS in English. He speaks grammatically but with an
   atrocious accent. The cigarette is never far from his mouth. (No subtitles.)
SARTRE:…because your music has a political resonance…
DAVIS: I just blow the trumpet, man. I blow that trumpet and the sounds come out
   and the cats dig it…Or they don’t dig it; it’s all the same to me. (Long fingers
   flutter.) Politics is what I’m getting away from.
SARTRE: From my point of view, this is a political act.
DAVIS, leans forward: It’s just music, man.
SARTRE: Yes, jazz music, which is an expression of liberty.
DAVIS, leans back; forced smile: That’s a white man’s word–jazz. White men
   always want to put a label on everything. They’re just tunes, man. I take the
   tunes to pieces and I put them back together in different ways, without the
   clichés…
SARTRE: Yes, and then no one can hear the tune without really hearing it. (Stubs
   out cigarette; taps another from the packet.) For example: here is a glass. A
   glass on the table.
DAVIS picks up his glass, drinks, puts it back on the table: Uh huh.
SARTRE: I say, ‘glass’, and the glass is exactly the same as before. Nothing
   happens to it, except perhaps it oscillates, but not very much. It is as if the glass
   does not give a shit.
DAVIS: Heh! This is existentialism, right?
SARTRE: No, Gréco is existentialisme if you believe the journalistes.
   (Smiling.)‘La Muse de l’existentialisme.’
All look at JULIETTE. She watches a woman in Dior clothes walking past with a
   poodle, which lifts its leg at a tree.
SARTRE: This is not existentialism. This is a man who is talking to another man…
DAVIS looks intently at Sartre.
SARTRE: But when I say the word ‘glass’, something has happened. The glass is
   not any more in the shadows. It is not…(looks at Beauvoir)…perdu dans la
   perception globale des choses…lost in the global perception?…When I name
   something, this is not without consequence, which is what the man who uses
   violence–la torture–( Juliette looks up) what he understands when he forces
   another man to say a name or a telephone number or an address. (To the
   garçon.) Oui, apporteznous une bouteille. (To Davis.) This is why we can say
   that the writer and, in a certain sense, the musician, removes the innocence of
   things.
DAVIS, laughing: Yeah, that’s what I do, man, I ‘remove the innocence of things’!
SARTRE: So, for example, in the Alabama, the oppression of the Negroes is
   nothing until somebody has said, ‘The Negroes are oppressed.’
MILES cocks his head; looks doubtful. That’s a place I ain’t never gonna see…
SARTRE: Or, a better example: in La Chartreuse de Parme by Stendhal–Vous la
   connaissez, Gréco, La Chartreuse de Parme? (Juliette smiles noncommittally.)
   Mosca, le comte Mosca, is very worried by the feelings–the feelings he cannot
   define–which his lover and Fabrice have for one another. And he sees them go
   away in the carriage, sitting one next to the other, and he says, ‘Si le mot
   d’amour…’, euh, ‘If the word amour–love–is pronounced between them, I am
   lost…’ (Blows out smoke.)So you have, when you name something, a
   responsibility.
DAVIS places his hand on Juliette’s.
BEAUVOIR, smiling at Davis and Gréco: Oui, la responsabilité!…But do you
   know when he said this, when Sartre said this, about la responsabilité de
   l’écrivain?
SARTRE, emptying his glass, titters.
BEAUVOIR: He was invited to give a conférence at UNESCO. It was the first
  meeting of UNESCO, two or three years ago, in 1946. At the Sorbonne. The
  evening before, we went to the Schéhérazade, with Koestler and Camus. And
  Sartre–you remember?–danced with Mme Camus, which was like watching a
  man lugging a sack of coal. He was very drunk, and he had to give his talk in
  the morning, but he had not written a line.
DAVIS, pointing a finger at Sartre: The teacher hadn’t done his homework!
BEAUVOIR: Yes, and Camus, who was also drunk, said, ‘You will have to do it
  without my help,’ and Sartre said, ‘I wish I could do it without my help.’
SARTRE, stubby fingers spread on the table, giggles.
BEAUVOIR: And then–he does not remember this–we had breakfast Chez Victor
  at Les Halles: soupe à l’oignon, huîtres, vin blanc–and then it was dawn, and
  we stood on a bridge over the Seine, Sartre and me, and we were so sad about
  la tragédie dela condition humaine–eh oui!–that we said we should throw
  ourselves into the river. But instead of that, I went home to my bed, and Sartre,
  he went to the Sorbonne to talk aboutla responsabilité de l’écrivain…
DAVIS: That’s cool, Jean-Paul. They knew you were talking straight because you
  hadn’t prepared…
BEAUVOIR, shaking her head: No, Sartre, he had everything already in his head.
SARTRE, with his wall-eyed stare, purses his lips, looks serious: What can we
  do? We can only try not to make ourselves guilty. That is what I said at the
  Sorbonne. It was after the Libération. (The garçon arrives with the next bottle.
  Sartre fills the glasses. To Davis, suddenly:) Why don’t you and Gréco get
  married?
DAVIS, looking at Juliette: Responsibility, man…I love her too much to make her
  unhappy.
BEAUVOIR, to Juliette, smiling: Il vous aime trop pour vous rendre
  malheureuse.
JULIETTE kisses Davis on the cheek. They look at each other. Close up: both in
  profile.
JULIETTE (to Beauvoir): Il ne veut pas m’emmener avec lui aux États-Unis.
DAVIS: Ayta-Zoony? Oui, mauvais, très mauvais pour les Negroes. Et très très
  mauvais pour les femmes blancs avec les Negroes.
SARTRE: But you can remain in France, where everybody loves your music.
JULIETTE, to Sartre and Beauvoir, looking at Davis: Vous ne trouvez pas qu’il
  ressemble à un Giacometti?
DAVIS: Jacko Metti?
WAITER: Je vais vous débarrasser…Vous allez dîner?
BEAUVOIR: Will you have dinner?
DAVIS, looking at Juliette: No, we gonna find ourselves a bridge and look at the
  river, and then maybe we’ll jump in…Shit, I just came here to play music, I
  wasn’t expecting none of this.
A CUSTOMER (the director) at one of the neighbouring tables, folds his
  newspaper, stands up and leaves.
JULIETTE pours some sugar into a cone of paper, reaches over and takes an
  empty ashtray from the next table, and puts both items into her bag. Stands
  up and takes Davis’s hand.
SARTRE, to Juliette: ‘Si tu t’imagines…’ You haven’t forgotten, Gréco?
JULIETTE, leaving with Davis, looks back, shakes her head.
Zoom back: ‘existentialist’ young man in street looking into dust-cart, takes out
  a book and leafs through it. Walks off down the street, reading the book.


 34. EXT. HÔTEL LA LOUISIANE, RUE DE SEINE.
Camera pans slowly from ground floor to top floor of the hotel–grimy shutters,
  window boxes, balcony railings. Pause at the top floor.


              35. INT. HÔTEL LA LOUISIANE.
Hotel room. DAVIS in bed; JULIETTE sitting cross-legged on the bed, looking at
   him.
Silence.
DAVIS: She’s called Irene. She’s a good girl. I care for her a lot. But she’s like…
   She’s not like you. She doesn’t have your independence…She doesn’t have
   your style…I mean…
JULIETTE, looking sad but not distraught; it is unclear how much of Davis’s
   talk she understands: Tu vas rester ici (pointing down), à Paris…en France?
DAVIS: I dunno…I could get used to being treated like a human being…He’s right,
   Jean-Paul. Everybody likes my music. But that ain’t good. Anything I play, the
   audience cheers. It gets so I’m not even sure it’s me who’s playing…But if I go
   back to the States, I sure as hell ain’t gonna find another woman like you.
JULIETTE, getting back into bed: Tu reviendras un jour. Et tu m’enverras tous
   tes disques…
Mellow trumpet music.
The following sequence is an accompaniment to the music rather than the other
   way about. (As in scene 18, ask Davis to improvise–but without showing him
   the sequence. Show some of the unedited take of scene 31 along the banks of
   the Seine.)


     36. OPPOSITE THE HOTEL, RUE DE SEINE.
(This is the same location as Juliette’s childhood home in scenes 12 and 14.)
   The view of windows across the street. Dissolves, showing sunlight on the
   face of the building, from morning to late afternoon.


       37. PLACE SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉS.
JULIETTE and DAVIS. His arm around her shoulders–his tall body towards the
   camera, his face in profile, kissing Juliette. Her face, also in profile, her
   head tilted back, her body arched like a musical instrument. (Copy the pose
   from a Robert Doisneau photograph.) The spire of the church of Saint-
   Germain-des-Prés appears in the background. The angle of the shot makes it
   look as though they stopped to kiss among the traffic while crossing the
   square.
A car pulls up just behind them. Sound of a door banging.
JULIETTE, quietly: Voilà…Il est toujours plus facile de partir que de rester…
DAVIS gets into the taxi. He turns round and stares through the rear window at
   Juliette (at the camera) with the look of a man being taken to jail.
JULIETTE watches the taxi disappear into the traffic towards the Rue
   Bonaparte. She stands still for a long moment, then turns around and looks
   over at the church spire…


       38. PLACE SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉS.
…which now appears in colour.
(All the final scenes are in colour.)
Long take; hand-held camera. Medium zoom at distance: the life of the square:
    people, cars, bicycles.
Black screen.
Title: ‘Five years on…’
         39. WALDORF-ASTORIA, NEW YORK.
The grand hotel facade on Park Avenue; yellow taxis, doormen, etc. Expensive
  hotel carpet; door with shiny brass fittings and a spy-hole. Door opens.
JULIETTE; her face is powdered and almost emaciated compared to her pudgier
  adolescent face; her nose is artificially thinner. She holds out her arms
  (speaking in English): Miles! I am so glad…
DAVIS, features taut, eyes bulging, visibly stoned; dressed in a shapeless sports
  jacket: Yeah, right. (Looks nervously down the corridor, both ways.) What did
  I tell ya? (Looks past her into the room.) They gave you a whole suite?
  (Swaggering like a pimp. Looks back down the corridor.) Here’s your room
  service.
Man in blue Waldorf-Astoria uniform arrives with trolley; sees Juliette and
  Davis, and freezes.
DAVIS, taking the bottle from the ice-bucket: What’s the matter with you,
  motherfucker? (To Juliette:) What did I tell ya? I told ya I never wanna see you
  in this country. (Jerking his head. Unconvincing swagger.) You got some
  money? I need some money right now!
JULIETTE, looking shocked, searches in her bag, hands Davis some dollar bills.
DAVIS grabs the money, pushes past the man. He heads along the corridor,
  takes a swig from the bottle.


                    40. HOTEL ELEVATOR.
DAVIS in the elevator, surrounded by mirrors, staring wild-eyed at his feet;
  looks up, tears in his eyes.


    41. CONCERT ROOM, WALDORF-ASTORIA.
JULIETTE on stage–a slim, dark figure, and the microphone stand. She is
  dressed in black and her hair is long and straight, but it now looks
  designedly artless, and the stage lighting gives her an air of sophistication.
  She sings the whole song, ‘Si tu t’imagines, fillette’–from the orchestra intro
  to the audience reaction at the end. (Three minutes.) She gives a muted
  rendition, ice-cool and slightly winsome. The emotions on her face are those
  required by the song.
(Subtitles: If you think, little girl…They’re going to last forever…The days of
   love and passion…You’ve got another think coming, little girl…)
Cut twice during the song to DAVIS, in the hotel lobby, arguing with the clerk
   and being asked to leave.
End with JULIETTE, engulfed in applause, looking straight at the camera. A
   lingering close up of her face and fluttering false eyelashes.
Black screen.


       42. PLACE SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRÉS.
During this scene, the credits appear.
Film crew on the square. JULIETTE, wearing a corseted Dior coat; otherwise
   much the same as in the previous scene. ACTORS in gabardines and fedoras
   standing around, chatting and smoking.
Slowly fade in trumpet music, as in the title sequence.
MAKE-UP WOMAN powdering Juliette’s face.
DIRECTOR, with megaphone: À vos places!
JULIETTE, pointing to two men, standing close by; she raises her hands at the
   director.
Close up: po-faced critic in black-rimmed spectacles talking to another critic:
CRITIC 1: That’s not how she looked! She was just a girl…In fact, she looked like
   a juvenile delinquent…
CRITIC 2: What do you expect? This is what they call ‘reality’!…(They laugh
   conspiratorially.)
DIRECTOR, to man with clipboard: Get those idiots off the set!…(Looking
   round, in exasperation:) Where are the Gestapo?! (To the actors in
   gabardines:) Messieurs, when you’re ready…
ACTORS drop their cigarettes, crush them under their jackboots, and walk
   towards a black Citroën. One of the actors, as he passes JULIETTE, tickles
   her waist. She turns, laughing, towards the camera. Despite the make-up, she
   looks happy and natural.
Freeze frame.
Fade out.
Credits continue.
