ONE NIGHT AT THE PALAIS-ROYAL
EVERY WEDNESDAY MORNING, at seven o’clock in summer and eight o’clock in
winter, the water-coach left the town of Auxerre on its hundred-and-thirty-mile journey
to Paris. In winter especially, it was the safest, most comfortable route from Burgundy
and the south. It took just three days to sail down the Yonne and the Seine to Paris,
where it came to rest among the spires and domes in the heart of the old city. A large,
flat-bottomed boat painted green and divided into compartments with portholes and a
spacious room lined with benches, the water-coach held up to four hundred human
passengers and as many animals, bound for markets along the river or for the dinner
tables of cousins in the city. There was a galley serving soups and stews for those who
came without enough provisions, and, on either side, two half-turrets known as les
bouteilles (the latrines), for those who paid ample homage to the vineyards along the
banks.
     Wealthy travellers who had lurched along the post-roads for countless leagues
found the voyage a delightful adventure, once they had grown accustomed to the
company of soldiers, travelling salesmen, wandering musicians, monks and peasants,
and the army of wet-nurses who left their babies at home and went to sell their breast-
milk in the capital. A poet who made the journey a few years before this story begins
imagined himself ‘aboard one of those vessels laden with creatures of every species
destined to populate some recently discovered territory overseas’. Passengers who
found a quiet vantage point in that Noah’s Ark behind the coiled ropes and the piles of
luggage observed the peculiar effect of a landscape that seemed to glide past the
motionless boat like a painted backdrop. In those long hours of idleness and gentle
progress, in the cheerful promiscuity of social ranks, some passengers experienced a
sudden rejuvenation. Men who were eager for the sights of Paris, and curious to test the
reputation of Parisian women for congeniality and charm, often found themselves
sentimentally attached long before they had glimpsed the towers of Notre-Dame.
     Among the passengers who boarded the service from Auxerre on the morning of 7
November 1787 was a young artillery lieutenant from a regiment recently posted to
Valence. He was eighteen years old, afraid of nothing except embarrassment; a little too
short for his long leather boots, but fierce enough to demand instant reparation from any
man who dared to call him Puss in Boots to his face. The inspector of his military
school at Brienne had described him with something approaching admiration:
         Upright and thoughtful; conduct most regular; has always distinguished himself
     in mathematics; possesses a fair knowledge of history and geography; weak in
     social accomplishments; will make an excellent sailor.


     As an avid reader of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, the young man was not insensitive to
the charms of a river journey, but he was far too conscious of the honour of his uniform
to indulge in the sort of dalliance that made the voyage seem all too short to some of his
fellow passengers: when he was sent to join his regiment in Valence, he alone in the
party of young officers had not taken advantage of the night in Lyon to visit a brothel. In
any case, though he was impatient to discover Paris, he had more serious matters on his
mind.
     He had just returned home for the first time since leaving for school eight years
before. His father had died after wasting several years and part of the family’s fortune
by suing his own relatives. When he saw the house again, he felt no grief at the old
man’s passing, but when he found his mother performing domestic chores, humiliation
struck him like a slap in the face. The family had legitimate and ancient claims to
nobility, but the government in France treated them as though they were ignorant
peasants. They had been granted a subsidy for planting mulberry trees and introducing
silk production to their backward region, but now that they had invested their money in
the scheme, a nameless servant of the Crown had withdrawn the subsidy. Since the
older brother was taken up with fruitless legal studies, it was left to him to negotiate
with the authorities in Paris.
     It had been a long journey up from the Mediterranean, on roads that were already
showing the effects of an early winter. It was only now, as he resigned himself to the
leisurely andante of a river journey, that he began to think of the city that lay ahead.
     He had seen Paris once before, as a cadet, at the age of fifteen, with three of his
classmates and a monk from the school at Brienne. There had been just enough time to
buy a novel on the quais and to say a prayer at Saint-Germain-des-Prés before they
were delivered to the École Royale Militaire, from where, in twelve months, he had
seen precisely nothing of the city, except the parade ground on the Champ de Mars. But
of course, he had heard about Paris and its splendours from his family and his fellow
officers. He had read about its monuments and treasures in histories and geographical
dictionaries. He had studied its defences and resources like a foreign general planning
an invasion.
     He remembered his readings and his comrades’ half-true tales as he watched the
satellite towns of Vitry and Choisy-le-Roi come into view, and the Bercy plain
beginning to widen to the north. He stood on the foredeck, looking ahead like the captain
of a ship, silent and severe among the pigs and the chickens in baskets, and the children
playing at his feet. He felt the boat catch the current of the sea-green Marne as it joined
the Seine at Alfort and broadened the brown river into a majestic thoroughfare. Here,
the first steeples of Paris could be seen in the distance, and the deep water had yet to be
sullied by the effluent of drains and factories. There were long rafts of floated wood
steered by wild-looking men in wolfskin cloaks, and boats bringing passengers and
paving stones from Fontainebleau. Washerwomen began to appear along the banks. He
saw a tree-lined road on which carriages were running, and long wooden sheds where
barrels of wine from Burgundy and the centre of France were rolled up to the waiting
wagons.
     This time, he knew what he was seeing–a city that had grown up like a thousand
villages, stifled by privilege and petty competition. There should have been a proper
port to rival London instead of those rickety landing-stages. The government should
build huge granaries and warehouses to feed the people in times of need. A city that
barely knew how to keep its population alive had no right to compare itself to ancient
Rome, still less to be sniffy about provincials.
     Now, low houses ran along both banks. The water-coach entered the channel to the
south of the uninhabited Île Louviers that was covered with enormous piles of firewood
as though the Gaulish forests had only recently been cleared. Behind it stood the tall
houses of the Île Saint-Louis, and, behind them, rising out of the river mist and the
chimney-smoke like the stern of a great ship, the buttressed mass of Notre-Dame.
     The lieutenant disembarked with the other passengers at the Quai de la Tournelle,
and pointed out his trunk to a porter from the hotel where he intended to stay. Then,
having previously studied the map and committed the route to memory, he set off across
the Pont au Double and entered the medieval maze of the Île de la Cité.
     After getting lost in the cul-de-sacs and the chapel closes, he found the other bank
and threaded his way through the crowded streets to the east of the Louvre. He crossed
the Rue Saint-Honoré–the main thoroughfare running east to west across the Right
Bank–and turned up the Rue du Four-Saint-Honoré, at the point where the heavy stench
of the river gave way to the vegetable smells of Les Halles.
     The Rue du Four-Saint-Honoré was a street of furnished hotels, patronized mainly
by men who came to do business at the central markets. The lieutenant went to the Hôtel
de Cherbourg, next door to the Café du Chat-Qui-Pelote. The hotel register (which has
long since disappeared) showed that he stayed in room nine on the third floor, and that
he signed his name in its native, Italianate form rather than in the French form that he
later affected.
     When his trunk was delivered, he settled in, and, in that city of six hundred
thousand souls, savoured the delight of being alone. In the house where he lodged in
Valence, people ambushed him when he left his room each morning and when he
returned in the evening; they stole his time and scattered his thoughts with polite
conversation. Now, he was free to think and explore, to compare his own experiences
with the books he had read, and to find out for himself whether or not Paris deserved its
lofty reputation.
EVEN WITHOUT the handwritten account that forms the basis of this story–a brief,
incomplete description of one night’s adventure–it would have been easy to guess the
principal object of the lieutenant’s curiosity. In those days, there was only one place that
every visitor to Paris wanted to see, and any traveller who published an account of his
trip and omitted to mention it, or pretended to have shunned it as a place of debauchery,
cannot be trusted as a guide to the city. The streets in its vicinity were said to be the
busiest in Europe. By comparison, the other sights of Paris–the Louvre and the
Tuileries, Notre-Dame and the Sainte-Chapelle, the Bastille, the Invalides, the grand
squares and gardens, the Pont Neuf, and the Gobelins tapestry works–were almost
deserted.
     In 1781, the Duc de Chartres, a pleasure-seeking, fashionably liberal cousin of the
King who was chronically short of cash, began to turn the grounds of his royal residence
into an amazing bazaar of economic and erotic activity. Wooden galleries were erected
along one of the rows of arcades that formed the stately courtyard. They looked (if such
a thing had existed) like a railway station implanted in a palace. Shopkeepers,
charlatans and entertainers occupied the galleries even before they were finished in
1784, and, almost overnight, the Palais-Royal became an enchanted city-within-a-city
that never closed its gates. According to Louis-Sébastien Mercier, ‘a prisoner could
live there without getting bored and would dream of freedom only after several years’.
It was known, half-humorously, as ‘the capital of Paris’.
     No one who saw the Palais-Royal in 1787 could doubt the progress of industry and
the benefits of modern civilization. There were theatres and puppet shows, and nightly
firework displays in the gardens. The galleries and arcades housed over two hundred
shops. Without having to walk more than a few hundred feet, a man who cared nothing
about cost or the honesty of shopkeepers could buy a barometer, a collapsible rubber
raincoat, a painting on a pane of glass, a copy of the latest banned book, a toy to delight
the most despotic child, a box of rouge for his mistress and some English flannel for his
wife. He could rummage in mountains of ribbon, gauze, pompons and satin flowers. In
the slow-moving crowd, he could find himself pressed up against a strangely attractive
woman, her bare shoulders glaring in the lamplight, and move on, a moment later, his
pockets completely empty. If he was sufficiently rich, he could lose his money in a
gambling house on the first floor, pawn his gold watch and embroidered coat on the
second, and console himself with one of the ladies who lived in rented rooms on the
third.
     There were restaurants fit for emperors, fruit stalls with exotic fruits from the
suburbs of Paris and wine merchants selling rare liqueurs from non-existent colonies.
Everything that made a person beautiful could be bought at fabulous prices: lotions and
ointments that whitened the face, eradicated wrinkles or showed up the blue veins on a
breast. A feeble old chevalier could leave the Palais-Royal a twinkling Adonis, with
lustrous teeth, a glass eye of any colour, a black toupee under his powdered perruque
and new calf muscles in his silk stockings. An ill-favoured girl in want of a husband
could make herself desirable, at least until the wedding night, with false shoulders, hips,
cleavage, eyelashes, eyebrows and eyelids.
     There were fancy boutiques in which the clothes of gamblers and libertines were
displayed in glass partitions, poorly lit to hide their stains, and sold to clerks and petits
maîtres. There were public latrines where, for a modest fee, a customer could wipe his
bottom on the day’s news. The Palais-Royal catered to every taste, and, it was said,
created tastes that had never existed before. A guide that was published shortly after the
lieutenant’s visit recommended Mme Laperrière, ‘above the baker’s shop’, who
specialized in old men and whips, Mme Bondy, who supplied the foreign and the very
young (recruited from the most reputable convents), and Mlle André’s fashion store–
though ‘one should never spend a night there, because Mlle André applies the principle
that “at night, all cats are grey”’.
     Despite his abhorrence of a place where everyone felt free to stare at everyone
else, and despite his aversion to crowds, the lieutenant seems to have made some
preliminary forays into the palace gardens–perhaps in the morning, when ragged women
rooted in the shrubberies and drains for dropped coins and trinkets, or at noon, when
people set their watches by the cannon that was fired by the rays of the sun through a
powerful lens. During one of these reconnaissance expeditions, he visited Jean-Jacques
Rousseau’s favourite coffeehouse, the Café de la Régence on the square in front of the
palace, where chess-players sat at marble tables in a gigantic hall of mirrors and
chandeliers. In Valence, he enjoyed a certain reputation as a chess-player. At the Café
de la Régence, he marched his pawns across the board, deployed his knights with an
occasional flash of brilliance, apparently indifferent to his losses, and always furious to
find himself in checkmate.
     The Hôtel de Cherbourg stood just five streets from the Palais-Royal, along the Rue
Saint-Honoré. On his way back to the hotel from the Finance Ministry, where he spent
hours each day in antechambers to learn the outcome of his family’s appeal, he often
passed the iron railings that ran along the galleries. Eventually, he began to explore the
galleries, always later in the day, after dark–to satisfy his curiosity and to fill a gap in
his knowledge (though he felt that too much was made of the matter, and that it was
commonly approached in a frame of mind that made it impossible to profit from the
experience). The Palais-Royal was, after all, a place where a man of philosophy and
sense could make some valuable observations. As he wrote a year or so later in an
essay on happiness, entered in a competition that was held by the Académie de Lyon,
‘the eyes of Reason preserve us from the precipices of Passion’. At the Palais-Royal, he
was able to witness the illusory pleasures of bachelorhood and the deleterious effects
of the modern contempt for family life. A man might go to the Palais-Royal to see the
savages from Guadeloupe, or ‘la Belle Zulima’, who had died two centuries ago but
whose exquisite body was perfectly preserved; but he might also see those civilized
monsters who had turned the natural desire for health, happiness and self-preservation
into a brutish quest for animal satisfaction.
     On the night in question, the lieutenant had spent almost two weeks in Paris, far
from his family and comrades. He was no further advanced with the subsidy for the
mulberry groves, though he had acquired some useful ideas on the subject of
administrative reform. He felt the need of some distraction. He walked past the Palais-
Royal and the Bibliothèque du Roi towards the tree-lined boulevards and the theatre
where the actors of the Comédie Italienne performed their comic operas. The ‘Italiens’
was popular with lovers of light music and humorous innuendo, but also with gentlemen
in search of a companion for the night, who appreciated the convenience of finding the
ladies already arranged by price, from the expensive balcons to the cheap
amphithéâtres.
     On the bill that night was a historical operetta called Berthe et Pépin. It was a
subject to stir the imagination of an ambitious young officer. By acts of astounding
bravery, the diminutive Pépin le Bref impressed the soldiers who dubbed him ‘the
Short’. Such was his political skill that he had himself crowned King of the Franks by
the Pope at Saint-Denis. After imprisoning his brother in a monastery, King Pépin
subdued the Goths, the Saxons and the Arabs, and marched victoriously across the Alps
into Italy. Pépin, rather than his son Charlemagne, was the first ruler of a European
empire.
     The operetta was based on an amorous interlude in Pépin’s life. Having
inadvertently married a tyrannical woman pretending to be Berthe of Laon, Pépin
happens upon the real Berthe in the forest of Le Mans. ‘Big-Footed Berthe’ (so called
because of her club foot) has sworn never to reveal her true identity, except to save her
virginity. By threatening her maidenhood, Pépin discovers her to be his true queen, and
the pair return in triumph to Paris. The main dramatic interest, to an audience chiefly
preoccupied with sex, was the pursuit of a club-footed maid by a short and lusting king.
     By the end of the performance, the young lieutenant was in a state of agitation that
can easily be imagined. The evening was far from over, and all around him people were
talking excitedly about the night ahead. He had no desire for cheery company, yet the
thought of dining alone at the Hôtel de Cherbourg was repellent. He left the theatre and
pulled his coat about him as the winter wind blew down the boulevard. People and
carriages were rushing about as though the day had just begun. Impelled by a sudden
resolution, he set off down the Rue de Richelieu towards the galleries and arcades
where a thousand lamp-lit dramas were acted out every night.
     An hour or so later, he returned to room nine in the Hôtel de Cherbourg. This time,
he was not alone. When his visitor had gone, he sat down to record his observations in
a large notebook. He never completed his account, but he kept the notebook, perhaps
because it recorded an event of such importance in his young life.
     Years later, when his life was in danger, he placed the notebook in a cardboard box
covered with grey paper, and had it sent to his uncle for safe-keeping. It is fortunate that
the manuscript has survived. So many people visited the Palais-Royal, yet so few left
any honest account of their dealings there, that the value of the manuscript as a historical
document far outweighs its biographical significance.

                              Thursday, 22 November 1787. Paris, Hôtel de Cherbourg.
          I had left the Italiens and was striding along the avenues of the Palais-Royal.
     Stirred by the vigorous sentiments that characterize my soul, I was indifferent to
     the cold. But as my imagination cooled, I felt the chill of the season, and took
     shelter in the galleries.
          I was standing on the threshold of those iron gates when my eyes fell on a
     person of the female sex. From the time of day, the cut of her clothes and her
     extreme youth, I deduced without hesitation that she was a whore.
          I looked at her, and she stopped, not with that martial air of the others, but with
     an air that was perfectly in keeping with her physical appearance. I was struck by
     this concordance of manner and demeanour. Her timidity emboldened me, and I
     spoke to her–I who feel more keenly than any other man the odiousness of her
     profession and who have always considered myself soiled by a single glance from
     one of those creatures…Yet her pale complexion, her frail physique, and her gentle
     voice caused me to act without delay. Either, I told myself, this person will be of
     use to me in the observations I wish to make, or else she is simply a dolt.
          ‘You must be very cold’, I said, ‘How can you force yourself to walk these
     avenues in such weather?’
          ‘Oh, Monsieur, hope is my spur. I must finish my evening’s work.’
          The dispassionate manner in which she uttered these words, and her
     composure in answering my enquiry, won me over, and I walked at her side.
          ‘You appear to possess a weak constitution’, I observed, ‘I am surprised that
     you have not tired of this profession.’
          ‘Indeed, Monsieur, one must do something!’
          ‘That may be, but is there no profession better suited to your state of health?’
          ‘No, Monsieur; one must earn a living.’
          I was delighted to see that she was at least answering my questions. None of
     my earlier attempts had met with such success.
          ‘To brave the cold as you do, you must come from a northern country.’
          ‘I come from Nantes in Brittany.’
          ‘I know the region…You must do me the pleasure, Mademoiselle, of
     recounting to me the loss of your virginity.’
          ‘An officer took it from me.’
          ‘Does that anger you?’ I asked.
          ‘Oh yes, of that you may be certain.’ (As she spoke these words, her voice had
     a charm and richness I had not previously detected.) ‘You may be certain of that,
     Monsieur. My sister is now well established, and there is no reason why I should
     not have been so too.’
         ‘How did you come to Paris?’
         ‘The officer who degraded me, and whom I hate with all my heart, abandoned
     me. I was forced to flee my mother’s indignation. A second man presented himself.
     He brought me to Paris, where he deserted me. He was succeeded by a third, with
     whom I have lived these three years. Although he is a Frenchman, his business
     affairs have called him to London, where he is now…Let us go to your lodgings.’
         ‘But what shall we do there?’
         ‘Come, Sir, we shall warm ourselves up and you shall satisfy your pleasure.’
         I was not about to be overcome by scruples. I had provoked her so that she
     would not run away when I put to her the proposition I was preparing to make, my
     intention being to feign the honourable designs that I wanted to prove to her I did
     not harbour…


At this point, the lieutenant laid down his pen. No doubt the rest of the evening’s
adventure scarcely lent itself to the style of prose he had learned in sentimental novels.
And perhaps, as he wrote and became entangled in his phrases, he realized that he was
not the principal actor in his play, and that there was more to that arduous profession
than he had supposed.
     The observer had been observed and analysed long before he made his first
approach. She had seen him walking in the crowd in his blue uniform, self-conscious
and proud, not quite as elegant as he would have liked, and clearly not from Paris. He
wore his virginity like an advertising board. Such a man would appreciate a shy young
whore who was dignified in her predicament–and prepared to hold a conversation in
the cold. He needed a woman skilled in the art of love who would make him feel that he
was leading the dance and teaching her the steps.
     The lieutenant shifted uncomfortably in his chair. There was indeed much to be
learned at the Palais-Royal. He had shown by his actions more than by his words that he
could profit from the lessons: too much time refining tactics and preparing the ground.
He had turned the loss of his virginity into a campaign, when all it took was a few sous
and five minutes of his time.


HE STAYED ON at the Hôtel de Cherbourg for another few weeks. In one sense, it was
a wasted journey. He failed to secure a subsidy for the mulberry groves, which seemed
to him a predictable outcome in a city of shopkeepers and libertines. He wrote a few
letters and the first paragraph of a history of Corsica: ‘Though I have scarce reached the
age [here, there is a gap in the manuscript], I have the enthusiasm that a more mature
study of men often eradicates from the heart.’ Doubtless he became better acquainted
with the sights of Paris, but he left no other record of his observations. If he returned to
the Théâtre des Italiens in December, he would have seen The Lover Put to the Test, or
The Invisible Woman, but not The English Prisoner, which was premiered two days
after he boarded the boat for Montereau on Christmas Eve. He may also have returned
to the Palais-Royal, but the crowds were so dense, and an engaging girl from Brittany
was rarely short of customers. It is unlikely that he ever saw his first lover again.
     The woman herself is known to us only from the lieutenant’s account. Even that
small amount of detail is unusual. Official statistics show that of twelve thousand seven
hundred prostitutes in Paris who knew their place of birth, fifty-three came from her
part of Brittany, but no names are attached to the figures–other than the usual noms de
guerre: Jasmine, Abricote, Serpentine, Ingénue, etc.–and there is nothing to corroborate
her tale of disgrace and abandonment. Perhaps her companion, if he existed, returned
from London and rescued her from the Palais-Royal. Or perhaps, like the wife of
Balzac’s Colonel Chabert, she was picked up in the galleries ‘like a hackney cab’, and
installed in an elegant hôtel. Two years after the young lieutenant’s visit, when the
Palais-Royal became a centre of revolutionary activity, she might have joined her
sisters-in-arms in the historic meeting around the fountain, when ‘the demoiselles of the
Palais-Royal’ vowed to publish their grievances and to demand fair remuneration for
their patriotic labours:

         The confederates of all parts of France who are joined together in Paris, far
     from having reason to complain of us, will retain a pleasant memory of the lengths
     to which we went to welcome them.


     She was better placed than prostitutes in other parts of the city to survive those
difficult years. When François-René de Chateaubriand returned from English exile in
1800, after passing through a ravaged landscape of silent churches and blackened
figures in neglected fields, he was amazed to find the Palais-Royal still ringing with
sounds of jollity. A little hunchback was standing on a table, playing a fiddle and
singing a hymn to General Bonaparte, the young First Consul of the French Republic:

          By his virtues and attractions,
          He deserved to be their father!


    If she was eighteen when she met Lieutenant Bonaparte, she would then have been
nearing the end of her professional life. (Most prostitutes in Paris were aged between
eighteen and thirty-two.) After the Revolution, life became harder. Whenever General
Bonaparte attended the Théâtre Français and parked his carriage near the Palais-Royal,
soldiers were sent to ‘purge’ the brothels, lest the First Consul be exposed to
embarrassing overtures. Later still, when the young lieutenant had conquered half of
Europe, married an Austrian princess and made his mother the richest widow in France,
the whores of the Palais-Royal were fined, imprisoned, medically inspected or sent
back in disgrace to their native provinces.
     But even Napoleon Bonaparte had little effect on ‘the capital of Paris’. According
to an English traveller, it remained ‘a vortex of dissipation where many a youth is
engulfed’. Its fame spread throughout the empire and beyond. In the depths of Russia,
Cossacks talked of it as a place of legend, and when armies from the east crossed the
frontiers of the crumbling empire, officers inspired their troops with tales of the Palais-
Royal, insisting that, until he had seen that palace of debauchery and tasted its civilized
delights, no man could call himself a man, or consider his education complete.
