MADAME ZOLA
                                   PART ONE


                                           1
THEY TOOK THE ELEVATORS on the way up, because none of them were as young
as they used to be, and there was a long evening ahead. The Otis elevator, which was
more like a mountain railway than an elevator, took them to the first platform, where
they paid another franc each and stepped into the cage of the hydraulic lift. Alexandrine
felt a tug at her stomach, and saw the crowds on the esplanade turn into a scene from
one of her husband’s novels–a swarming ant-hill, and then, as details disappeared, a
smear of black and grey. The sky was heavy with cloud. She thought of the reports,
which had troubled É mile, that the Eiffel Tower would alter the weather and bring
thunderstorms flocking to Paris.
     They looked out over the quartiers in the north and east where they lived and
worked. A windowpane two miles distant caught the sunlight and seemed to be
signalling to the Tower. To the left of it, the Gare Saint-Lazare was a giant greenhouse,
and the patch of vivid green in front must be the copper roof of La Madeleine. The men–
É mile, his publisher and the publisher’s son-in-law, Edmond de Goncourt, and an art
critic–tried to identify the monuments and to find their homes. The biggest surprise was
that Paris had a mountain in the north-east with a big square Buddha on top of it.
Beneath it, the tenements of Montmartre and the Goutte d’Or, which she knew to be
filthy, were bright white cubes, like the houses of a Muhammadan city, cascading down
the slopes as though they expected to find the Bosphorus at the bottom.
     It was hard to trace a route along the crevices that ran here and there through the
mass of roofs. The city seemed to have been designed by a race of architects who
worked in only two dimensions. The importance of everything had changed, as though
years had passed with every yard of the ascent. Notre-Dame was a small toy lost in
wasteground, while the pepper-pot towers of Saint-Sulpice had become a major
landmark. Vast shadows swept across the scene, plunging the Batignolles into darkness,
turning the Seine into a livid streak. The men at last fell silent. As the countryside
beyond Paris came into view, they all felt–it seemed to her–a kind of fascinated
disappointment. There was a mortal sadness in the spectacle. A great lake seemed to
have welled up, spread itself across the land, and solidified into a grey mass.
     The cage juddered and came to a stop. They got out and walked over to the railing.
From that height, there were no signs of life. Nothing below seemed to move and no
sound reached them on the platform. She had expected to see the city where she was
born and where she had lived for fifty years spread out beneath her like the floor-plan
of a familiar house, but now it seemed that all along she had been living in a strange
place.
     They took the lift back down to the first platform, from where Paris looked more
recognizable than it had a few moments before. A table had been booked at the Russian
restaurant, which was already noted for its wine cellar under the north-eastern foot of
the Tower. They ordered from the menu and looked out at the panorama. She chose
enough dishes to encourage É mile to order at least as much as she was intending to eat.
He had surprised her recently by keeping to his diet and by refusing all alcohol–except
when he had been bicycling–for three months. He had lost fourteen kilograms, while
she, for a reason that escaped her, had gained six. She ordered caviar, batvinia, the
boiled sucking-pig, and she would probably join them in the vodka and the Chambertin
and then a Château d’Yquem with whatever came after.
     They talked about the Javanese dancers they had seen performing in the little
thatched palace on the Esplanade des Invalides. Goncourt had found their ‘chubby
yellow flesh’ ‘somewhat repulsive’. (‘Repulsive’ was one of his favourite words.)
Nine years before, she had ridiculed his unnaturalistic brothel scenes in La Fille Élisa
(the gentlemen had found her observations highly amusing), and ever since, Goncourt
had taken every opportunity to prove that he was a connoisseur of women. Of course, he
was jealous of her husband because É mile Zola stood head and shoulders above his
contemporaries, and he was frightened of her because she had once been a laundress.
She looked at É mile as if to prompt him. ‘There is a certain softness in their fat,’ he
said, ‘that one doesn’t find in European flesh.’ Then he squeezed his nose between his
fingers and moved it about as though it were made of india rubber. He was always more
scientific about such things than Goncourt.
     Darkness gathered while they ate. Now, when they looked out, they saw only their
own reflections. After the gélinottes–which she had wanted to compare with hers–the
bear’s paw (out of curiosity), the Polish waffles, the napoleonka, the tea from the
samovar, which É mile could have emptied on his own, and the gold-tipped cigarettes,
they picked their way down the three hundred and forty-five wooden steps, which were
already showing signs of wear. Goncourt said that he felt like an ant descending the
rigging of a metal ship. She seemed to remember the image from one of É mile’s novels.
     The crowds on the Champ de Mars were even noisier and smellier than in the
daytime. The sightseers filled the streets and doorways like a flood. They managed to
stay together and found their way to the Rue du Caire which, with its minarets and
musharabiya designed by a French architect, was said to be more authentic than any
street in modern Cairo. They stared at the Africans, who stared back, and entered the
Egyptian café to observe the danse du ventre that had supposedly scandalized the
thousands of Parisians who went to see it.
     She sat next to Marguerite Charpentier, the wife of É mile’s publisher, and
discussed the dancer’s costume–the lilac bodice, the low belt and the tight skirt, the
panel of yellow gauze that revealed the extraordinary mobility of her navel. There had
been some difficult moments with Marguerite in the past. Mme Charpentier had grown
up in the Place Vendôme, was always elegant, knew three languages and had never had
to work, but somehow her husband’s philandering, which Alexandrine had known about
before Marguerite, had brought the two women closer together. É mile had always been
faithful, but for the other wives, a husband’s fidelity meant only that he didn’t keep a
mistress, and she had overheard Julia Daudet’s husband say that if only Julia would
allow him to do the things that any barmaid in the Brasserie des Martyrs would be glad
to have done to her, he would be ‘the most faithful of Fidos’.
     ‘What I can’t understand,’ Goncourt was saying, as they watched the Syrian dancer
who danced with a jug of water on her head, ‘is that when one sleeps with a Moorish
woman, there’s only the most imperceptible swaying, and if you ask them to spice it up
with some pitching and tossing in the fashion of our European women, they complain
that you’re asking them to make love like dogs!’ The men agreed that the dance would
be more interesting if the woman were completely naked, because then they would be
able to observe the arrangement and displacement of organs in the female body.
     After the sabre dance and the whirling dervish, they walked along the artificial
street and bought some of the sticky sweetmeats that everyone was eating. They talked
to the cafetiers and sat down at one of the Tunisian cafés to drink a glass of date brandy.
Even this late in the evening, the Rue du Caire was full of people. The Egyptian donkey-
drivers seemed to be having the time of their lives. The faces of the crowd were lit by
red lanterns, and everyone looked slightly drunk. At the end of the street, women queued
for the water-closets and talked in loud voices. A group of men stared up at the finely
wrought windows of a harem. The Exhibition was an immense department store where
all the world came to indulge its pleasures and to find out what it wanted.
     The Chemin de Fer Intérieur that had been built for the Exhibition had a little
station by the Galerie des Machines. They would take it all the way to Les Invalides,
where they were more likely to find a cab. As they waited under a wooden pagoda for
the next train, É mile took out his notebook and jotted down some observations.
Charpentier asked Alexandrine if the train would appear in his new novel about
railways, La Bête humaine, but she didn’t know, because she had been less involved
with the research than usual.
    The locomotive pulled into the station and sent up a cloud of steam. Before they
boarded the train, they looked back across the Champ de Mars and saw what could only
be seen from a distance. At the very top of the huge metallic structure, in the gallery that
was closed to the public, two projectors were sweeping their powerful electric beams
over the city. The idol of the Exhibition seemed to be looking for something in the sea of
roofs, searching for the secrets that only a novelist could discover.


                                             2
THE MAIN RAILWAY LINE from Paris to Le Havre ran past the foot of their garden.
Médan was less than two hours from the centre of Paris–a train from Saint-Lazare, then
a short walk along the Seine. They had bought the little house, which É mile called ‘a
rabbit hutch’, for nine thousand francs in 1878, when only one other Parisian owned
property in the district. Of course, they had kept the apartment in Paris, because of his
work, and because she had always been a city girl. Two hundred thousand francs later,
the rabbit hutch was a residence fit for a genius. The original cottage with its little
shuttered windows was squeezed between two tall towers like a victim of mistaken
identity being marched to the commissariat by two hefty gendarmes.
     The big square tower had risen while he was writing his novel about the daughter
of a laundress who became a courtesan. It was called, in her honour, the Tour Nana. The
hexagonal tower, which had been completed in 1886, was the Tour Germinal. It was
there, above the billiards room, that she had her spacious lingerie. She sat among the
piles of linen, sewing and embroidering, looking out at the misty trees along the river,
calculating the wages of the servants and the builders, while É mile sat writing on the
other side of the house.
     His mother had lived with them for the first two years, which might have been even
worse than it was without the silent games of dominoes in the evening. Since her death
in the autumn of 1880, they had been busier than ever. They had acquired some
adjoining plots and the island in the river, on which they erected the Norwegian chalet
that had been part of the 1878 Exhibition. They went shopping for all the things they had
never owned as children and had never dreamed of wanting. In the original part of the
house, she had a kitchen with blue porcelain tiles and copper pans of every size and a
white wooden table in the middle with sliding compartments. É mile had some specially
made stained-glass windows and a collection of antiques that Victor Hugo would have
envied, including a sarcophagus and a medieval bed that had sent Gustave Flaubert into
raptures. He had a gas lamp disguised as a candle, and the latest kind of orguemélodium
with foot-pumped bellows and a stop for ‘celestial voices’. He played chords on it at
dusk, which either alleviated or exacerbated his hypochondria, she wasn’t sure. They
had a horse, a cow, rabbits, doves, chickens, dogs and cats, all of whom had names.
Their friends–when the house was finally ready to receive them–were amazed.
     She had hoped that Marguerite, Julia and the others would stop feeling sorry for her
because she had no children. She and É mile had abandoned the idea of a family long
before. As É mile said, his novels were their children, and all his creative energy went
into Les Rougon-Macquart, which was now only four novels from completion.
Sometimes, she remembered the foundling hospital in the Rue d’Enfer, when she was
practically an orphan herself, a flower girl, twenty years old, with a baby whose father
she had almost forgotten. She had seen them attach a piece of white paper (white for
girls) to the baby’s bonnet, with her name, Caroline, her number and her date of birth,
and watched them carry her into the big dormitory with the inscription above the door,
‘My Father and Mother Have Abandoned Me, But The Lord Will Take Care Of Me.’ In
the year when Caroline would have turned eighteen, Alexandrine had told É mile about
her long-lost daughter, and they had gone to consult the register, in which it was
recorded that the baby had died in 1859, twelve days after being left at the hospital.
     When they moved to Médan, she had thought that she would miss the city. She did
miss their research expeditions–the sweatshops in the northern suburbs, the dressing-
rooms of the boulevard theatres, their nocturnal exploration of Les Halles and the
delicious cabbage soup that was served on a street-corner at dawn, for which she still
had the recipe. She thought of their tiny apartment by the Odéon on the Rue de
Vaugirard, the long nights of literary discussions and their enormous appetites. She was
looking forward to equipping the new apartment in the Rue de Bruxelles, which was a
short walk from the Gare Saint-Lazare. But in the end, though she was often dissatisfied,
she told herself that Médan had been a wholesome break with the past. She had
discovered her talent for organization, her love of the countryside and boating on the
river, and she liked the fact that his friends from the old days felt ill at ease there,
especially Cézanne, who was making a career out of failure and who always seemed to
have mud on his boots even after a week without rain.
     She had even relished the responsibility of managing staff. Having worked long
hours herself, as a flower-girl and a laundress, she knew what to expect of servants. She
knew how to train them and when to dismiss them. Her chambermaid and seamstress,
Jeanne Rozerot, had been a particular success. As soon as she saw the tall girl–timid
but elegant, dressed in a modern, practical skirt and a high collar–she had known that
she would enjoy the task of teaching her the trade. Jeanne had lost her mother when she
was still a baby and been sent to a convent school. She might almost have been
Alexandrine’s daughter. Though she looked quite frail, she was lively at work and
always cheerful, even when her mistress was being bossy.
     Alexandrine had explained Jeanne’s qualities to É mile, and he had not objected
when she declared her intention to take the girl with them to Royan, where she had
coped well with all the turmoil of a summer vacation. (He could hardly have objected,
since Royan was his idea.) That had been barely nine months before the dinner on the
Eiffel Tower. She was still disappointed that, after the holiday, Jeanne Rozerot had
handed in her notice for ‘personal reasons’, which she had tactfully not enquired after.
With all the important visitors and two rather moody employers, she must have found
life at Médan somewhat bewildering. It was vexing, all the same, to spend so much time
training a servant only for someone else to have the benefit.


                                            3
THEY SET OFF for the Pyrenees on 9 September 1891, which was rather late in the
year, but he was determined to leave, saying that he needed a holiday after the battle of
writing La Débâcle. She stopped in the middle of packing to write to her cousin:

         Where are we going? You can probably guess. Where I least want to go, of
     course. It’s the story of my life–never having what I want, or getting it only when I
     no longer want it.


     They took the train to Lourdes and saw cripples throwing away their crutches and
falling over in the crowd, and consumptives being plunged into water that even the
sloppiest laundress would have poured away. They saw the chilly spa towns and the
jagged curtain of the Pyrenees. When they crossed the border to San-Sebastián, it
poured with rain, and all the time they both felt that they should have been somewhere
else.
     On the beach at Biarritz, where they stayed at the Grand Hôtel, she realized that
they looked like an ill-matched couple, which was normal at their age, but it made her
feel sad, and also faintly apprehensive, but mostly sad. É mile was beginning to
resemble the portrait that Manet had painted of him twenty years before. The defiant
curl of his mouth was almost mischievous. He wore white flannel suits and struck jaunty
poses. All that developing of photographs–an art that she herself had never quite
mastered–was making him behave as though he was always about to be photographed.
He looked like a man who knew how to take a holiday, even in late September. He
might almost be described as thin. The bicycle had something to do with it, of course,
but this was also his reward for spurning their shared indulgences.
     He folded the newspaper and pushed himself out of the deckchair. He was going to
take an energetic walk. She saw that his face was slightly flushed. She might ask him
later on, and he would probably say that it was a symptom of his ‘malaises nerveux’,
which he attributed to his relentless work.
     When he had gone, she picked up the newspaper. There was a long editorial on the
Jews. It was the centenary of their emancipation by the Revolution, but now, said the
writer, ‘things have gone too far the other way’. Several articles were devoted to ‘the
future war’ with Germany, and to the fact that French citizens were to be allowed to
enter Alsace-Lorraine without a passport. Footmen and printers were on strike, and the
union of café garçons had asserted its right to wear facial hair: every garçon in Paris
was now growing a moustache in a show of solidarity. A penniless Austrian tailor who
had had himself delivered to the Exhibition in a crate had become a ‘café-concert
phenomenon’ and was touring Europe as ‘the Human Parcel’.
     None of this was likely to have altered É mile’s mood or to have brought a flush to
his face. There was nothing in the paper about É mile Zola, and nothing about any of his
literary rivals. In fact, the news was as uninteresting as it usually was in the holidays.
The movements of grand duchesses and princes were assiduously reported. A courtesan
wrote to deny the malicious rumours of marriage that had been printed in the gossip
column, and blamed them on ‘feminine vengeance’. Various violent crimes had been
committed in the provinces, and the new tramlines in the Avenue de la Grande Armée
were causing accidents. There was rain over the Channel, and cloud over Paris.
     Page three and the back page were always the same. Even sitting in a deckchair,
with the gulls wheeling overhead and the bunting flapping in the Atlantic breeze, it was
easy to imagine oneself in Paris. Lohengrin was at the Opéra, Cinderella at the
Châtelet, ‘eccentric clowns’ at the Folies-Bergères, and La Demoiselle du téléphone at
the Nouveautés. The Eiffel Tower would be closing for the winter on 2 November, but
there were still concerts every evening in the restaurant on the first platform.
     She read on, through the advertisements for false teeth, hair-restorer and soap–soap
was everywhere, even among the serious news, disguised as editorial comment. ‘The
exquisite, persistent perfume of Savon Ixora makes the skin silky, white and delicate.’
Mme Baldini of 3 Rue de la Banque gave daily lessons on the art of remaining forever
young. É mile had no need of such lessons, even if they had been offered to gentlemen.
Perhaps something in the ‘Correspondances personnelles’ had given him an idea for a
novel.
     She was not a storyteller–she could never have pieced together the million details
that went to make a novel–but she found those telegrammatic messages as evocative as
the first page of a serial. Some of them suggested the happy continuation of a normal
life. Some of them were sad, though it was hard to say why. She wondered whether the
people to whom they were addressed would see the messages, and she thought it ironic
that things that had to be kept secret from a husband or a wife were printed where
everyone could see them.

         Diane. Écriv. proj. fer. t. m. pos…. Dés. v. voir. Amit.

         243 imp vs vr vs svz pquoi att avc imp esp btot att depuis merc ts ls jrs mme
     hre écvz.
        C21. Gw xoaowg qsg zwubsg hcapsbh gcig hsg msil goqvs eis xs h’owas sh
     h’owasfow hcixcifg.*

         A. B. 70. Faisan bien arrivé superbe 25. Duval.


     The Duval household would be celebrating the arrival of the ‘superb’ pheasant by
eating it, she imagined, with oysters and a nice bouillon. It was the meal that she and É
mile had always shared when they returned to Médan, though with a partridge instead of
a pheasant. It reminded her that they would soon be home. She scanned the
advertisements on the back page, which, apart from the ‘very fetching and curious
photographs’ from a Dutch publisher, were all addressed to women. There was a carpet
sale at the Grands Magasins du Louvre, and the new winter collection was about to be
unveiled at the Samaritaine. That, too, had been one of their shared pleasures–the orgies
of shopping in the big department stores, and all the research for Au Bonheur des
Dames, the ravenous accumulation of facts, the desire to know everything that went on
in the basements and the attics. He had been like a little boy, wallowing in the lingerie,
blushing at the buxom dummies, ‘turning pink with pleasure’ like the man in his novel.
She preferred to make her own jackets and dresses, but there might be something to buy
for the new maid that she couldn’t have worn herself.
     When he returned from his walk, Émile still felt slightly out of sorts, and suggested
that they bring the holiday to an end. While Alexandrine organized the packing, he wrote
some letters. He seemed pleased to be returning, but also reluctant to leave. It was the
first time that either of them had been abroad. Perhaps he was sorry that the adventure
was over. Soon, when his sequence of novels was complete, there would be more time
for holidays and more time to enjoy the house.


                                            4
THE LETTER ARRIVED on Tuesday 10 November, forty days after their return. Her
own post was usually quite humdrum: family correspondence, begging letters, bills for
food, clothes and work on the house. But she also read his correspondence and told him
how to reply to people who wanted articles or translation rights. She wrote to editors of
supposedly impecunious magazines who owed him money. Sometimes she felt that the
person least able to defend the fortune and reputation of É mile Zola was her husband.
There was the time, for instance, when he gave away the manuscript of Nana to a
journalist, who promptly sold it to an American collector for twelve thousand francs!
    This letter was addressed to her, Madame É mile Zola. She did not recognize the
hand, and the letter was unsigned. It was as short and orderly as an invoice. She read it
in an instant: ‘Mlle Jeanne Rozerot…66, Rue Saint-Lazare…has had two children by
your husband.’


LATER THAT DAY, the clerk at the telegraph office was presented with a terrific piece
of gossip, a nugget of scandal in the bland stream of greetings and condolences. M. É
mile Zola wished to send an urgent message to his friend in Paris, M. Henry Céard–or,
as he was sometimes known, for the purposes of private communication, M. Duval:

        My wife is going absolutely mad. I fear a calamity. Could you go to the Rue
     Saint-Lazare and take the necessary steps? Forgive me.


IN THE TWENTY-SIX YEARS they had lived together, she had often been able to
follow a plot as it developed in his mind. A story, she knew, could begin almost
anywhere. It might start with a short railway journey and a woman in a compartment,
clutching a small package. The window, in which her face is reflected, shows scenes
from the past and the present, like slides from a magic lantern: a house by the railway, a
sail on the river, the telegraph poles ticking past, the coal smoke over the northern
suburbs.
     Next, a slate-grey autumn evening in the city: the crowd, cowering under the drizzle
in the Rue Saint-Lazare, between the station and the fish-food restaurants; the endless
funeral procession of black suits and umbrellas.
     A woman in a dark dress stops on the pavement and stares up at a soot-streaked
window. Behind the window, a tableau in the style of Mary Cassatt: a young mother
putting her child and her baby to bed. The woman in the dark dress climbs the stairs
with the steady trudge of a rent collector. Outside, the evening sky above the Gare Saint-
Lazare floods the street with red. Over the traffic, the shunting engines can be heard
shrieking and bellowing like great beasts in their wrought-iron cage.
     The Rue Saint-Lazare met the Rue Blanche a few yards from the south-eastern
corner of the station. It was the opening scene of La Bête humaine–the fifth-floor room
with the view of the railway lines disappearing into the Batignolles tunnel, and a piano
banging away downstairs. It was curious how often her spirit seemed to inhabit one of
his male characters.

         ‘Admit that you slept with her or, by God, I’ll cut you open!’
         He would have killed her. She could see it clearly in his eyes. As she fell, she
     noticed the knife, which lay open on the table…. She was overcome with a feeling
     of cowardice, an abandonment of herself and everything, a need to get it all over
     with…
         ‘All right, it’s true. Now let me go.’
         What happened next was abominable. The confession he had wrung from her
     with such force struck him in the face like something monstrous and impossible. He
     could never have imagined such infamy. He grabbed her head and banged it against
     a foot of the table. As she struggled, he pulled her across the room by her hair,
     knocking over the chairs. Each time she tried to get up, he punched her again and
     sent her sprawling back onto the floor. The table was pushed and nearly knocked
     over the stove. Some hair and some blood clung to a corner of the dresser…
         The music continued downstairs, with loud laughter and the sounds of young
     people.


A FEW DAYS AFTER the letter arrived, an upholsterer came to Médan. The walls and
door of the bedroom were to be padded in case the servants, who were so hard to
replace, were frightened away by the shouting and screaming.


                                            5
SHE HAD GONE TO number 66 and broken the lock and found the apartment empty.
She had found a room full of someone else’s life: homemade curtains, flowers in a vase,
some plates and cutlery, the sweetish smell of breast-milk. She found two cots that must
have come from the Samaritaine. There were framed photographs–riding his bicycle in
the Bois de Boulogne, standing on a beach somewhere. She did not know who had taken
the photographs. There was a writing desk, which she easily broke open, and enough
letters inside to make a novel, which she began to read and then burned to ashes.
     She might have stayed in the room for a few minutes or for more than an hour. She
walked back past the house at number 16 where she was born. Because of the station,
the area was always crowded. It was the best place to buy fresh seafood. She passed
the fishmongers’ stalls across from the station but the smell of the apartment stayed with
her.
     Until she decided what to do, they would both stay indoors. She went to the kitchen,
which she had practically abandoned those last few years. The recipe called for a fire
that could roast a sheep in a few minutes, though the only meat was fish. A bottle of oil,
one tomato, garlic, a fistful of pepper. Everyone must have known–the men, of course,
and probably Marguerite Charpentier and Julia Daudet, who each had three children of
their own.
     Every afternoon at four o’clock, tea was served with a plate of pastries, which had
to be finished.


NINE MONTHS LATER, in 1892, they went on holiday together, just the two of them,
to Provence and Italy, for seven weeks. He published the last novel of his great
sequence, which had taken twenty-five years to complete. The main character was a
man, Dr Pascal, who, having ‘forgotten to live’, tries to make up for lost time by falling
in love with his niece: ‘All that solitary passion had given birth to nothing but books.’
He dedicated it to the memory of his Mother and his dear Wife. Since his wife no longer
had herself placed next to journalists at dinners and told them what to write, the novel
was not well reviewed.
     She did, however, attend the celebration lunch on the island in the Bois de
Boulogne. Two hundred people were rowed across the lake and sat under a marquee,
eating truite saumonée, noix de veau aux pointes d’asperge, galantine truffée de
perdreaux and bombe panachée, to mark the completion of Les Rougon-Macquart and
the Master’s imminent promotion to the rank of officer in the Légion d’Honneur.
According to the newspaper, when Charpentier mentioned Mme É mile Zola in his
speech, ‘she had to fight back her tears’.
     Six weeks later, she attended one of those intimate dinners whose principal purpose
had always been to allow everyone to see how much older everyone looked. They
dined at Goncourt’s house in Auteuil with the Daudets and some other friends. The men
talked about their difficult profession, and asked each other how much they were paid
by newspapers. Alexandrine sat in the corner with Julia Daudet, and told her all about
her life at Médan. É mile, on the other side of the room, looked nervous and tried to
hear what she was saying. Now and then, he asked, ‘Is everything all right, ma petite
chérie?’

         ‘…Then he walks about the garden, waiting for two o’clock, which is when the
     papers are delivered. He hardly says anything, except that I ought to go and do
     something about the cow, which I know absolutely nothing about. That’s a job for
     the gardening woman. Then he goes up to read the papers and has his snooze…’


They ate dinner by the windows and saw a dark cloud in the sky. It was certain to rain.
She brightened the conversation by telling them how terrified É mile had been of
lightning when he was a little boy. His mother had had to take him down to the cellar
and wrap him in blankets. Even now, when there was a thunderstorm, they had to sit in
the billiards room beneath the laundry with the curtains drawn and all the lights on, so
that she had to wear dark glasses, and he would take out his handkerchief and use it as a
blindfold, which was especially funny because of all the scientific rationalism in his
novels–the thought of É mile Zola quivering at electrical discharges like some biblical
sinner under an angry sky…
     She knew that, when they had gone home, Goncourt would write it all down in his
diary, and when future generations came to study the works of the great novelist, his life
would have no secrets.


                                    PART TWO


                                             6
THE AUTUMN OF 1895 was miserable in Paris. When the drizzle finally stopped,
raindrops sprang from the trees along the boulevards. The pavements were always
slippery, and the top of the Eiffel Tower was lost in cloud.
     In Italy, the sun lingered late into the season. The sky was an intense blue, like some
impossibly perfect memory of childhood. Every day, she wore summer dresses, and
organized her afternoons around the sites where she might find some shade and a cool
drink.
     She wrote to him every day–from the Royal Hotel in Naples and the Grand Hotel in
Rome–because he had been unsettled by her departure. In thirty years, they had never
spent more than a day or two apart. She told her sister’s child, Elina, that she had fallen
in love with Italy: ‘There are so many things that one knows only from history books–
but how much more interesting they are when one can walk about in these historic
places!’ She learned enough Italian for shopping; she even wrote some thank-you letters
in Italian; but everyone was so welcoming that she was able to speak French whenever
she liked.
     She was fêted by the French ambassador at the Vatican, and her movements were
reported in the society column of the Figaro, along with those of princes and duchesses.
Count Edoardo Bertolelli, who had published some of É mile’s novels in La Tribuna,
insisted on seeing her every day. She was fourteen years older than the count, but he
called her his ‘ray of sunshine’. When she dressed for dinner, she tied a bunch of violets
to her belt. He took her fox-hunting, and she saw the Sistine Chapel, the Villa Borghese,
the Villa Medici, the Forum and the Catacombs. She felt the earthquake that shook Rome
one night in mid-November. The count was so charming that he ordered her portrait
from a painter, for which she wore a silk dress and some feathers in her hair, and in one
hand she held the bouquet the count had given her.
     Sometimes, when she was alone at the hotel, she remembered the foundling hospital
and the baby with the white paper attached to its bonnet. She thought of the young
woman alone with two small children, and the father who was hardly ever there, and
terrified that his wife would leave him. As ever, she had faced up to the inevitable. He
was allowed to take tea with them every afternoon, but it was a strange life for Denise,
who was six, and Jacques, who was four. She saw them only occasionally, like a
visiting grandmother, but she already knew them better than É mile. She would have to
tell him how to treat the children, and how different they were from each other. In
Rome, she bought them presents and looked forward to their next walk together in the
Tuileries. If Denise asked for news of ‘the Lady’ while she was away, he was to say
that ‘the Lady’ sent kisses to them both.
     ‘Devote yourself to the ones who are near you,’ she told him. ‘Show them a smiling
face as much as you can.’ (Some things were more easily explained in a letter.)

         You say that you would like to see me happy. You know me better than anyone
     else, but you still don’t know me very well if you hope to see me happy. I know
     that the happiness I had dreamt of for our old age has gone for good. My only
     pleasure now is to be useful to you and to help the ones I love. That is the task I
     have set myself, and I shall persevere for as long as I can.




                                           7
SHE RETURNED TO Italy the following year, and again in 1897. But that year, the
holiday was cut short. He needed her at his side in Paris, because how could he face the
storm alone? Kitchen slops and excrement were tipped over the garden wall; some
soldiers had thrown stones at the house; a bucket of dirty water was poured over the
children when they were riding their bicycles. Six months after his open letter to the
President of the French Republic on the Dreyfus Affair, when every wall in Paris was
covered with the words, ‘J’Accuse!’, he was sentenced to jail for criminal libel and
forced to flee to England.
    She went with him to the Gare du Nord, with his nightshirt wrapped in a
newspaper. He was in a terrible state of agitation, but she insisted on staying behind.
Someone had to talk to the journalists, the lawyers and the politicians. At least there
would always be something interesting to report. When he had gone, she wrote to her
friend, Mme Bruneau, whose husband had accompanied É mile to the court house every
day:

         There are secret police agents at our door, and some more in the hotel across
     the road, and also some at Médan, with reporters from the gutter press to help them
     with their spying. If I blow my nose or cough, it’s reported next day in the
     newspapers.
          They know when the servants go to bed, and when I go to bed. People write
     shameful things on the walls, and they send threatening letters to me and the
     servants. But I’m as hard as iron, and no one who sees me would guess that I’m
     under attack.


    She read all his letters and sorted them into separate piles–the messages of support
and the death threats, which he did not need to see. Exile was arduous enough as it was,
and so she spared him unnecessary details.
    Some of the anonymous letters were addressed to her:

         Madame,
         If you haven’t buggered off a week from now we’ll find a way past your
     servants and fuck you in your fat belly until you die. Since your filthy husband has
     gone into hiding, we’ll attack his family instead and show no mercy.
         Death to the Jews and all them that support them.


     After reading each letter, she made a note of the date of reception, and filed it away
for posterity.
     She worried about him, sitting there without a word of English at the Queen’s Hotel
in Upper Norwood. She told him to be brave, and that he would have to finish what he
had started. ‘His latest letters saddened me,’ she told Mme Bruneau, ‘not because of his
health, but because he seems disheartened. So I got on my big warhorse and terrorized
my hero, which did him a lot of good, because today I can tell that his mental barometer
is getting back to normal.’
     She finally joined him in England in the autumn of 1898, but she stayed for only five
weeks. There was little she could do for him while she was away from Paris. Captain
Dreyfus was still on Devil’s Island, and É mile was still a fugitive from what the
government called ‘justice’.
     Upper Norwood was no substitute for Rome. Everything was served with potatoes.
The fish, which was cooked without butter or salt, tasted waterlogged, and the pastries
in the bakers’ windows were so stodgy that it made one ill just to look at them. She
returned to Paris in time to buy Christmas presents for the children, to see the doctor
about her emphysema and to catch up with his work. There were so many letters to
write and so many people to visit. ‘I have to be you and myself at the same time’, she
told him.


WHEN AT LAST the tide was turning and the hero was able to return, their half-
marriage resumed. She settled in to her sadness as though arranging their possessions in
a house that was too small or too dark. The days of literary battles and endless research
were over, but he seemed happier now that he could indulge his hobby. He liked to say
that only when one had taken a photograph of something could one claim to have truly
seen it, because a photograph showed details that would otherwise have escaped
attention. He invented a release mechanism that allowed him to take photographs of
himself, and she saw them all sitting together, taking tea in the garden of the rented
house near Médan–É mile pouring the tea–and the mother of his children, who had once
been so pretty and who now looked so glum, as though she were contemplating the life
that could never be hers.
     Since he owned at least eight cameras and various pieces of equipment in heavy
boxes, he needed Alexandrine to help carry them about the Champ de Mars. Day after
day, they went to the Exhibition. He wanted to record everything. For the first time since
1889, they climbed to the second platform of the Eiffel Tower and looked down over
the city. The sun was shining. A new century had begun, and Paris was dressed for a
new beginning.
     He photographed the roofscape, moving around the platform, until he had a
complete panorama of the city, from the industrial quartiers in the east to the avenues
and gardens in the west. When they viewed the assembled panorama, they saw a world
as grandiose and coherent as his great sequence of novels. This was not the shrouded
mass of roofs she had seen the first time; it was the vast, collective work of the
nineteenth century, the man-made ocean in which her husband had been one of the
brightest beacons.


                                            8
THEY WOKE IN the night with headaches and stomach pains, and thought it must have
been something they had eaten. He said to her, ‘We’ll be better in the morning.’ Then
they had fallen asleep again, and it seemed to her that she could see him lying there and
could do nothing to help him.
    She woke in the clinic at Neuilly. It was three days before she was strong enough to
be taken to the house. She went straight to the room on the first floor and fell on her
knees, sobbing, and embracing the body, and stayed with him for an hour. Even in her
weakness, when she was still at the clinic, she had thought of Jeanne and asked the
publisher to go to Mlle Rozerot and tell her the terrible news, so that she and the
children could bid him their last farewell.
     No culprit was ever found. The death was described as a dreadful accident and a
national calamity, but both women knew that someone must have crept across the
rooftops, while the unseeing searchlights swept over the city, and blocked up the
chimney, then cleared it again in the early morning.
     His enemies had not prevailed. A huge, silent crowd followed the hearse from the
Rue de Bruxelles to the Montmartre cemetery. Soldiers presented arms as the
procession passed. She had planned every detail of the ceremony herself. It was the
greatest public event in Paris since the funeral of Victor Hugo. She was too frail to
attend the burial, but she knew that somewhere in the crowd that stood at the graveside
were two children and a young woman who might be mistaken for a widow, and that
their photographs would join hers in the coffin.


SHE SOLD some of the paintings and antiques, and the land at Médan between the
railway and the Seine. She made certain that Jeanne had everything she needed–because
he had not made all the necessary financial arrangements–that Denise and Jacques
worked hard and did not try to take advantage of their mother’s kindness. They
discussed clothes and furniture and the flowers that were placed on the tomb where the
children’s father had been laid to rest.
     She still went to Italy every year, but her true place was in Paris, and at the house in
Médan, which became a site of pilgrimage. Every year, on the first Sunday in October,
the leading lights of the literary world arrived at the station and walked up to the house
to pay homage to the Master. Two years after his death, in 1904, hundreds of people
attended the commemoration. It was a shame that the children had been unable to
witness their father’s glory. Little Jacques was suffering from tuberculosis and was
being treated at the clinic in Normandy that Alexandrine had investigated herself. She
reminded Jacques’s mother that he was to eat as much as he could and that he should be
given plenty of milk and eggs between meals. A few days later, when all the disciples
had gone home, she wrote to her again:

          The demonstrations of homage to our dear great hero were truly magnificent.
     The future bodes well for the father of our dear children. One day, they will want
     to find out all they can about the labours to which he devoted his life before it was
     cut short. I hope that they will understand that by the manner in which they comport
     themselves they will help to preserve the glory of the name Zola. You will be there
     to direct them and to teach them many things–unfortunately far fewer than I might
have taught them, for you did not know him as well as I, who lived at his side for
thirty-eight years.
     His violent death has struck us both a cruel blow, and in our suffering, the
affection of his children has been a great happiness to me. I feel as though their
affection comes from him, and this makes me cherish them even more than I would
have thought possible.
