OCCUPATION
                                            I
CHILDREN WHO LIVE in cities are said to grow up faster than other children. They
see and hear strange things almost every day, and even if they cultivate a spirit of
indifference and try to be unobtrusive, their routines and beliefs are always coming
under attack. The daily bus-ride can suddenly become a dangerous adventure, and the
puzzle of streets between home and school can turn into a haunted labyrinth. A whole
quartier can be overshadowed by a misanthropic dog, a friendly beggar, a cellar
window, a perplexing caricature on a wall or by any of the million objects and
creatures of which a child’s itinerary is composed. Parents might complain about ‘the
same old thing, day in, day out’, but every child knows that the city changes all the time,
and even the things that don’t change can look different from one day to the next. Parents
are not authorities on the teeming life of the metropolis. There are many things that they
don’t notice or that they try to ignore, because not even the most sympathetic parent
wants to relive the terrors of childhood.
     So many strange things kept happening in Paris in those difficult years that Parisian
children must have grown up even faster than usual. They grew up, however, in only one
sense. Statistics show that the juvenile population as a whole was actually getting
shorter and lighter. The pink vitamin pills and protein-rich ‘Biscuits Pétain’ that were
handed out at school had no noticeable effect, and there was little that mothers could do
except to disguise the perennial swede as something more enticing, or to serve the bean
soup with beans one night and chestnuts the next.
     Boys and girls who lived in a constant state of hunger and gastronomic
disappointment were more than usually sensitive to the city’s tricks and transformations.
In normal circumstances, they would soon have shrugged off the little miseries of urban
life, but an empty stomach lends its ominous rumblings to every minor inconvenience.
The booths on the boulevards that used to sell spinning-tops and bonbons sold dreary
things such as phrase books and bicycle-repair kits. Almost overnight, the infant
economy collapsed. Postage stamps and model cars quickly reached unaffordable
prices, and some toy shops closed down and their owners went away. There were so
many upsetting rules and restrictions that it was hard to believe that Maréchal Pétain,
who was known to be fond of children, had been told what was going on in Paris. The
pond of the Palais-Royal was drained of water, and a boy who had always gone there
with his boat of sardine tins and bobbins now had to walk all the way to the Tuileries
Gardens, where the lake was too big for a little boat. Other children went to the park
and found that their favourite climbing-tree had been cut down for firewood. Rationing
affected children’s lives in so many ways that no statistic could possibly encapsulate the
misery it caused. When shoes wore out, they had to wear uncomfortable wooden soles
marked ‘Smelflex’, or clumpy clogs, which made it impossible to run. Dolls were
forced to make do with the clothes they already had, and some big dolls even had their
clothes taken away from them.
     Children who had never been fussy about their food found that sweet things tasted
bitter, as though someone was playing a trick on them. Beautiful cakes and pyramids of
fruit in shop windows had notices in front of them saying ‘É talage factice’, which
meant that they weren’t real. Nothing was what it seemed any more. New signs
appeared all over the city with words on them that meant nothing or that seemed to be
misspelled or mixed up with real words, like ‘Gross Paris’ or ‘Soldatenkino’. Some of
the words were too long and had to be written in very small letters to fit on the sign.
The signs were put up by the Germans, who were also called the Boches, and it was
usually the Boches who were blamed for everything bad, though sometimes it was the
English or the Jews. Worst of all, mothers and fathers were nearly always in a bad
mood, because they had to queue for everything, or because they kept running out of
cigarettes.
     Life under the Boches was probably even harder for older brothers and sisters,
who remembered what things had been like before the war. Children who had just
started school found some of the new things quite exciting. A boy who lived near Les
Invalides saw the statue of a general being blown up with dynamite, and some of the
pieces of stone went flying over the neighbouring houses. Some children liked to watch
the long lights flailing across the night sky and the red lights coming down in the
distance, and they also liked to imitate the sound of the sirens. When the clocks were put
forward an hour, everyone had to carry a torch to school, and the bright circles that went
dancing along the street looked like a procession in a fairy-tale. Birthdays were often
disappointing, but many children who had never been allowed to have pets were given
guinea-pigs to look after. Some people even kept rabbits in the bathtub which had to be
fed with grass from the park. One girl who lived in an apartment block in Belleville
knew a woman whose rabbit ate her food coupons when she wasn’t looking, and the
woman said that at least she wouldn’t feel bad when she cut the rabbit’s throat and
threw it in a pot with the carrots and the swede.
ALTHOUGH MOST PARENTS kept saying that life was getting harder all the time, it
was only after two years of this that many children–especially those who lived in
certain parts of the city–began to feel that things really were getting worse.
     One day that spring, in thousands of homes all over Paris, the wireless was
unplugged and taken away, along with all the bicycles that were kept on the landing with
padlocks on them because there were so many bicycle thieves about. Telephones were
disconnected, and since they were not allowed to use a telephone box or to go into a
café, the only way to ask relatives in the country to send more food was to use one of
the letters on which the words were already printed: ‘The——-family is well’ ‘——-
wounded——killed——in prison’ ‘——need food——money’, etc.–but then they
weren’t allowed to buy stamps to put on the envelope. Sundays became quite boring
because the families who were singled out in this way were not allowed to go to the
park, the playground or the swimming pool, or even to the market or to any of the
museums, and they couldn’t even visit relatives in hospital (though they still had to go to
school). They couldn’t go to the theatre or the cinema, which meant that they missed
seeing Charles Trenet sing ‘C’est la romance de Paris’.
     It became quite hard to think of things to do, except read books, and even that
became difficult. A boy called Georges who lived in the third arrondissement had to
take all his library books back to the town hall. The librarian, whose name was Mlle
Boucher, saw him come in with his books, and she said to him,
     ‘You like reading, don’t you?’
     Georges nodded his head.
     ‘And I expect you’d like to go on reading, wouldn’t you?’
     ‘Yes,’ said Georges, ‘but I’m not allowed to now.’
     Then she said to him in a whisper,
     ‘Come back this evening at half-past five and wait for me outside.’
     At half-past five, Mlle Boucher wheeled her bicycle through the gates of the town
hall and told Georges to get on the back. They went along the Rue de Bretagne and
turned down the Rue de Turenne. Ten minutes later, they stopped in front of the Musée
Carnavalet, which was where Mlle Boucher lived, because her father was the director
of the museum. She took Georges inside and showed him the library and told him that he
could come back whenever he wanted and read all the books he liked, and this is what
he did until the day when he and his family were forced to leave Paris.
     Georges knew that Mlle Boucher was doing him a special favour. He also knew
that she was very brave, because when she took him on her bicycle, he was wearing his
yellow star. At school, the teachers had told everyone that they were not to treat the
children who had to wear the stars any differently, and most of their classmates felt
sorry for them, except when they were children that no one had liked anyway. But there
were also pictures pasted up on walls and printed in newspapers that were supposed to
be pictures of children like himself, and he often looked in the mirror to see if he had
the same horrid nose and silly ears as the people in the pictures.
      Parents had to use their clothing coupons to buy the stars, and older sisters
complained that the star, which was mustard-yellow, didn’t match any of the clothes that
they had. Some of their neighbours stopped talking to them and even said rude things to
them in public. One child’s aunt came home in tears, and when she took off her
headscarf her head was covered in soap because the woman at the hairdresser whose
job it was to rinse the customers’ hair had refused to wash it off. And then instead of
having nothing nice to eat, they sometimes had nothing at all, because their mothers
were only allowed to queue for food between three and four in the afternoon, by which
time all the food had gone.
      This was in the summer of 1942. For some people, it was the last summer they ever
spent in Paris, and those who stayed behind sometimes wondered whether they were
still living in the same city.


                                            II
THAT JULY, two days after everyone had celebrated Bastille Day, some children found
themselves in a part of the city where they had never been before, at least not on their
own.
     Nat stood on the street where all the green-and-white buses with what looked like
friendly faces were lined up bumper to bumper. In front of him was a short street at the
end of which was the Seine. Though he couldn’t see it, he knew it was the Seine
because there were no houses, just empty space where the buildings would have been.
And then he saw a seagull swerve lazily.
     He clutched his coat about him like a thief, without stopping to button it, not
because he was cold, but to hide his sweater. He could still feel his mother’s hand on
his back where she had given him a shove, and he began to walk forwards, towards the
Seine. At the end of the street, he turned right without noticing. This was the Quai de
Grenelle, which was also the name of a Métro station.
     The wind blew along the river in gusts and made his eyes feel sore and dry. He put
one foot in front of the other and thought about going back inside to where all the others
were. Then the wind brought down the rumble of rubber and metal and the elongated
screech. He looked up and saw the green carriages heading out towards the seagull.–Le
Métro aérien…It was called that as though, on that section of the line, it was a different
kind of train altogether, as though it might leave the tracks with a sudden silence and run
off into the sky.
     The wooden steps went up from the middle of the street. The street was sheltered
by the underside of the tracks like the roof of a basement. He began to climb into the
cage of metalwork. He was still extremely thirsty and he could still smell the urine on
his trousers. Across the road, a street-sweeper had stopped sweeping and was watching
him climb the steps. At the top was a woman in a uniform with no expression on her
face. She sat under the sign that said SORTIE and looked like the woman who opened
cubicles in a public toilet, only more grubby. Two policemen came from under the sign
marked PASSAGE INTERDIT. The woman was called the poinçonneuse because she
punched a hole in the ticket, which he did not have, and his mother had not put any
money in his pockets. He heard the sound of clanking chains and sliding metal that
meant a train was coming.


THE WOMEN were shouting, ‘On a soif! On a soif! Nos enfants ont soif!’ They
pushed away from the concrete wall, holding each other by the arm, bulging out into the
street, staring at the eyes half-hidden by visors, each one picking out a pair of eyes like
infantrymen advancing on an army. Behind them, inside the great closed space, the hum
of humankind sweltering in the smell of shit and antiseptic. Then the cry went out, ‘Une
épicerie ouverte!’
     Some of the women broke away from the others and were clattering across the
street. As they ran, they were digging in their pockets and shoulder-bags. They were
thinking of bottles of water, calculating the weight and bulk of fruit or biscuits, or even a
tin of Banania as a compromise if they could get some milk. The line of policemen
adopted a waiting position: allow them to buy some water; keep the others close to the
entrance between the concrete pillars, under the red letters on the dirty glazed arch:
VEL’ D’HIV.
     Anna was standing near the entrance with her mother. Now–as she had been doing
since the day before yesterday–she relieved herself standing up with all her clothes on,
because this sudden emergence into the open air was too good an opportunity to waste.
Her hair had been combed as if she was about to go on an errand. She felt her mother
thrust her sideways and then try to pull her back or try to get a better grip to push her
away. She clutched at skirts and pushed against bottoms to let the women know she was
there behind them, because they were stamping and going backwards and forwards.
     Two policemen were standing by the buses. After she had walked past them, there
was the street ahead of her, and the air rushed into her lungs and when one of the
policemen called out to her to come back, she said, ‘I wasn’t in there. I only came to
find out about my family.’
     She did not look back, because the policemen might not believe her, and she did not
run, which was obviously the temptation, because her clogs would come off, and she
would have to stop to put them on again or leave them lying in the street.


MILLIONS OF HANDS had pressed against the bar every day and polished it until it
was shiny, unlike everything else in the Métro. Nat walked through the barrier and
crossed to the other platform to get away from the woman in case she called him back.
She had looked at him for several seconds, saying nothing, and then she had said,
‘Passez!’, but without looking any friendlier.
     A train came and not many people got off. Nat did not get into the last carriage,
which was where he was supposed to go. He lifted the metal handle and forced the
doors apart, like Samson or a lion-tamer. He had to use both his hands, which made his
coat come open. Once he was inside, he turned to pull the doors together, standing as
close to them as he could, then he clutched his coat and sat down.
     He saw the people who had got off the train racing backwards along the platform.
Then black girders went by, and there were faces in the window staring back at him or
just looking out of the window. He saw his own face and his eyes, which looked like
dark holes. No one spoke in the Métro any more. The train sped up but not very much
because the next station was not far away. The faces began to vanish, and there was the
street just below, with the buses’ white roofs and gas tanks, and policemen standing in
groups, then lines of trees and the wide river, where the buses couldn’t go. He saw the
Eiffel Tower turn slowly and begin to walk away to the right.
     A man stood up and went towards the door. Windows flew past–a balcony covered
in plants, a big room with a chandelier and a table. The windows were close enough for
Nat to climb into the room if the train had stopped. At first, when it reached the station,
the train kept moving because he was not in the last carriage. Then it screeched to a
stop, and he saw ‘PASSY’ on the wall.
     This was the end of the Métro aérien. Daylight came from the river, but the roof
blotted out the light from the sky. Soon, the train would go back underground. He said to
himself, ‘Trocadéro, Boissière, Étoile’. He tried not to think too hard ‘Étoile’, which is
what he was wearing on his sweater above his heart.


ANNA did not look back. When she saw the bridge and the red sign, she knew where
she was going, and she knew how to use the Métro on her own. Then she did look back.
     The man with the sweeping brush and the little sailboat on his cap was staring
straight at her. He lowered his chin and made his head point across the street to where
the Métro was. She kept her eye on him while she crossed the street to see if he would
do anything else, but he just kept pointing with his head at the steps that went up into the
Métro.
     She still had the five-franc coin with the Maréchal’s face on it. She would be safer
in the Métro if she did not get into the last carriage. She put the coin on the counter and
the woman took it and gave her a ticket and four coins, which she put into her pocket. If
anyone asked, she would say she was going shopping for her mother, though she didn’t
know where she was going because there was no one left at home. But her mother
would find her in the Métro. She went under the sign that said DIRECTION ÉTOILE,
because that was where all the different lines came together. Her own station was on a
line that went to É toile, but it was a long way away, on the other side of Paris.


UNDER THE GANTRIES, applause broke out and washed about for a while, then
stopped. Beyond the galvanized steel lamps, where the words said RIZLA and
PHOSCAO, there was just the faintest flickering of hands. Then a loudspeaker rasped
out some names and other syllables, which quickly lost their force and joined the felted
layers of dust and sound; whoever was speaking into the microphone evidently had no
idea of the effect of his voice. The noise and dust were so dense that shouts and screams
were either muffled or too much a part of everything else to be noticed. It was like the
oceanic clamour of a railway-station concourse, composed of nothing but the shuffling
of clothes, limbs being stretched, a gasp, something dropped on concrete. A woman
banged her head on the floor for nearly a minute before a policeman came to knock her
unconscious.
     Some of them were lying on the steeply banked track, which was dangerous
because it was at least eighty feet from there to the top of the stands, and people
occasionally jumped off. Other families were still arranged in little encampments
marked off by bags and coats, which they tried not to move when the latest influx began
to filter through. Some had been found at home with the gas-pipe in their mouth. A
woman in the fourteenth arrondissement had just finished throwing her children out of
the window, and then herself. A young man had seen her do it, and they all died, though
someone else said it had happened at Belleville, and by the time the woman jumped,
firemen were holding the blanket to catch her.
     In the buses, the window seats had all been taken by children, who wanted to see
where they were going. In the tenth arrondissement, the policemen who knocked at
Mme Abramzyk’s door found her holding her six-year-old son; they told her to get her
things ready and they’d be back in an hour…But when she rushed down to the ground
floor, saying thank you God for this great mercy, the concierge came out of her lodge,
where she had the Maréchal in a frame on the sideboard with his country suit and his
hunting dog, and bolted the door to the street.
     They had all been slow to respond to the rumours, and almost no one had seen the
leaflet sent out by the communists, which they only heard about later on. Someone had
received a pneumatique, someone else a telephone call–because luckily they had not
yet been disconnected. They had sat and discussed it the whole night: it would only be
men, or it would only be immigrants; families with little children or with fathers who
were prisoners of war would be left in peace. Someone’s father had been pulled off a
train in the Métro by a complete stranger who said he was delighted to see him again
after so many years and then told him on the platform, before getting back on the train,
that he was a police agent and that he should not sleep at home that night.
     Now, in the grimy colosseum that contained whole quartiers without any dividing
walls, rumours caused sudden eddies and movements of people. In an inner courtyard
somewhere behind the stands, bread was being thrown down from the windows of a
workshop in the Rue du Docteur-Finlay where they made gears for Citroën cars, and the
neighbours who had seen the children’s faces in the buses and smelled the rising stench
had been going there all day with food.
     Anna’s mother watched for these wild surges of the crowd and the drift of bodies
towards the exits. Her daughter had escaped and might be standing in the street waiting
for her. She had already spotted a boy slip out of the same exit and she hadn’t seen him
since. The thought that she might miss her only chance was too much to bear. She picked
her way through the bodies, watching the exits, and sometimes she went right up to a
policeman, who must have a mother himself, but it was only when she gave in to her
anger that she made an impression. The policeman almost screamed at her, ‘I’ll put you
in solitary if you don’t get back in there!’–as if they had cells in the Vel’ d’Hiv. So she
shouted back at him,
     ‘Let me go! What difference does it make to you, one victim more or less?’
     The policeman shrugged his shoulders, and said, in a quieter voice, ‘Get back in
there.’ Then he turned away, and she saw the cropped hair below his cap and his stiff
shoulders, and he seemed to be finished with her, so she walked out into the street.
     Some women were standing in a doorway. She went towards them, and when they
realized she was going to talk to them, they seemed to shrink back into the wall. She
said, ‘Let me in. I have to hide.’ One of the women, who seemed more frightened than
she was, said, ‘No, no! Keep going. Don’t stay here.’
     The wind wafted the smell of her own clothes into her nostrils, and it was only a
matter of time, she thought, before she was dragged back inside, and her daughter would
be lost. But then she saw in the gutter what looked like an old coat-sleeve lying at right
angles to the kerb with something wrapped in it, and the water rushing out of the drain,
and a sloppily dressed man with his City of Paris cap, coaxing the rubbishy water along
with his broom. She walked up to him, and as she passed, said, ‘Follow me!’, which he
did, and he kept following her until they reached the Métro.
     At the foot of the steps, she looked round and thought she saw the man smile at her,
and he raised his hand briefly as if to say goodbye and then went back to his sweeping.
     Another bus was coming round the corner from the Seine, with suitcases piled high
on the rear platform, and children’s faces pushed up against the windows.


THIS WAS SOMETHING that happened at É toile and nowhere else: there was only
one line but two platforms. The doors were opened on one side to let everybody out,
then the doors on the other side were opened for the people who were waiting. Anyone
who left the train was separated from the other passengers by the width of the carriage.
As he walked along the platform, Nat looked through the carriage windows and saw
some German soldiers waiting to get on with their rifles and gas masks slung over their
shoulders so that they could carry all their parcels and shopping, but there were no
policemen, which was more important.
     He walked to the end of the platform where the metal plate said TUNNEL
INTERDIT AU PUBLIC–DANGER, then he walked through the barrier with all the
other people. These days, the escalators never worked and the electric lights were
always dim. He climbed the stairs as slowly as all the grown-ups around him. There
was a pain in his stomach which reminded him that he had not had anything to eat,
though he did not feel hungry.
     At the top of the escalator, he stopped behind a pillar that someone had used as a
urinal and, reaching inside his coat, he tugged at his sweater and pulled off the star,
which he crumpled in his fist and put into his pocket. There were men and women
everywhere, heading off into tunnels with the look of people who knew where they
were going. He stood in front of the Métro map for quite a long time, following the
coloured lines with his eye and, to make it look more convincing, he also studied the
board that listed all the stations that were closed. On the map, he mostly followed the
blue line that went from É toile to the top-right corner of Paris. He saw BELLEVILLE
and COMBAT and PELLEPORT, and then he thought of his friend from school, Elbode,
who did not have to wear a star and whose parents had always been very polite to him.
     There were so many people in the station now that sometimes they bumped into
anyone who was just standing there. Anna’s mother had come into the concourse from
the Quai de Grenelle platform and thought it miraculous that she had found her daughter
there, though Anna had simply got off the train and waited patiently in the part of the
station where all the different lines came together. When he turned away from the map
of the Métro, Nat saw a little girl being squeezed against her mother’s skirt, and he
wondered if he should go and speak to them, but instead, he went past them and joined
the crowd of people heading for the sign marked NATION.
     Later that day, he stood on the landing in front of the door where the Elbodes lived,
and it was a moment he often relived after he crossed the demarcation line a few months
later on his way to Grenoble and entered the Zone Libre.


ALL OVER PARIS–that day and in the days to come–people were discovering new
parts of the city. It was almost as if they had never lived there before. The Rimmler
family at 51, Rue Piat discovered that there was a little room above the garage next
door to their apartment block where ten people could sleep if they sat with their backs
against the wall. At 181, Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Antoine, the Tselnicks’ concierge
unlocked one of the old maids’ rooms on the fifth floor which they had never seen or
even thought about before. In the Rue des Rosiers, where people going to work were
surprised by the unusual silence, a boy had been placed in the rubbish bin by his mother
and was still covered in kitchen waste when he was taken to a neighbour’s house and
from there to a reception centre in the Rue Lamarck. Some families moved into back
staircases and attics, or into curtained cubby-holes in neighbours’ apartments, and felt
as though they had been transported a great distance, though they were just a few feet
from home.
     When all those previously unsuspected places were brought into use, it seemed as
though the city was revealing some of its secret resources in an attempt to accommodate
a new influx of people, though in reality there were thirteen thousand fewer people in
Paris than a day or two before.
     While the stinking velodrome was emptied out by buses bound for Drancy in the
north-eastern suburbs, and then by trains bound for somewhere in the east, the people
who were left in Paris waited in their rooms and hiding-holes, never spending more
than two nights in the same place. Anna and her mother lived like hunted animals for
two years before they were arrested again and sent to the unknown place that children in
their games called ‘Pitchi Poï’. Since none of the fugitives could venture out, they had to
use other people’s food coupons and tried to make their neighbours’ generosity last as
long as possible.
     As usual, concierges had to rack their brains looking for solutions to unanticipated
problems. They cut off the water and the gas and the electricity, as they were told to do,
but the policemen also had orders to leave any domestic animals with the concierge.
Some of those snug little lodges on the ground floor of apartment blocks turned into foul
and overcrowded menageries overnight. Cats were set free–there had been warnings in
the paper about lethal bacilli passing from vermin to cats and from them to human
beings–but when it became obvious that their owners would never return, dogs, rabbits,
guinea-pigs and even songbirds were used to supplement the meat ration, which, since
life showed no sign of becoming any easier, is probably what would have happened to
them anyway.
     The city returned to what passed for normal, and the strange stories of arrests,
suicides, abandoned children living in empty apartments and the stench of the Vel’
d’Hiv joined all the other implausible rumours that poisoned the air and filled it with
mysteries that nobody wanted to solve.
     Some of the children who were left behind saw their parents again when they were
tricked into going to a reception centre run by the Union Générale des Israélites de
France, and then put on a train to Drancy. Others were given new names and were sent
to live with new parents in other parts of France. When things became really
frightening, many children behaved in a very grown-up fashion. While their parents
relived the horrors of childhood, their children sent them letters telling them not to
worry and using secret code: ‘The weather has been quite stormy’, or ‘The sun is
beginning to shine’. They tried to think of all the things that their parents would like to
hear, but it was not very easy to comfort mothers and fathers when they weren’t there
any more to be comforted.
