EXPANDING THE DOMAIN OF THE
         POSSIBLE
I. A. i.
THE CAMPUS OF Nanterre-Paris X had been built among shantytowns beyond the
western edge of the city, on seventy-nine acres of former terrain militaire. The origin of
the name ‘Nanterre’ is Nempthor, from Nemptodurum, meaning ‘hill-fort of the sacred
wood or clearing’. The earth consisted mainly of compacted garbage and builders’
rubble. Cars circulated easily, but not pedestrians. Thirteen thousand students were
housed in buildings made of concrete blocks and windows that were always dirty. Some
of the rooms looked down on shacks where immigrant workers from Portugal and North
Africa lived under sheets of corrugated iron. It was 1967. On beaches in the south of
France, naked breasts and perfect tans were a common sight. Women used sun-tan
lotion; men lay on their stomachs in the sand. Some people went to naturist colonies in
pine forests and formed temporary ménages based on sexual excitement and socio-
economic equality.
     At Nanterre-Paris X, male and female students were housed in separate buildings.
They had yet to see the benefits of the Neuwirth Law of 28 December 1967, which
legalized the contraceptive pill, but many of them had read or had heard about D. H.
Lawrence, the Surrealists, Wilhelm Reich, Aldous Huxley, Herbert Marcuse and
Simone de Beauvoir. Publicity campaigns by holiday providers such as Club
Méditerranée proved that sexual liberation was available to the salaried, middle-class
population independently of ideology. In three or four years, the majority of students at
Nanterre would occupy positions assigned to them by the state and, as they had learned
to conceptualize the matter, contribute to the exploitation of the proletariat.
     Since 1965, women had been allowed to work and to open a bank account without
the permission of a father or a husband. Their mothers had been granted the right to vote
in 1944. Sexual liberation was only part of what was known as ‘expanding the domain
of the possible’. Pregnancy remained a serious risk and abortion was illegal, but a wide
range of other options was available. The monthly magazines Elle and Marie-Claire
had already broached the subjects of heavy petting, oral sex, orgasm, love in a physical
relationship and the use of ‘beauty products’. Almost half of each issue was devoted to
advertising. The models were depicted in positions of sexual availability. Bodies
engaged in unorthodox sexual acts could also be discerned in photographs of bottles of
mineral water and vermouth. The total wattage available to the average household had
more than doubled since before the Second World War, and women were said in the
advertisements to have been ‘liberated’ by household electrical items.
     The chief impediment to interpersonal sex at Nanterre was a regulation banning
male students from female premises. The academic authorities were thought to have
imagined nocturnal orgies, though intercourse was just as likely to occur in the early
morning when the banging of garbage trucks and the scream of two-stroke motorcycle
engines brought the partners to mutual semi-consciousness. It seemed a ridiculous
restriction of individual freedom. A concrete tower containing several hundred
hypothetically liberated young females, some of whom wore miniskirts and synthetic
pullovers, seemed a throwback to the Middle Ages. The Americans were fighting an
imperialist war in Vietnam. Radical thinkers were questioning the bases of Western
civilization. Some rock stars were not much older than students at Nanterre.


I. A. ii.
IT WAS IN MARCH, when the weather improved, that the trouble began. The doors to
the girls’ dormitory were locked, but only in a ritual fashion, because the janitorial staff
knew that they could be opened with moderate force within thirty seconds. The doors
were forced open, and soon afterwards, boys were circulating freely in the girls’
dormitory.
     The action was welcomed by most of the professors at Nanterre, because they
disapproved of the segregation of students, and the majority of them were sociologists,
political scientists and authorities on Romantic and Post-Romantic literature. Apart
from radio, television and newspaper reporters, no one beyond the campus gave the
dormitory revolt much thought, except of a speculative, mildly pornographic nature. The
commonly expressed view at Nanterre was that structures had to be changed on several
levels to reflect changing mentalities. Some students decided to postpone their political
involvement until they had spent a year or two reading and reflecting; others stressed the
need to adapt to what they saw as a public service (the university). It was generally
agreed, however, that the academic authorities, who represented the government and the
capitalist system, should grant them certain rights. The abrogation of a rule was almost
insignificant. It was not as if mind-expanding drugs and gratuitous acts of violence had
been legalized.
     For a time, instead of creeping through ground-floor windows, boys infiltrated the
female blocks without impediment. They brought wine, cigarettes, Tunisian pâtisseries,
hot dogs and erections. Some girls became lonelier as a result, and the structure and
conduct of discussions changed. Boys were able to generate larger quantities of
discourse proportionate to the amount of text they had read. Socially, the change was
small. The ciné-club was just as well attended. Girls remained more active in the
provision of amenities and entertainment than in political committees. It is probably
true, as some historians insist, that the dormitory revolt at Nanterre in 1967 should not
be seen as the prologue to the more serious events that followed.


I. B. i.
THE FOLLOWING YEAR, 8 January (a Monday) was marked by the opening of an
Olympic-size swimming pool at Nanterre by the Minister for Youth and Sport.
     In 1968, an Olympic-size swimming pool on a university campus was an
overdetermined space characterized by a complex network of social structures and
global capitalist tendencies. On one level, it was a place where boys and girls could
enact a visual exchange without implicating themselves in a contractual obligation.
Swimwear exposed up to nine-tenths of the body, and packaged and commodified the
remaining parts. Exchanges took place, however, not in the quasi-natural setting of a
beach or a pine forest, but in a refrigerative environment of laminated tiles and
chlorinated water. Boys who went to a swimming pool with the thought of picking up
girls (a practice known as draguer, which means ‘to dredge’ or ‘to trawl’) found their
penises reduced to prepubescent dimensions. Moreover, use of the swimming pool
implied a certain competitiveness in the interests of the state: health and healthiness,
national athletic dominance, and so on. The Minister for Youth and Sport had recently
launched his ‘thousand clubs’ policy, which promised to fund places of recreation and
to give young people administrative control over the clubs. They would be able to tailor
the clubs’ services to local demand by providing ping-pong, flipper, baby-foot and
coffee produced by the high-pressure brewing process. The minister had published a
thick report titled Le Livre blanc de la jeunesse, in which the positive views of young
people were recorded.


I. B. ii.
THE OPENING CEREMONY took place in the evening, after classes. The minister’s
speech was interrupted by a red-haired student with an open collar and a cheeky,
pugnacious face. He was afterwards known as ‘Dany le Rouge’ and identified as the
son of German Jews who had fled to France. ‘M. le Ministre,’ he said, ‘I have read
your White Book on Youth. In three hundred pages, there is not one single mention of the
sexual problems of young people.’
     The Neuwirth Law had come into effect eleven days before. The cost of the pill
was not covered by social security, and any woman who had started taking the pill on
the day the law was passed was still impregnable. The minister’s retort was not widely
reported, because the chief point of interest was felt to be the student’s audacious
interruption. ‘With a face like yours,’ said the minister, ‘you must be quite familiar with
such problems. I cannot recommend too highly a dip in the swimming pool.’

     Document 1: Conclusions of Le Livre blanc de la jeunesse
          The young French person hopes to marry young but worries about bringing
     children into the world before he has the means to bring them up correctly. His
     number one objective is professional success. In the meantime, he saves what he
     can from his modest earnings–the young man hopes to buy a car, the young girl to
     make her trousseau. The young French person takes an interest in all the big
     problems of today but has no desire to rush into politics. 72% of young people are
     of the opinion that the right to vote should not be given to the under-21s. They do
     not believe that war is imminent, and think that the future depends above all on
     industrial efficiency, internal order and the cohesion of the population.




I. C. i.
THE NANTERRE swimming pool incident, rather than the dormitory revolt, is now
thought to be a significant forerunner of the later troubles. Many other acts of rebellion
could be cited. For example, during the traditional New Year’s reception, the Dean of
Nanterre, his wife and their four guests left their seats of honour to collect food from the
buffet when (as the dean recalled twenty-five years later) they noticed four young
sociology professors removing their bags and belongings and taking their seats. The
dean then remembered the warning given by his friend Raymond Aron, when he had
learned that Nanterre was to have a sociology department: ‘By its very nature, this
discipline will engender action groups that will create tensions and agitation. Beware
of sociologists! They’ll make a mess of everything!’


I. C. ii.
AS EXAMINATIONS loomed, rebellious behaviour began to affect the educational
process itself. Previously, professors had delivered their lectures to fifteen hundred or
two thousand students packed into an amphitheatre. The students scribbled notes,
chatted and read the newspaper. One professor likened the experience to ‘talking in the
concourse of the Gare Saint-Lazare’. Sometimes, the professors saw their students at an
oral examination, and were struck by their ‘encyclopedic ignorance’. Now, lectures
were being interrupted by students who demanded the right to speak and then lectured
the professor on his pedagogical backwardness and his role as a tool of state
repression.
     The media took a keen interest in youthful rebellion, and so, before long, television
viewers (potentially half the population) were treated to the unusual spectacle of
students holding press conferences. The students sat like examiners behind a trestle
table, talking into microphones. They blew out clouds of smoke, wagged their fingers at
the audience and used terms from sociology and political science which, to many
viewers, seemed incongruously professorial. They expressed themselves in the form of
questions, to which they supplied the answers, following a rhetorical model to which
they were accustomed. ‘Why are we in revolt? Because the ruling class is trying to
condition our daily life. Why is it trying to do that? Because Western imperialism is
opposed to all forms of popular culture. Why is it opposed to popular culture? Because,
in the final analysis, this is a class struggle.’
     This form of exposition, commonly used with passive audiences, allowed
objections to be answered before they were raised by an antagonist: ‘Are we not
members of the bourgeoisie ourselves? Yes, but, as such, we must use our freedom to
criticize and, if need be, to overturn the state. What would be the result of such a
revolution? The result would be, not the simple embourgeoisement of the proletariat
and the insertion of the sons of the proletariat into managerial positions, but the
abolition of the distinction between labour and management.’
     Despite superficial differences, this was roughly in line with Gaullist policy,
which, since 1945, had striven to increase the involvement of workers in the running of
factories (a practice known as cogestion). For the téléspectateurs, the interest of such
conferences lay in the exciting usurpation of institutional authority, the flouting of
generational power structures and in the references to media manipulation, which added
a degree of self-reflection and unpredictability not normally seen in government-
controlled public broadcasting. Furthermore, whereas representatives of the government
and the university were distinguished by drab items of clothing purchased as ensembles,
the students’ clothing (knitwear, scarves, second-hand jackets, etc.) showed signs of
what the anthropologist Lévi-Strauss termed bricolage–the improvisational use of
manufactured objects for purposes other than those for which they were intended,
normally associated with primitive, pre-capitalist societies.


I. C. iii.
ON 20 MARCH, students protesting against the war in Vietnam smashed the windows
of the American Express offices near the Opera and daubed slogans on the walls. Two
days after that, six Nanterre students were arrested in a pro-Vietcong demonstration.
This confirmed the view of many commentators that ‘nanterrisme’ was part of an
international youth movement rather than a specifically French phenomenon.
     On returning to Nanterre that evening, militant students filed through a small door
marked ‘Entrance reserved for administrative staff and professors’. Pushing past a pair
of startled administrators, they climbed to the top floor of the highest building on the
campus and entered the Council Chamber. Its dominant position was felt to reflect the
authoritarian nature of the educational régime. They sprayed some slogans on the walls
(‘Teachers, you are old, and so is the culture you teach’) and passed a resolution. The
students agreed to called themselves the 22nd of March Movement, by allusion to Fidel
Castro’s 26th of July Movement. Shortly afterwards, they were given an assembly room
in which to hold their political meetings and renamed it the Che Guevara Room.


I. D. i.
FOR THE téléspectateurs who saw these images of student revolt, this was indeed, as
the commentators insisted, ‘a strange new phenomenon’. The youth of Paris had been
subtracted from the city as though by a bureaucratic Pied Piper and placed in a ‘learning
factory’. They had been parcelled up and ejected en masse along the line of the
Champs-É lysées to land in the former terrain militaire in the far west of the
conurbation. Once there, they were fed on predigested information marketed as
‘knowledge’ and dispensed by professors who were little more than vending machines.
Most of the students were in their early twenties and came from the sixteenth,
seventeenth and eighteenth arrondissements of Paris. More than ninety per cent of them
were of bourgeois parentage (upper and middle management, liberal professions, civil
service), but their parents were either unwilling or not wealthy enough to provide them
with better accommodation. A ‘concrete cube’ at Nanterre cost ninety francs a month; an
unfurnished room in Paris with no water or gas cost one hundred and fifty francs a
month.


I. D. ii.
BECAUSE OF an administrative failure to anticipate the explosion in the student
population, the range of activities at Nanterre was comparatively small. There was the
ciné-club, the subsidized restaurant, a cafeteria with a hundred seats, the possibility of
taking a train to Paris, hitchhiking out to ‘the country’ or cooking a pot of stew in a
communal kitchenette and sharing it with friends. Some of the students volunteered to
work with children of the shanty towns. They helped them with their French and taught
them to recognize parts of speech and the different tenses. Many of their contemporaries
were riding Vespas or Vélosolex, buying records, practising macramé and scoubidou to
produce items such as key-strings and lampshades; they visited shopping centres and
airports, and lived in situations more conducive to the cultivation of sexual or romantic
relationships. At Nanterre, friends were either an obtrusive presence or a prophylactic
against anxiety and alienation. Services aimed at young people, such as the popular
radio programme and magazine Salut les Copains (‘Hi, Gang’), were seen as a form of
paternalism and were largely devoid of intellectual content.
     The student revolt promised to enlarge the range of activities and to target services
more accurately. However, in the absence of capital, these activities were often of a
symbolic nature: displaying pictures of Trotsky or Mao Tse-tung, eating sandwiches in a
lecture hall, carpeting an office floor with cigarette-ends, organizing political
‘groupuscules’.
     Ironically, the student leaders appeared on television not just as ‘people in the
news’ but as consumers and objects of visual consumption. They were, to quote the
subtitle of Jean-Luc Godard’s film of 1966, Masculin Féminin, ‘the children of Marx
and Coca-Cola’. They possessed the marketable qualities of youth, elegance and wit.
Their long hair conformed to commercial models of youth such as the Beatles and Alain
Delon. Although the students’ ideological referents were specialized and professional–
Marx, Nietzsche, Freud, etc.–their sentiments were recognizable as those of the yé-yé
songs that dominated the hit parade, which, as yet, showed few signs of the market
segmentation that was so noticeable in Britain and America: ‘Il ne restera rien’
(‘There’ll Be Nothing Left’), ‘Je ne sais pas ce que je veux’ (‘I Don’t Know What I
Want’), ‘Ma jeunesse fout le camp’ (‘My Youth Is Going Out The Door’). The
interviewers tended to ignore the politico-philosophical debate and sought out female
students whose faces and clothing corresponded to the tastes of the téléspectateurs.
They did not try to belittle or humiliate them, though they did often flirt with them in
order to produce a telegenic reaction or to implicate the viewer in the process of
seduction.

     Document 2
         A documentary on Nanterre and ‘nanterrisme’ was screened by the public
     broadcasting agency, ORTF, on 26 March 1968. It gave a sympathetic view of the
     range of student opinions, and aroused feelings in the audience that affected initial
     perceptions of the May revolt. Much of the documentary was filmed in a small,
     crowded room in which a dozen sociology students were sharing a pot of stew
served in two stainless-steel pans and a Le Creuset cooking pot. The atmosphere,
at first, was noisy and convivial.
     A traditional anthropologist might not have considered the film a particularly
valuable document because of the male interviewer’s interference with the
principal interviewee–an attractive female student dressed in a thin, striped
pullover and a short skirt. She appeared eloquent, affable, rather timid, but keen to
answer the questions accurately. The camera showed her face in close-up and
made her eyes and mouth the centre of attention. In the cramped conditions, the
interviewer occasionally obtruded in the form of a wave of dark hair or a black-
sleeved arm suddenly raised to consult a gold wristwatch. The student sat with her
bare knees clutched to her chest and appeared to be slightly overshadowed by the
interviewer. At first, the hubbub in the room almost drowned out some of her
answers, but as the interview proceeded, the room became noticeably quieter.


You’re a student of what?
Last year, I was in sociology; and this year, I’m doing a diploma on demographics.
   In fact…I’m doing a study of the research that’s been carried out into the
   fertility of oppressed women.
That’s a very serious subject… Yes. It’s a subject I find really interesting because
   it’s about women.
You used to live in Reims, I think you told me.
Yes, I was living in Reims.
And you’ve been at the hall of residence…
I’ve been here…it’s my second year…When I first got here, in January, I was
   living here in secret.
How do you mean, ‘in secret’?
With a boyfriend…because I didn’t have a room.
With a boyfriend?
A boyfriend.
Whom you got to know…
Whom I got to know last year…I’ve been with him since last year.
You met him here?
I met him here.
How is it that a young girl from the provinces turns up in Nanterre and… There
   are lots of provincials here at Nanterre…You see, you get here, and at first
   you’re a bit lost…
You didn’t know anyone.
No, I didn’t know anyone. The first month, I spent hardly any time here. I arranged
   to spend the night with friends in Paris…I didn’t want to live here. It was really
   frightening.
Why?
First, because I’d never lived in an HLM* like this–these little pigeon-holes and
    boxes. And I was afraid to live here…As soon as the boys find out there’s a
    new girl, they pounce on you…
What do you think causes that?
Well, it’s caused by the fact that they’re bored, obviously. They’re looking for
    something new, that’s all; it doesn’t go any further than that…It’s the problem
    of…of boredom. When you come out of the restaurant in the evening, you don’t
    know what to do. You’re fed up. There’s the cafeteria…
And since you first met this boy…you’re still with him.
Yes.
Is that usually the case?
No. It’s very difficult for a couple to succeed.
Why?
Because it’s impossible to live like a couple here. It’s not a normal sort of life.
    And you can never get away from friends…. There are lotsof interchangeable
    couples. They live together for a week and then they change partners.
Do you think that has to do with Nanterre?
No…I think it has to do with any student residence.
It has to do with living in a hall of residence?
Look, if you have fifteen hundred girls and fifteen hundred boys living face to face,
    there are going to be problems…problems to do with couples, problems with…
    I don’t know…
Doesn’t that worry you?
(Quietly.) Yes, it does…
Do you think that the boy you’re living with is sensitive to these problems?
Of course…of course…Especially now that there’s a sort of collective madness
    and people are leaving…You start out as a well-balanced group of individuals,
    and then suddenly it all falls apart, and your friends go off just like that.
(Pause.)
Are there evenings when you feel really fed up?
Of course…Just now it’s every evening.
Even though you’re with Jacques?…
(Pause.)
Yes…

     The room has now fallen silent. The girl to the left of the interviewee, who at
first looked cheerful, seems depressed and uncomfortable. A male student bites his
nails and is visibly agitated. No conclusions are drawn from the interview. The
scene then changes abruptly, and the documentary ends with four male students in
     Spanish costume playing gypsy music on guitars and mandolins at the foot of a
     concrete tower.


        Questions and sample answers


          What did the students fear?

         That they might invest their youth in hard study and then fail to find a job. (The
     risk of unemployment remained high.)


          What might the consequences have been?

        Their spending power would be negligible, affecting not only marriage
     prospects but also lifestyle, and leading eventually to social déclassement.


          How were the students affected by the increasing social mobility of the
          late 1960s?

         Social mobility was a mixed blessing. It meant not only that children of the
     proletariat could aspire to managerial positions, but also that children of the
     bourgeoisie might find themselves descending into a kind of neo-proletariat.


II. A. i.
ON 2 MAY, as a result of continued protests and damage to university property, the
authorities decided to act. Government ministers were afraid that the troubles at
Nanterre would spread to other sections of the university. That evening on television,
with an air of stern regret, the Dean of Nanterre announced the suspension of classes.
    For this complex struggle on the new terrain of public relations, Dean Grappin
appeared sadly unprepared, like a gladiator in a minefield. He used sentences, the
syntax of which, in order for their meaning to be grasped, called for an unusual degree
of concentration. He accumulated nouns and pronouns with which he would have to be
heard to have made the proper grammatical agreements before the end of the sentence.
He was, in effect, sitting a small public examination set by himself. He concluded his
address; the screen turned grey; students continued to make the journey from Nanterre
and to file into the chlorinated corridors and amphitheatres of the Sorbonne.
     The revolt had now migrated from the wasteland on the western horizon into the
most famous, telegenic and overdetermined space in continental Europe: the Paris Latin
Quarter and its main commercial artery, the Boulevard Saint-Michel.
     Next day, marching into the minefield, the authorities asked the police to evacuate
the Sorbonne.


II. B. i.
THE STUDENTS who assembled in the courtyard of the Sorbonne on 3 May were
inspired by similar protests at Nantes, Strasbourg, Berlin and Berkeley. Using picks and
hammers, they converted parts of the building and its furniture into ‘anti-fascist
equipment’ (sticks and stones). They were anticipating an attack by an anti-communist
student group called Occident, which had been infiltrated by former terrorist
paratroopers of the OAS. Occident members wearing motorcycle helmets and
brandishing axe handles were demonstrating a few yards away on the Boulevard Saint-
Michel, demanding that the protesters be sent to Peking.
     At about four o’clock that afternoon, instead of helmeted fascists spoiling for a
fight, the students saw, entering from the Place de la Sorbonne, a battalion of men who
would normally have spent Friday afternoon directing traffic, arresting burglars,
importuning beggars and expressing admiration for the sexually interesting parts of the
bodies of Parisian women and, to a lesser extent, of foreign female tourists.
     These policemen, incorrectly identified by the students as members of the CRS,*
having little experience of crowd control, performed their task clumsily. They bundled
three hundred students into the ‘salad shakers’ (police vans). One of those arrested was
Daniel Cohn-Bendit, known as ‘Dany le Rouge’, who was due to appear at a meeting of
the University of Paris on 6 May, charged with ‘agitation’.
     The university and the government believed that the ‘extremists’ in the Sorbonne
represented a minority, and that all the other students were busy in their concrete cubes
preparing for examinations, which they were due to sit in three weeks’ time.


II. B. ii.
DESPITE THE increasing use of non-gender-specific clothing and hairstyles, the police
successfully distinguished male from female students. Avoiding contact with the female
students, they herded the male students into the waiting vans.
     What happened next was more significant than it might appear at a distance of forty
years. Female students surrounded the police vans and began to chant ‘CRS–SS’,
equating the police with the Gestapo (a historically dubious but ear-catching slogan),
and ‘Libérez nos camarades!’ To the policemen, the girls were not Trotskyites,
Leninists, Stalino-Christians or Maoists; they were child-bearing ornaments and objects
of desire. Their use of the noun camarades, which can be either masculine or feminine,
reoriented the conflict and induced a dangerous degree of semiotic confusion in the
forces of order.
     Seven days later, on the first ‘Night of the Barricades’ (see sections III. A.–B.), the
police would go on the attack. They charged the poorly made barricades on the Rue
Gay-Lussac and unlawfully broke into apartments in pursuit of rioting students. In a
street near the École des Mines, a girl wearing almost nothing came rushing out of a
building and stopped in the street like a hunted rabbit. She was passed along a line of
policemen, beaten up and dragged to a ‘salad shaker’ that was waiting in the Rue des
Fossés-Saint-Jacques. Local people who witnessed the violence were horrified.

         Questions and sample answers


          How had the conflict changed?

         The conflict had been radicalized and polarized. The policemen, who were of
     predominantly proletarian, artisan and petit-bourgeois origin, had reasserted the
     power of institutional authority over individual, bourgeois self-expression. They
     did this, however, without the blessing of their bourgeois superiors. The Prefect of
     Police, Maurice Grimaud, having witnessed the scenes of violence on television,
     sent a circular to all his agents: ‘Striking a demonstrator who is on the ground is
     the same as striking oneself.’ It was an aphorism rather than an order, and was
     evidently greeted with incomprehension or derision.


          Who was at fault?


              a) The police, who had offered to allow the students to leave the
          Sorbonne peacefully but then arrested them as they tried to leave. This gave
          rise to a violent demonstration, which the police repressed with greater
          violence, which led in turn to yet more violent demonstrations.
              b) No one was at fault. Although the flames of rebellion were fanned by
          the police, the conscious intentions of individuals and groups were subsumed
          in a power struggle which was in turn determined by long-term historical
          trends. The nature of this struggle remained obscure to most of the
          participants.



          What was the nature of the struggle?

         The students had been conducting a form of consumer protest, focused on staff
     reductions, poor facilities, gender segregation and a law (the Loi Fouchet) that
     would have restricted access to university education. When the police became
     aggressors, the students found themselves opposing a rebellion of armed members
     of the lower classes. This rebellion corresponded more closely to underlying
     historical trends (monopolization of surplus value by the bourgeoisie, alienation of
     the proletariat, etc.) and thus became the new focus of agitation.


III. A.
DEMONSTRATIONS took place in Paris on 6, 7 and 8 May. On 9 May, the
Government announced that the Sorbonne was to remain closed. On the night of 10 May,
barricades appeared at several key points of the Latin Quarter for the first time since
1944.
     Although their composition differed from that of their predecessors (cars instead of
carriages, café chairs instead of domestic furniture), these barricades were associated
by newspaper readers and téléspectateurs with moral rectitude and sexual adventure:
Cosette and Marius in Victor Hugo’s Les Misérables, the bare-breasted ‘Liberty’ figure
in Delacroix’s Liberty Leading the People, and countless romantic serials loosely
based on episodes of the Paris revolutions of 1789, 1830, 1832, 1848 and 1871.
     The barricades offered a seemingly unique opportunity to participate in ‘history’,
and their sudden appearance in the Latin Quarter contributed to the media success of the
riots. In the short and long terms, they enhanced the attraction of the Latin Quarter as a
tourist destination. During a lull in the fighting, a Belgian tour bus stopped next to a
crumbling barricade; a young man got out and stood on the barricade with a stone in
each hand while his father took a picture.
     May ’68 was a revolution with its own theme park. A graffito that appeared on the
walls of various public buildings advertised the sites of historical interest even before
the historical events had occurred: ‘Ici, bientôt, de charmantes ruines’ (‘Coming soon:
picturesque ruins.’)


III. B. i.
PARTLY BY CHANCE, and partly by imitation of guerrilla movements, the students
evolved a crude communications network, using bicycles, mopeds, walkie-talkies and
transistor radios. With their light-weight footwear, they could out-run booted policemen
and were able to dodge about the city in small groups, avoiding road blocks, setting fire
to cars and urinating on the flame of the Unknown Soldier. Live reports on the youth-
oriented stations Europe 1 and Radio Luxembourg had the effect of coordinating the
riots. Radios were placed on windowsills, and the commentaries cascaded down to the
streets in stereo. Reporters exaggerated the numbers involved and brought even more
people onto the streets.
     Despite attempts by politicians and the police to identify ringleaders, there was no
recognizable command structure. Confusingly, the students failed to conform to the
model of earlier bourgeois protesters (duffle coat, baggy blue pullover, yellow
‘Boyard’ cigarette). The subsequent re-education of the police would concentrate,
therefore, on the free-floating signifiers of adolescent bourgeois culture: ‘Eschew all
prejudgements! A good policeman does not categorize people according to their
clothing or physical appearance: a black leather jacket is not necessarily the costume of
a hooligan; a hippie is not always a drug addict; long hair is not the external symbol of
delinquency.’* Deprived of these simple keys to social status, many policemen found
their duties increasingly difficult to perform.


III. B. ii.
BY NOW (10–11 May), the ‘anti-fascist equipment’ of the Sorbonne occupiers had
been upgraded to a more efficient, paramilitary arsenal. The police used tear-gas
grenades, stun grenades, water cannon, truncheons, rubber batons and booted feet. The
students employed a greater variety of weapons: projectiles, including building rubble,
cobblestones and iron bars; catapults; a sand-blaster; planks of wood with protruding
nails; smoke bombs and tear-gas produced by chemistry students; Molotov cocktails
containing metal pellets or topped up with motor oil to produce an effect similar to that
of napalm.
     Burning cars–especially the lightweight Simca 1000 and Citroën 2CV–were both
defensive and offensive weapons. (The owners of these cars, being sympathetic to the
students, covered by insurance and coveting more recent or prestigious models, were
not generally opposed to their use in barricades.)
     The effectiveness of the students’ weaponry can be gauged by the number of
casualties. After the Night of the Barricades, three hundred and sixty-seven people had
been injured, of whom two hundred and fifty-one were policemen and other service
personnel. Eighteen policemen but only four students were seriously wounded. Sixty
cars were destroyed and a hundred and twenty-eight severely damaged. The absence of
fatalities, which is still felt to be a remarkable feature of the riots, may reflect a certain
degree of ritualism in the use of these weapons. It should be noted, however, that, with
road blocks, cratered streets, almost two hundred cars hors de combat and many others
safely stored away in underground car parks, inhabitants of the Latin Quarter were less
likely to die a violent death in May 1968 than at other times.


III. B. iii.
RITUALISM WAS particularly evident in the use of cobblestones–cubes of blue-grey or
pinkish granite from quarries in Brittany and the Vosges weighing approximately two
kilograms and laid in fan-shaped patterns by skilled manual labourers to provide a
durable and easily repaired road surface. Many were covered with a thin layer of
tarmac but could soon be dislodged with a pick or a road-drill. Hurled with sufficient
force, a cobblestone could seriously injure even an armoured policeman.
     The cobblestones (pavés) were not just weapons, they were symbolic objects,
representing the essence of the city (‘le pavé de Paris’is a metonymical expression with
romantic overtones). Furthermore, cobblestones represented the hard, back-breaking
labour of the proletariat and the paternalistic provision of undifferentiated communal
services by the state. The slogan, ‘Sous les pavés, la plage’,* asserted the underlying
truth of individual consumer choice and the freedom to engage in leisure pursuits. (The
sand, in fact, was not the geological ‘beach’ beneath Paris but imported industrial sand
that was compacted and levelled to provide a smooth base for the stones.)
     The commercial availability in 2008 of cobblestones used in the May 1968 revolt
suggests that many were collected at the time as valuable commodities and investments.
Prices vary according to historical significance and the aesthetic properties of the stone.

      Document 3: Cobblestones advertised on eBay. fr in
     May 2008.
          (a) ‘Genuine cobblestone, witness of French history’: 1 euro; 10 euros
          postage and packing.
          (b) 150 cobbles marked ‘Quartier Latin, Mai 68’ in red and blue paint:
          ‘memorable souvenirs that can be used as book-ends or paperweights’.
          (c) ‘Decorative display object’, currently in a flower-bed at Boussu
          (Belgium): a ‘witness of the events of May 68, which passed through the
          windshield of my father-in-law’s 2CV, which was parked at the time in the
          Latin Quarter’. 10 euros.
          (d) ‘Parisian cobblestone in its original state, with traces of tar’, collected
          ‘as a souvenir’ by a fireman on the night of 23–24 May, ‘subsequently used as
          a book-end’. 27 euros.


IV. A. i.
AFTER THE Night of the Barricades, the conflict could no longer be seen as a simple
rebellion against the government and its agencies.
     A new protagonist, whose emergence had been anticipated and, it might be said,
desired by the students, now appeared on the scene. The CRS had been founded after
the Liberation as a special force to fill a gap between the regular police and the army.
They were trained in crowd control and mountain rescue. They patrolled motorways in
urban areas and served as lifeguards at lakes and beaches.
     CRS recruits had a relatively low level of education. Many came from deprived
areas where physical violence was a form of personal expression as well as a form of
defence. They did not have homes of their own but were housed in special barracks.
They were strangers to the areas they policed, partly because, as sons of the proletariat,
they might otherwise have found themselves, during a workers’ strike, opposed to
members of their own family or clan.
     The men of the CRS were poorly paid and unappreciated. Many suffered from
social alienation and psychological problems related to insecurity. They compensated
for this by developing a tribal sense of loyalty and tradition, sharpened by a perception
that the misdemeanours of all the forces of order were blamed on the CRS. In May
1968, they often worked several shifts in a row and were kept on duty overnight,
cooped up in armoured coaches parked in side streets.


IV. A. ii.
THIS OSTENSIBLY proletarian and provincial force became ‘the enemy’ to a much
greater degree than the bourgeois, Parisian authorities. As usual in such conflicts,
propaganda was used to dehumanize the enemy, enabling combatants to overcome moral
or aesthetic objections to physical violence. For example, a cartoon in a student paper
showed an injured CRS man being prepared for a heart-transplant operation: the heart
was to be supplied by an anaesthetized ‘vache’* in the neighbouring bed.
     The CRS fostered sympathy for the students by attacking innocent bystanders and
allowing their actions to be guided by a simple form of class consciousness. According
to one eye-witness, a teacher leaving a bookshop in the Latin Quarter was beaten up by
a group of CRS. When the officer in charge ordered his men to stop, observing that the
victim looked too respectable to be a student, one of them objected, ‘But, chief, he was
carrying books!’


IV. B.
IT WAS NOW that the student revolt revealed its unexpected capacity to redefine
market segments. In streets and boulevards that were already saturated with commercial
signifiers, the revolt carved out its own niche, and proved that the market’s ability to
commodify ideas as well as products had been drastically underexploited. Shops that
stood in riot zones sold red bandannas, Che Guevara T-shirts and other revolutionary
paraphernalia from the very beginning of the revolt. Students of the École des Beaux-
Arts flooded the new market with screen-printed posters and called on striking
schoolchildren to help paste them up. Slogans appeared on walls throughout the Latin
Quarter and branded the revolt so successfully that these slogans are still being used in
2008 to describe and analyse the conflict.

         Document 4: Questions and sample answers.
    Analyse the following slogans:

     • ‘Sous les pavés, la plage’.
     (Related slogan: ‘Je jouis dans les pavés’: ‘I come in the cobbles.’)
         The ‘beach’ symbolizes leisure and self-gratification. After a predominantly
     urban existence as students and then as managers and civil servants, many of the
     rioters would acquire or rent properties in rural or semi-rural parts of France with
     access to a lake or a beach, developed and managed for the purposes of recreation,
     with lifeguards, retail outlets and other amenities. This would form part of a
     lifestyle associated with certain ideas of freedom, which in turn would be
     associated nostalgically with the revolt of May ’68.
    • ‘Soyez réalistes: demandez l’impossible’: ‘Be realistic: ask for the
       impossible.’
    (Related slogan: ‘Prenez vos désirs pour la réalité’: ‘Treat your desires as
      reality.’)
        A serious-ironic invitation to assert consumer-control over the market and to
    redefine liberty in terms of personal preference. Cf. ‘Soyez exigeant: demandez le
    cognac Hennessy!’ (‘Be demanding–ask for Hennessy!’); ‘Parce que je le vaux
    bien’ (‘Because I’m worth it’). Cf. also the CGT’s* call to workers: ‘Match your
    desires to reality.’

    • ‘Baisez-vous les uns les autres, sinon ils vous baiseront’: ‘Fuck, or be fucked.’
    (Related slogans: ‘Déboutonnez votre cerveau aussi souvent que votre
       braguette’: ‘Unbutton your brain as often as your trousers.’ And: ‘Faites
       l’amour et recommencez’: ‘Make love and start again.’)
         These slogans reflect familiarity with the theories of Reich, Foucault and
    Lacan. Erotic activity is conceptualized as a form of socio-political competition.
    The ‘baisez-vous’ slogan, blasphemously derived from John 15:12, would later be
    applied in other forms to professional activity in business and financial markets.

     • ‘Si tu rencontres un flic, casse-lui la gueule’: ‘If you meet a cop, smash his
         face in.’
     (Related slogans: ‘Si tu veux être heureux, pends ton propriétaire’: ‘Happiness
        is a landlord with a noose round his neck.’ And: ‘Ne dites plus: Monsieur le
        Professeur; dites: Crève, salope!’: ‘Don’t say, “Professor”, say, “Drop dead,
        bitch!”’)
These slogans represent an appropriation of proletarian forms of discourse and their
rebranding with bourgeois irony. The feminine noun salope, applied to a male, is
supposed to intensify the insult. Only the first of these slogans was intended as a
practical recommendation.


V. A. i.
ON MONDAY, 13 May, in what appeared to be a victory for student propaganda,
workers joined the revolt. The unions were caught off guard and pretended to have
called for a one-day general strike. The government itself was in a state of chronic
indecision. The student demonstrations had given rise to a mass revolt that directly
threatened the power of the unions and the economic well-being of the state. This
spontaneous alliance of workers and intellectuals was worryingly reminiscent of the
successful revolutions of 1830 and 1848.
     The students gathered at the Gare de l’Est and marched along the Boulevard de
Magenta. As the demonstration passed in front of the Socialist Party’s headquarters,
some elderly socialists appeared on the balcony, displaying a hastily made banner
proclaiming ‘Solidarity with the Students’. The students chanted back, ‘Op-por-tun-
ists!’ and ‘Bureaucrats–into the street!’ Confused by this anarchic scorn for political
tradition and the respect due to age, the socialists shrank back behind the windows in
embarrassment. The socialist politician François Mitterrand, however, joined the march
and offered himself as a compromise candidate in the event of presidential elections.
     At Place de la République, the students joined the workers. The crowd (officially
estimated at two hundred thousand) surged along the Rue de Turbigo towards Place du
Châtelet and the Left Bank, instead of following the traditional route of workers’
marches (République to Bastille). Several hours would pass before the head of the
march reached Place Denfert-Rochereau via the Boulevard Saint-Michel.


V. A. ii.
THE COMMUNIST newspaper L’Humanité had been denouncing the students as
‘dubious elements’ and ‘bourgeois leftists’. The communist-dominated CGT called
them ‘pseudo-revolutionaries in the service of the bourgeoisie’. But young workers at
the big Renault factory at Boulogne-Billancourt in the south-western suburbs had been
impressed by the students’ spontaneity. Although they thought it odd that anyone should
complain about a university education, they empathized with their cheerful anarchy.
Some of the young workers had been arriving for work without their blue overalls:
some wore leather jackets, others were in shirtsleeves, which was a uniform strictly
reserved for the higher ranks of management. They were tired of the unions’ insistence
on following ‘the party line’, and had no particular objection to becoming bourgeois
themselves.
     The demonstration passed through the Temple district, where smiling Algerians,
some of whom had seen members of their family murdered by Paris policemen in 1961,
joined in the chants of ‘CRS–SS’. Thousands of schoolchildren marched in perfect
order, divided into arrondissements, with neatly painted banners calling for
‘Democratic Reform of the Education System’. They passed through the Marais, where
militant workers and impoverished bourgeois intellectuals inhabited the crumbling
palaces of a forgotten civilization. The activists of the third and fourth arrondissements
were used to spending their weekends at the police station after writing the latest issue
of their ‘mural newspaper’ on the walls of the Marché des Enfants Rouges on the corner
of the Rue Charlot. Many of them had temporary jobs–they worked for construction and
removal companies or (as unemployed sociology graduates) conducted surveys for
polling organizations–and could barely afford to be on strike.
    Having reached an agreement with the police, the CGT stewards controlled the
march, which the unions had decreed would be peaceful, and kept a watchful eye on the
schoolchildren, the anarchists and the action committees of workers and students. The
students chanted, ‘Power to the Workers!’ and, ‘Adieu, de Gaulle!’ The unions’ banners
said, ‘Defend Our Purchasing Power’.


V. A. iii.
WHEN THE HEAD of the march reached Denfert-Rochereau at 5.30 p.m., something
happened that seemed at the time to be a turning point, though it can now be seen as a
confirmation of the essentially bourgeois tendency of the revolt. CGT stewards locked
arms and prevented the students from continuing the march. The students had been
intending to hold the biggest rally held on the Champ de Mars since Robespierre’s
Feast-Day of the Supreme Being in 1794. Loudspeakers told the crowd to disperse,
recommending ‘order, calm and dignity’. When the students refused to go home, the
CGT stewards knocked them to the ground and tore the banners from their hands.
     Only a few thousand students made it to the Champ de Mars. After sitting on the
grass by the Eiffel Tower, listening to speeches, the students re-occupied the Sorbonne,
while the union leaders went home and prepared for negotiations with the government.


V. B. i.
PARIS NOW entered a period of festive chaos. In spite of the unions, the general strike
continued. Soon there were petrol queues, and the streets were reclaimed from
Citroëns, Fords, Peugeots, Renaults and Simcas. Parisians rediscovered their city and
talked to one another in the street. Deserted railway tracks shone in the sun, and anglers
on the Seine and the Canal Saint-Martin were undisturbed by the wash of passing
barges. Even Monoprix, whose basement supermarkets had caused something of a retail
revolution by staying open on Mondays, remained closed.
     After two weeks of general strike, the spectre of a cigarette shortage hung over the
city, but the workers and the students stood firm. They organized the manufacture and
distribution of cigarettes made from discarded butts, sold in packets of four at a
generally agreed price of fourteen centimes.


V. B. ii.
DURING THE strike the protests continued, but there was already an air of anticipated
nostalgia about the riots. The night of 23–24 May was called the Second Night of the
Barricades. The students had been hoping to commemorate the anniversary of the Paris
Commune by torching the Hôtel de Ville, but spies dressed in kaftans and Mao jackets
had alerted the authorities, and the police brought out the giant high-speed bulldozer that
they had borrowed from the army. Instead, students, workers and the unemployed
assembled at the Gare de Lyon and set off in separate groups for the Right Bank, where
they set fire to the Bourse and attacked the firemen who came to extinguish the fire.
     Impressions of these events would later be treasured as memories of a transcendent
experience and recounted many times over to children, grandchildren and researchers:
the Doppler shift of sirens, the thump of helicopters surging over rooftops, booted feet
marching parallel to the main arteries, the acrid smell of tear gas, the shiny black plastic
of capes and truncheons, the slippery sludge of flattened sandwiches. The sense of a
priceless, unrepeatable experience was enhanced by the physical transmutation of the
students: they looked ragged, sleepless and disreputable. Their faces were covered in
talc or masked with handkerchiefs soaked in lemon juice as a defence against the gas. In
the swirling clouds of chemicals, the streets of modern Paris looked like parts of the old
revolutionary faubourgs or, with a stretch of the imagination, like scenes of the Vietnam
War in Paris-Match.
     For two hours on the Second Night of the Barricades, large parts of Paris were in
the hands of the students. It had often been said that a population brainwashed by
television would never have taken the Bastille, because everyone would have rushed
home to watch it on the box. But now, as if by accident, the students (or rather, eight
million striking workers) had brought the Fifth Republic to the brink of collapse.
     In the absence of leaders, they were unable to capitalize on their advantage. That
day, and in the days that followed, the CRS and the police, who were terrified of being
lynched by angry citizens, grabbed students and schoolchildren as they rode past on
bicycles, punctured their tyres and emptied their satchels onto the street. They lined
them up against the ‘salad shakers’ and kicked them in the genitals. They arrested
people who had dirty hands, dark skin or (remembering Dany ‘le Rouge’ Cohn-Bendit)
red hair. For the same reason, they arrested people who had a foreign name or accent.
They punched them in the throat and made them walk between lines of CRS who broke
their ribs and noses. At Beaujon Hospital, which served as a detention centre, they
threatened them with further beatings and prevented them from calling their families or
receiving medical attention. Before releasing them, they confiscated one shoe from each
detainee.
     Traffic lights in the Latin Quarter changed from red to green and seemed to serve a
purely decorative function. Towards the end of May, Paris began to resemble the set of
a science-fiction film. When the Métro was running, squads of CRS who looked like
Martian robots waited for students to emerge from the underground at Cardinal-
Lemoine, Mabillon or Maubert-Mutualité. A few enclaves of hedonistic mayhem
survived like post-nuclear colonies. The Sorbonne and the Odéon theatre were run by
anarchist collectives and overrun by rats. Many of the occupiers were seeing the inside
of a university or a theatre for the first time. In the Sorbonne, the smells of incense and
patchouli had overcome the disinfectant. The early slogans had disappeared under the
tide of anarchist inscriptions and stains. Girls and boys lost their virginity in the
corridors. They discovered Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, hashish and LSD. The mood of
casual optimism was maintained by student spokesmen who assured everyone that, at
the end of the academic year, they would be deemed to have passed the non-existent
examinations.

         Document 5: Slogans of late May ’68.
         ‘Examens = servilité, promotion sociale, société hiérarchisée’:
     ‘Examinations= servility, social advancement and hierarchical society.’
         ‘Même si Dieu existait, il faudrait le supprimer’: ‘Even if God existed, he
     would have to be abolished.’
         ‘Quand le doigt montre la lune, l’imbécile regarde le doigt (proverbe
     chinois)’: ‘When the finger points at the moon, the idiot looks at the finger
     (Chinese proverb)’.
         ‘Réforme, mon cul’: ‘Reform, my ass.’


VI. A. i.
AFTER THREE WEEKS of dazed exhilaration, the end of May ’68 was bound to be an
anti-climax.
      President de Gaulle had mysteriously disappeared at the height of the general
strike. He was rumoured to have gone to Baden-Baden to assure himself of the army’s
support in the event of a coup d’état. Meanwhile, the unions negotiated a deal with the
government. The minimum wage was to be increased by 36%, the working week
reduced to forty hours and the unions were to have more say in the running of factories.
      To the union leaders’ astonishment, the proposals were rejected by the rank and
file. It was then that President de Gaulle returned to Paris. On 30 May, he sat at his desk
in front of a radio microphone and spoke of ‘intimidation, intoxication and tyranny’. He
also appeared on television, and his appearance alone was worth a thousand tanks: old
man’s ears, sagging, watery eyes like flooded mine shafts, and the long, grey face of a
badly weathered municipal statue. The majority of the voting population found this
reassuring. The President announced the dissolution of the Assemblée Nationale.
Legislative (but not presidential) elections were to be held in June.
VI. A. ii.
THE EFFECT was almost instantaneous. Unions abandoned the workers to the CRS and
turned their full attention to the election campaign. ‘May ’68’ was glamorous and
theatrical. ‘June ’68’ was bloodier and less appealing to the téléspectateurs, especially
since most of the key events did not take place in Paris. It was in June that the forces of
order, battling against members of their own class, lived up to their reputation. On 11
June, at the Peugeot factory at Sochaux in eastern France, two workers were killed and
a hundred and fifty-one were seriously wounded. The government enacted emergency
legislation: many left-wing organizations were outlawed, demonstrations were banned
and paramilitary Gaullist groups were given carte blanche to ‘encourage’ the workers
to end the strike.


VI. A. iii.
ON 14 JUNE, the Sorbonne, the École des Beaux-Arts and the Odéon theatre were
cleared out by the police and disinfected by immigrant cleaning women. Citizens who
were unaware of the underlying historical process were surprised to learn that the
government intended to satisfy the students’ principal demands. In a private meeting
with the Dean of Nanterre, the new Minister of Education, Edgar Faure, outlined the
new policy of placating the protesters by enhancing their access to capital: ‘Give them
money, and they’ll shut up.’
     Even as the decrees were being drafted, producers were repositioning their brands
to take account of changes in customer engagement. A special edition of Elle magazine
(17 June) congratulated female students on their ‘amazing courage’ and stressed the
growing importance of interactivity: ‘We want to participate much more closely in your
preoccupations of today, and your cares of tomorrow, and to get you to participate in
ours.’
     Female students had participated mostly by distributing tracts, organizing crèches
and by lying unconscious on the ground, being filmed by cameramen. Only a few of them
had thrown missiles, and none of them had appeared on television as leaders of the
revolt. Their equal treatment by the forces of order, however, had given them a sense of
civic importance and consumer rights. A poster produced by the École des Beaux-Arts,
titled ‘Beauty is in the Street’, showed a young woman launching a cobblestone rather
wildly but with graceful, trousered legs and the flapping skirts of a knee-length duffle-
coat. This charming, iconic design anticipated some of the fashions that would be
unveiled in the summer collections, notably by Yves Saint-Laurent, who dedicated his
range of duffel coats and fringed jackets to the students of May ’68.
VI. B.
‘MAY ’68’ came to stand for personal liberation and the bankruptcy of a paternalistic,
gerontocratic system. However, it is important to remember that the biggest
manifestation of popular feeling in May ’68 did not involve the students: when General
de Gaulle returned to Paris on 30 May, more than half a million people marched up the
Champs-É lysées. This huge demonstration of support for the Gaullist régime was
organized by Gaullists, but the numbers far exceeded expectations. In the subsequent
national elections, the Gaullists won a crushing victory. Left-wing parties had never had
such a small share of the vote.
     Not long afterwards, the Dean of Nanterre saw huge consignments of furniture and
educational equipment arriving on the campus. Gigantic projects of no apparent worth
were afoot. Cafeterias and language laboratories sprang up all over the campus, and the
builders who constructed them–at vast expense to the government but very little to
themselves–joked openly about their imminent early retirement. To a mind unschooled
in the dynamics of capital flow and long-term growth, this could only be described as
‘waste’. It was a small comfort to the dean to be told by the Minister of Education that
no questions would be asked about education spending until 1970.

        Questions


          How did the student revolt of May ’68 lead to the biggest popular
          demonstration of support for an existing regime in the history of France?


          Did everyday life change as a result of May ’68?


          Were the students right to see examinations as the tool of a repressive,
          hierarchical society?


          Summarize the conclusions according to the foregoing analysis.


        In May 1968, children of the bourgeoisie provoked a proletarian revolt. The
     revolt took two forms: a) a violent rebellion of the forces of order, which turned
them into public enemies; b) a general strike that defied union leaders and led to a
split between unions and workers.
     The consequences of this were: a) rapid improvement in living conditions and
services for the young bourgeoisie; b) the discrediting of non-consumer-oriented
educational methods; c) devaluation of age as a marker of social status; d) public
endorsement of capitalist aspirations by union leaders; e) the effective eradication
of the Communist Party as a major force in French politics.


     Describe the legacy of May ’68 in the light of public opinion polls.

    After May 1968, 62% of French people declared themselves ‘quite satisfied’
with things in general, more satisfied than not with relationships, housing and
work, but only slightly satisfied with leisure–perhaps a sign of greater customer
awareness. Only 32% described themselves as pessimistic (16% didn’t know, or
perhaps didn’t want to think about it). More people aged between fifteen and
twenty-one were happy in 1969 than in 1957. 71% felt ‘free’ when making
purchases, either because they had sufficient spending power or because the range
of products was adequate to their desires. 77% thought themselves lucky to be
living in the late 1960s.
     In 2008, most people who responded to opinion polls believed that May ’68
had revolutionized French society, especially in the realms of sexual equality and
workers’ rights, and that the revolt had made the government more accountable to
public opinion. Asked to name the May ’68 slogan most relevant to today’s world,
almost half the respondents chose ‘It is forbidden to forbid’, while only 18% voted
for ‘Be realistic: ask for the impossible.’
