FILES OF THE SÛRETÉ
                        1. The Case of the Crayfish

                         New Year’s Day, 1813, Rue des Grésillons

AT SOME POINT in the night, while the snow was falling thickly, the pile of rubbish
had crossed the street, and was now positioned a few doors down from no. 13, Rue des
Grésillons. This street, which was later swept away by the Gare Saint-Lazare, ran along
the edge of the grim and grimy quartier known as Little Poland. It was the kind of area
where a pile of rubbish might expect to pass unnoticed, even if it did occasionally put
forth a gnarled head that swivelled and disappeared.
     The Rue des Grésillons was the haunt of mysteriously industrious people who
considered themselves lucky to be tenants, because no landlord or bailiff ever dared set
foot there. It was Paris, but it had nothing that anyone would have recognized as Paris.
Once, it had marked the point beyond which no building was allowed. On one side–the
old perimeter of the city–were half-empty scrap-iron yards, smutty laundries,
windowless brothels and nameless hostels. Most of its inhabitants came from distant
parts of France, and some of its teetering tenements housed the entire adult male
population of an Alpine valley. On the opposite side of the street–the side further from
Paris–were the desolate slopes and gullies of the city’s northern waste dump.
     In any other street, the pile of rubbish would have been dismantled in a trice by a
licensed rag-picker, a municipal cleaner or by one of the unregistered scavengers who
darted about like shadows, poking at piles of waste and filling a leather bag with
objects of unidentifiable desire; but by the time they reached the Rue des Grésillons, the
sweepings of Paris had attained a state of refinement that placed them almost beyond the
digestive aspirations of a rat. Every cabbage-stalk and bone, every nail, splinter, scrap
and thread, every bandage and poultice from the hospitals of Paris had been gathered or
eaten, leaving only a gravelly coagulation of mud, soot, hair, faeces, and whatever else
ten thousand brooms had mustered in the street before nine o’clock in the evening. There
was just enough compostable matter in that residue of seven hundred thousand human
lives to start the process of fermentation–which was fortunate, because the night was
bitterly cold, and the occupant of the pile of rubbish was dressed only in the thin felt
jacket of a messenger.
      As he crouched in the steaming filth, the bogus messenger felt the warm glow of
satisfaction that always seemed to presage a successful operation. The others had
succumbed, hours before, to the lure of an all-night wine shop, but he knew that,
however long it took, the wait would be worth his while. To the man known as ‘Sans-
Gêne’ (‘Have-A-Go’)–the man who had tricked, chiselled, sawn and bludgeoned his
way out of every prison in France–a night of cramp, frostbite and stench was nothing.
As everyone knew, Eugène-François Vidocq was impervious to pain. He also
possessed the curious faculty of lessening his height by four or five inches, and in this
contracted form could walk about and jump. He could carry on a normal conversation
with a metal file in his mouth. He had thought nothing of staining his face with walnut
juice and clogging up his nostrils with coffee and gum arabic in order to imitate the skin
colour and chronic nasal discharge of a criminal known as Tête-de-Melon. At last, his
hard work and persistence were about to pay off. The case that had brought him that
New Year’s Night to the Rue des Grésillons would, he was certain, be the last nail in
the coffin of his enemies at police headquarters.
      Twenty-two members of the gang had already fallen into his net–including the
Pissard twins, and the fiendish criminal who, until he was tortured, was known only as
‘The Apothecary’. They had carried out their thefts with such elaborate cunning and
such minute knowledge of the premises (including the apartment above the
commissariat of the eighth district), that it was obvious they must have been employees
of the victims. In bringing these men to justice, Vidocq had, almost single-handedly,
destroyed the centuries-old reputation of Savoyard immigrants for honesty and
reliability. No one would ever trust a chimney-sweep, floor-polisher or errand-boy
again, which, in a city where people habitually left their key in the door and invited
strangers into their home, could only be construed as an act of public philanthropy.
      The one remaining member of the gang was the notorious ‘Crayfish’, whose
whereabouts had remained as mysterious as his nickname. (Perhaps he owed it to his
grasping claws or a bright-red complexion, or perhaps he had achieved proficiency in
the potentially useful art of walking backwards.) Though the Crayfish had eluded
capture, his girlfriend, a laundress, had been traced to the Rue des Grésillons, and it
was reasonable to suppose that the Crayfish would attempt to deliver her New Year’s
gift in person.
      Dawn’s chill fingers were already stretching over the eastern suburbs when a
shadow passed along the house-fronts. The door of no. 13 opened, and the figure
scuttled in, looking up and down the street as it backed into the courtyard. A minute
later, the frozen heap of filth was standing in the hallway, beneath the stairs, whistling in
the manner of a Savoyard coachman. On hearing the signal, the Crayfish emerged on the
landing two floors up, and the following conversation took place:
      ‘Is that you?’
    ‘Yes.’
    ‘I’ll be down in a minute.’
    ‘It’s too cold to wait here. Meet me at the bar on the corner–and look sharp.’
    It was not until he was holding up his trousers with one hand and, with the other,
presenting his braces to a smelly man with a pistol in his hand, that the Crayfish realized
what had happened. An hour or so later, his ankles tied with napkins to the legs of his
chair, he was helping Vidocq to celebrate his capture in a private room at the Cadran
Bleu restaurant, divulging all sorts of information about his criminal colleagues, in the
mistaken belief that this would ensure his release.


THAT MORNING, Commissioner Henry arrived for work as usual, turning off the Quai
des Orfèvres, and passing along a glass-covered arcade that led from the river to the
courtyard of the Sainte-Chapelle. It was there, under the shadow of the medieval
basilica, in a frequently fumigated office at no. 6 Petite Rue Sainte-Anne, that M. Henry
conducted his never-ending war on crime.
     As a man who had passed many a delightful Sunday fishing in the Seine, M. Henry
knew the pleasure of outwitting a slippery creature. It was a pleasure that was denied to
him as head of the Second Division of the Préfecture. Criminals, who were supposed to
live by their wits, were desperately stupid. Their slang was a secret code that gave
them away as surely as a bag marked ‘swag’. Recently, a thief called Mme Bailly,
having learned that there was money to be made as an informer, had provided the police
with details of all the burglaries she had committed herself, and was surprised when
they came knocking at her door.
     The Commissioner’s own modest powers had earned him a reputation for
supernatural percipience. He was known to the criminal underworld of Paris as ‘the
Bad Angel’, and it was said that no one ever left his office without accidentally
confessing his crime or giving some vital clue that led to his conviction. Unfortunately,
M. Henry was forced to work with a team of skivers and incompetents. His constables
had been known to lie in wait in a burglar’s cupboard for seventy-two hours, only to be
locked in by the burglar and almost starved to death. And so, when Vidocq had offered
his services as a thief-catcher, and proposed the creation of a special Brigade de la
Sûreté staffed by ex-convicts, Commissioner Henry–to the envious indignation of his
regular officers–had promptly organized Vidocq’s ‘escape’ from La Force prison, and
given him his own office, with a monthly salary of one hundred francs and the promise
of a bonus for each arrest.
     Vidocq returned the compliment by following M. Henry’s orders with almost
sheepish devotion. There was something in Vidocq’s ability to grind a man’s face to an
unidentifiable pulp that filled him with devoted tenderness towards anyone who earned
his respect.
     The Commissioner was briefing his officers when a powerful smell filled the room,
followed by a visibly intoxicated Vidocq, holding his latest catch by the collar. Seeing
the line of policemen, the Crayfish squirmed with loathing and spat out a stream of
abuse. Vidocq bowed to his colleagues, and said,
     ‘Allow me and my illustrious companion to wish you a Happy New Year!’
     The Commissioner looked at his man with pride. Then, turning to his officers, he
said, frostily,
     ‘Now that’s what I call a New Year’s gift! Would that each of you, Messieurs, had
come bearing a similar gift.’
     The Crayfish was led away to the cells, and, from that day on, Vidocq’s position as
Head of the Sûreté appeared to be unassailable.


                 2. The Case of the Yellow Curtains

                         New Year’s Day, 1814, Rue Poissonnière

THANKS TO Vidocq, Paris now had a centralized criminal bureau, instead of forty-
eight competing commissaires who gave up the chase as soon as a felon turned a street
corner and left the quartier. The ex-convict not only made police work more
professional, he also conferred a rough sort of glamour on what had previously been
seen as a rather squalid branch of government administration.
     To M. Henry, Vidocq was simply the most effectual of all the two-faced
opportunists who went back and forth between police headquarters and the underworld.
To criminals, he was something weird and unnerving, a will-o’-the-wisp with fists of
steel. His prestige and power were rooted in superstition: the edges of Paris were still
half-dissolved in their rural hinterland, where werewolves and witches were as much a
part of daily life as rabid dogs and concierges. Once, Vidocq was told by an
unsuspecting policeman’s daughter that the great Vidocq could turn himself into ‘a truss
of hay’.
     ‘A truss of hay! How?’
     ‘Yes, Monsieur. One day my father followed him, and just as he was going to put
his hand on his collar, he grasped only a wisp of hay. That’s not all talk, the whole
brigade saw the hay, which was burned.’
     There was, however, nothing magical about Vidocq’s methods, and they deserve a
purely rational investigation. It would be hard in any case to imagine a better guide to
the devious streets of Paris than the human bloodhound who sniffed out their secrets
with such ruthless delight.
OF ALL THE MYSTERIES that Vidocq solved–or rendered irrelevant by brute force–
few were as revealing as the Case of the Yellow Curtains.
     It was almost a year since the Crayfish had been netted, and M. Henry was hoping
to present the Minister with another New Year’s gift. Unfortunately, the case that lay in
front of him that Christmas Eve seemed too risky for Vidocq. A convict called Fossard,
who specialized in making keys from wax impressions and in jumping out of upper-
storey windows without hurting himself, had escaped from Bicêtre prison. (Bicêtre, two
miles south of Paris, was a clearing-house for convicts: from there, they left in chains
for the hulks of Brest, Rochefort and Toulon.) Apparently, Fossard was ‘armed to the
teeth’, and had vowed to kill any policeman who tried to arrest him.
     The problem was that Fossard had known Vidocq in prison and would certainly
recognize his former cell-mate. M. Henry therefore entrusted the job to his regular
officers, who, giving due consideration to the words ‘armed to the teeth’, busied
themselves with paperwork and harmless enquiries which showed that Fossard was
indeed still forging keys and jumping out of upper-storey windows. Faced with craven
incompetence, the Commissioner reluctantly gave the job to Vidocq and presented him
with the latest piece of intelligence. It took the form of a detailed but inconclusive
report:

         The said Fossard is now in Paris. He is lodged in a street that runs between the
     market and the boulevard, from the Rue Comtesse-d’Artois to the Rue
     Poissonnière, via the Rue Montorgueil and the Rue du Petit-Carreau. It is not
     known on which floor he resides, but his windows may be recognized by yellow
     silk curtains. In the same house, there is a little hunchback seamstress, who is a
     friend of Fossard’s concubine.


      With this shred of information, Vidocq set off in search of the escaped convict.
      The four streets in question formed a single, serpentine stretch of road that twisted
and turned so often that it seemed to be heading nowhere in particular. In fact, it ran
north from the central markets, bisecting the boulevard and the ‘Great Drain’ that
girdled Paris. The main segment was the Rue Poissonnière–so called because this was
the route by which fresh fish reached the capital from the ports of the Pas-de-Calais. In
the festive season, the road was even busier than usual, and no one paid much attention
to the elderly man with a three-cornered hat, a pigtail, and wrinkles painted on his face;
nor did anyone stop to ask him why he was gazing up at windows and scribbling in a
little book.
      The task was daunting. Yellow was a popular colour for curtains–and many others
had yellowed with age–and there were enough seamstresses in northern Paris to
populate a small town. Assuming young men to be representative of the whole
population, medical reports on army conscripts would suggest that there were something
in the region of 6,135 hunchbacks in Paris. The streets of Paris had a total length of 425
kilometres, and the fish-route along which Fossard lurked behind yellow curtains was
900 metres long. Allowing for variations in population density in the different
quartiers, this would give the streets in question a total hunchback population of
thirteen.
     A fictional sleuth might have interviewed the local haberdasher, interrogated the
informant as a possible source of red herrings or examined the muddy street for the tell-
tale prints of a female hunchback. But since this was real life, where the tediously
simple and the impossibly confused left little room for tidy puzzles, Vidocq recorded
over one hundred and fifty pairs of yellow curtains in his notebook, then trudged up and
down the same number of staircases, knocking at doors. The result was a handy address
list of ‘ravishing’ seamstresses, but no hunchback and no Fossard.
     It transpired that the yellow curtains must have gone to the cleaners, and that
Fossard no longer lived along the Rue Poissonnière. However, so dense and
intertwined were the threads of mutual acquaintance, daily routines and knowledge of
neighbours’ doings, and so tirelessly did Vidocq wear out his shoe-leather on the
cobbles, that even if the report had falsely specified green curtains and a one-armed
seamstress, he would still have found his man.
     He eventually caught Fossard–just in time for the New Year–by asking hundreds of
questions, spending a small taxpayers’ fortune in bribes, disguising himself as a
coalman and, finally, by pouncing on Fossard ‘with the speed of a lion’. Fossard went
back to Bicêtre, and from there to the hulks of Brest. No doubt, like most convicts, he
managed to escape, but the coal-blackened face of the colossal Vidocq had put the fear
of Satan in him, and the Sûreté Brigade was never troubled by Fossard again.


THE ULTIMATELY disappointing case of the yellow curtains is a good example of
what might be termed the early Vidocq method of investigation. Ever since his boyhood
in Arras, he had been paring down his modus operandi to a few infallible devices. His
first theft had involved the use of a glue-coated feather, fed through the crack of the
cash-box in his parents’ bakery–a crime as difficult to explain as it was tedious to
commit. Since the feather extracted only the smallest of small change, he resorted to a
false key, and when the key was confiscated by his father, he used a pair of pliers,
wrecked the box, grabbed the cash and walked ‘very quickly’ to the next town.
     These simple means were well suited to the urban villages that made up early-
nineteenth-century Paris. But the city was growing by the day: in some quartiers, even a
concierge or a police spy could barely keep abreast of the influx of strangers. In the
sixteen years during which Vidocq ran the Sûreté Brigade (1811–27), the population of
Paris increased by over one hundred thousand. The drainage system grew by ten
kilometres, the hills of rubbish turned into mountains, and streets that had never
wandered far from their medieval origins reached out into the countryside like the veins
of a gigantic parasite. Soon, it would take something more than mere persistence to
stretch the net of public safety over the whole crime-ridden metropolis.


     3. The Case of the Six Thousand Missing Criminals

                          20 June 1827, 6 Petite Rue Sainte-Anne

ONLY A BUREAUCRAT with a heart of stone would have felt no pity for the fifty-two-
year-old man who sat alone in his office that Wednesday in June, hunched over a large
desk on which a single sheet of paper remained. That musky suite of rooms under the
shadow of the Sainte-Chapelle had been his home for the last sixteen years, and the
little platoon of twenty-eight men and women–scribes, spies and half-reformed
convicts–had been the only family he had known since he left his parents’ bakery as a
boy. He had grown to love the accommodating file cabinets, the capacious wardrobe
that would have been the envy of a boulevard theatre and the little galley where, at any
hour of the day or night, a convict’s mistress cooked the meals that kept them on the trail
of criminals.
      Commissioner Henry, who had been like a father to him, had retired to devote
himself to fishing, and his departure had caused a flurry of administrative manoeuvrings.
In his place, the Minister had appointed a neat and tidy young man with a heart of stone,
who had begun to investigate Vidocq’s distant and not-so-distant past. Rather than await
the outcome of the investigations, Vidocq had decided to tender his resignation. He
signed the sheet of paper, and left the office for what seemed likely to be the last time.
As he passed along the glass-covered arcade, lugging a trunk full of documents, he
wondered how his successor as Head of the Sûreté–an ex-convict known as Coco
Lacour–would manage to match his impressive record of arrests.
      Vidocq had brought to justice enough criminals to sink a prison ship. His name was
a household word, and he was somewhat inconveniently famous as a master of disguise
from Cherbourg to Marseille. He had solved so many cases that to the tradesmen, cab
drivers, clerks and, for that matter, criminals, who read about his exploits in the
newspapers, nothing seemed quite as innocent as before. That feeble old woman might
be a secret agent on a case, and that loaf of bread she was carrying might be an
improvised valise containing a loaded pistol and a pair of handcuffs.
      It is a tribute to Vidocq’s efficiency that when he left the Sûreté, most of the
mysteries that remained unsolved concerned Vidocq himself. Why, for instance, were
his hands covered with blood when his former mistress Francine was found with five
stab-wounds inflicted by his knife–a knife, admittedly, that she later claimed in a signed
statement to have borrowed for a suicide attempt? Why was an ex-convict, who was
known to be a habitual gambler, put in charge of the Police des Jeux, which supervised
casinos? And how did he manage to retire from the Sûreté in June 1827, with almost
half a million francs, when his annual salary was only five thousand francs?
      One case was so mysterious that it seems to have escaped attention altogether, and
it is especially unfortunate that the lack of evidence makes it the shortest case of all.
      The mystery is this: the number of people Vidocq arrested each year far exceeds the
annual number of convictions for crimes against the person or against property in the
entire Seine département. In one year, the Sûreté Brigade arrested seven hundred and
seventy-two murderers, thieves, forgers, conmen, escaped convicts and miscellaneous
miscreants. Even subtracting the forty-six unexplained arrests made ‘by special
warrant’, and the two hundred and twenty-nine ‘vagabonds and thieves’ who were
expelled from Paris, this leaves a very large number of criminals who do not appear in
the official statistics. Even at a conservative estimate, in the sixteen years of Vidocq’s
reign, the number of criminals arrested by the Sûreté, but unaccounted for in the official
statistics, is approximately 6,350. At this rate, it would have taken fewer than fifteen
Vidocqs to arrest every criminal in the country.
      If Commissioner Henry had devoted his well-earned retirement to writing his
memoirs instead of fishing in the Seine, he might have explained that Vidocq was more
dangerous as a detective than he ever was as a crook, and that, by casting the eerie light
of crime over the whole city, he created a demand for people like himself: legalized
avengers who would give the taxpayers their money’s worth by cleaning up the streets.
He might have granted Vidocq his proper place in history, and hailed him as the man
who reinvented crime-fighting as a means of controlling the innocent population…But,
as Vidocq may have reflected that June morning, as he set down his trunk on the Quai
des Orfèvres to take a swig from his brandy-flask, a true genius is never recognized by
his contemporaries.


         4. The Case of the Mysterious Unpleasantness

                           17 October 1840, 13 Galerie Vivienne

SOME TIME AFTER Vidocq’s departure from the Sûreté, that characteristically
Parisian breed known as badauds (‘gawkers’), who had nothing better to do than stand
and stare, as though any object, whether living or lifeless, might become interesting if
stared at long enough, began to notice Xs–sometimes accompanied by Os–marked in
white chalk on the walls of certain houses. If a particularly patient badaud had lingered
within sight of one of the single Xs, he might eventually have seen a man or a woman
take a piece of white chalk and inscribe an O beside the X before disappearing down
the street or behind the brick column of a public urinal; and, if he followed the
mysterious defacer of public property, he might in due course have found himself in one
of the plusher parts of Paris, under a glassy arcade thronged with people who, like
himself, had nothing better to do than stand and stare.
     The Galerie Vivienne had been built in 1823 as a speculative venture. It quickly
became one of the busiest arcades on the Right Bank. On a summer evening, Parisians
out for a stroll would leave the dazzling sun on the boulevard and plunge into its
gleaming shadows to feast their eyes on chocolates and pralines and miniature armies of
petits-fours, or to gaze at the frills and ornaments that were displayed like holy relics
under the nymphs and goddesses of the rotunda. A man could smoke a cigarette there on
a rainy day while examining the curves and unexpected vistas of the marble galleries
and the pretty women who came to shop for lingerie and the latest fashions. Like an
elegant marquise, the Galerie Vivienne had a sort of indestructible frivolity, and its
fame as the centre of Paris fashions spread far beyond the city. The words ‘Galerie
Vivienne’ appeared like a sacred motif on beautifully wrapped bandboxes that were
delivered to ladies in provincial towns when their husbands were away. It was, in
short, the sort of place a woman could safely visit on her own without arousing
suspicion.
     That Saturday afternoon, a young woman, who will have to remain nameless,
entered the Galerie Vivienne and passed through the monumentally respectable entrance
of no. 13. She climbed the magnificent, swirling staircase where windows set high in
the marbled wall made it possible to look onto the stairs without being seen. She
knocked at a door and was ushered into the comfortable office of the man who was
described on the metal plaque, the headed notepaper and in countless advertisements as
‘Ex-chief of the special Sûreté police, which he directed for 20 years with undisputed
success’.
     The Bureau of Universal Intelligence at 13 Galerie Vivienne was the world’s first
private detective agency, founded two decades before Allan Pinkerton, ‘the Vidocq of
the West’, launched his National Detective Agency in Chicago. It offered a range of
discreet services: ‘Prosecutions and debt-collection, intelligence of every sort,
surveillance, and investigations in the interests of business and families.’ Other
agencies had sprung up in imitation, but none of them had prospered, as the Bureau’s
prospectus cheerfully explained:

        All those who tried to imitate me have come to grief, and were bound to fail.
     ‘The Alarm-Bell’ was melted down in the prisons of Mézières. ‘The Lighthouse of
     Commerce’ was snuffed out in the cells of Bicêtre. ‘The Illuminator’ shed so much
     light on its own shady dealings that it went to jail for several months. Their
     successors will inevitably fail in their turn.


    To some minds, there was a touch of menace in the Bureau’s advertising. It was
almost as if a blackmailer had extended his operation to the entire commercial world of
Paris…

        Certain businessmen who subscribed to my Bureau for several years, and then
     saw fit to discontinue their subscription, found that, no sooner had they dispensed
     with my experience and advice, than they fell prey to rogues.


    But since the Bureau performed such useful services, and since a more liberal
government was preventing the police from interfering in family affairs, it enjoyed some
powerful protection. It had a huge database of file-cards on every known criminal–and
several thousand law-abiding citizens too–and a team of specialized sleuths: ‘the
Cyclops’, ‘the Faun’, ‘the Man-about-Town’, and a very tall detective who could peer
through first-floor windows without using a ladder. Even when the Bureau was raided,
and more than two thousand old Sûreté files relating to the years 1811–27 were
confiscated, its filing-system was feared by politicians as much as Vidocq’s fists were
feared by criminals.
    The Bureau’s ‘undisputed success’ had not come easily. The house rules, which
were prominently displayed in the director’s office, gave some idea of how difficult it
was to work with agents who had acquired their skills and manners in prison-cells and
slums:

        Employees must always be dressed in a clean and respectable fashion, and
     especially not have muddy shoes.

         Employees must be equipped at all times with necessary items such as knives,
     rulers, pens, etc., and must always leave their desk tidy.

         Drunkenness and gambling, those two shameful vices, will be severely
     repressed. Eating and drinking, smoking and chewing tobacco are forbidden in the
     offices, as is anything unconnected with the service.
        Any employee who writes on the walls, notice-boards, windows, etc., will be
     punished with a fine three times the cost of the damage.

         Documents and notes are to be turned face down in the office so that prying
     eyes cannot read them. Anyone who can prove that his comrade has divulged the
     details of a case to him will be rewarded with the day’s pay of the one who
     blabbed.


The final rule would have been of particular interest to a badaud. It pertained to
‘external operations’. When a house was under surveillance, the agent was to mark the
nearest street corner with an X. ‘To this effect, white chalk will always be at his
disposal.’ When he left the house to follow a subject or to ‘satisfy a need’, he was to
mark the wall with an O. In this way, the director could monitor his agents’ activities
and take punitive action where necessary.
     It is fortunate, in a sense, that the Bureau was closed down in 1843 and its files
dispersed. Some of the paperwork found its way to government offices and, from there,
eventually, to second-hand bookshops and archival collections. One of the salvaged
records appears to be the office copy of a letter that the young woman in the Galerie
Vivienne had received that Saturday. (In 1840, there were six deliveries a day, so that a
letter posted in Paris to an address in the city before 9 a.m. would arrive before noon.)
     The letter was sufficiently disconcerting to bring the addressee to Vidocq’s office.
It was written on the usual headed paper, with the Bureau’s motto beneath the address:

                               20 FRANCS A YEAR
                 Give protection from the wiles of the wiliest rogues.

     Mademoiselle,
                   Having a matter to discuss that concerns you and that might cause you
     some unpleasantness and expense, please take the trouble to drop by my office on
     receipt of this letter.
         Respectful regards,
It would be too much to hope that a case requiring such discretion should be transparent
in all its details after so much time. The envelope has not survived, and the woman’s
address is unknown. There is as much chance of identifying Vidocq’s client as there is
of seeing Vidocq himself emerge from the offices of the historical preservation society
that now occupies no. 13 Galerie Vivienne. However, the Bureau’s copy of the letter at
least makes it possible to follow the progress of the case over the following week.
     Several notes were scrawled across it. The first, in thick, clumsy characters
suggesting a quill gripped by a fist, says: ‘She won’t pay more than 2 francs a month.’
Then, in another hand, ‘Wrote on 19 Feb. 1841 to pay’. Another note, in the first hand,
says, ‘A note to find out the lady’s possition [sic].’ The final note says, ‘Made note on
23 February’.
     No further information is available. The precise nature of the ‘unpleasantness’ to
which the young woman was exposed must remain a mystery, and we shall never know
whether or not her two francs a month were considered sufficient payment, nor in what
manner the Bureau of Universal Intelligence intended to offer her protection from ‘the
wiles of the wiliest rogues’…


                5. The Case of the Bogus Revolution

        6 June 1832, Île de la Cité, to 11 May 1857, Rue Saint-Pierre-Popincourt

ONLY A MAN who had hidden himself in piles of rubbish and watched the same door
or alleyway for days on end would have known how many obscure dramas were wiped
from the history of Paris by demolition and urban renewal. Street corners and
crossroads were the synapses of a gigantic, convoluted brain, and when, in 1838,
Prefect Rambuteau began to cut through the living tissue of ancient lanes to create the
broad, hygienic street that bears his name, large parts of the city’s memory were lost
without trace.
     Since Vidocq was occasionally employed on special missions, even after the
demise of his detective agency, he could certainly have written something more
revealing than his ‘pocketbook for decent people’, Thieves: A Physiology of Thievish
Behaviour and Language (1837). He might, for instance, have written a practical
manual for army officers and would-be heads of state. He might have shown that anyone
who wished to conquer France should first control the capital, and that, in order to
control the capital, he should assemble at certain key points in the city the following
items: two carts, some tables, chairs, bed-frames and doors, several mattresses, and
some well-chosen rubbish untouched by rag-pickers. Since few streets were more than
seven metres wide, a collection of such materials could quickly reach a first or a
second floor. In this way, a whole battalion could be held at bay.
     In a later chapter, he might have shown that in order to confirm the change of
regime, and to damp down the fires that had forged the new administration, the head of
state should provoke another revolution, and then repress it.
     On 5 June 1832, one of the last victims of the cholera epidemic, the popular
republican orator General Lamarque was being taken to his final resting-place by one of
the largest funeral processions ever seen in Paris. Rumours had been spreading since
the morning that the funeral would be the occasion of a royalist revolt. The liberal
monarchy, which had been established by a three-day Revolution in July 1830, was
threatened by discontented royalists on one side and disgruntled republicans on the
other. Strangely, though, despite its fear of a further republican uprising or a royalist
counter-revolution, the government did nothing to prevent the crowds from assembling,
and when a colossal man appeared on a horse, waving a red flag and a Phrygian bonnet,
no soldier or policeman intervened until panic had begun to spread.
     Three hours later, half of Paris was choked with barricades, and a handful of
intrepid men, dressed in the style of blood-red revolutionaries, were calling on citizens
to resist the royalist revolt.
     A cynic might have said that this chaotic revolt was a stroke of luck for the new
regime. By dawn, many of the rioters had been killed or captured, and the rebellion was
concentrated in the narrow streets around the church of Saint-Merri. It was there, as
readers of Victor Hugo’s Les Misérables know, that the final scenes of that bloody
drama were acted out. Order was restored by government troops, who fired cannon at
the bulwarks of mattresses, and smashed their way through partition walls to fire on the
barricades from upper windows. Any general would have realized that a battle
concentrated in such a small area would not eradicate the threat for good. Many of the
troublemakers slipped through the cordon and escaped across the rooftops. But there
was no doubt that, after the events of 5–6 June 1832, Paris was safer for the monarchy
than before.


SURVEYING PARIS that morning from the Île de la Cité, a keen observer would have
seen the clouds of gun-smoke and pulverized rubble rise over the impenetrable mass of
roofs to the north. But he might also have heard sounds of fighting closer to hand. While
the massacre was taking place across the river at Saint-Merri, barricades had appeared
in the narrow lanes of the island, behind the Quai des Orfèvres. They were first noticed
at about ten o’clock that morning, by which time, according to every history of the 1832
revolt, all resistance was confined to the Right Bank.
     As they retreated from the massacre and fled across the river, several bands of
rioters were alerted to the presence of barricades on the Île de la Cité by men who
seemed to have a precise knowledge of the ebb and flow of the battle. Since the
barricades occupied a position of clear strategic importance between the government
buildings on the Right Bank and the army of starving workers and seditious students in
the Latin Quarter, the insurrection was quickly reignited in the heart of the old city.
     If any of the men and women who rushed to defend those barricades had paused to
examine them, they might have noticed something odd about their architecture and
composition. The barricades had firm foundations, as though the builders had
manoeuvred the carts into position according to some unwritten principle of barricade
construction. There was an unusual preponderance of desks and file cabinets forming
neat courses with bridged joins and buttresses, and, running along the top, a row of
cartwheels and chairs that served as coping-stones and battlements. If the battle had
been long in coming, the insurgents might have realized that a barricade in a maze of
alleyways could be attacked from several directions at once, or isolated from the
neighbouring barricades by a handful of troops. They might have flushed out the
occupants of the houses that looked down on the barricades, and picked off any snipers
who squatted behind the chimneys and the mansards. Any such precautions would, of
course, have been futile if some of the rebels defending the barricades had turned out to
be soldiers or policemen in disguise.
     In the absence of detailed records, it is hard to say exactly what happened that
morning under the shadow of the Sainte-Chapelle. The most explicit document is a letter
drafted by an unknown hand and signed by two hundred and fifty inhabitants of the
neighbouring streets (Rue de la Licorne, Rue de la Calandre and Rue de la Juiverie).
This testimonial, which was later produced by Vidocq in support of his application for
a government pension, praised ‘the zeal and courage of M. Vidocq’, who, though no
longer officially employed by the Sûreté, had somehow managed to capture the
‘malefactors’, and ‘cleaned up’ the quartier by ‘sweeping away the rabble’.
     The notion that the barricades on the Île de la Cité had been constructed under
Vidocq’s direction and manned by his agents provocateurs was expressed, long after the
events, by some of the revolutionaries who were captured that day on the barricades,
and then tortured and imprisoned. Some of the survivors later made attempts on
Vidocq’s life, and their testimony has always been considered unreliable.


SO MANY MURKY TALES are attached to Vidocq’s name that he seems to hover over
nineteenth-century Paris like a phantom. Governments that were increasingly sensitive
to public opinion, and inclined to farm their policing out to criminals, were bound to
find a man like Vidocq indispensable. There were probably few political pies in which
he did not have a finger. In 1846, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte (the future Napoleon III),
who had been imprisoned after bungling a coup d’état, escaped from the fortress of Ham
with the benefit of Vidocq’s advice. He fled to London, where Vidocq was sent to spy
on him, and where Vidocq also took the opportunity to advise him on his next coup
d’état. After the Revolution of 1848, and before Louis-Napoléon’s successful coup
d’état of 1851, he served Lamartine as a secret agent. Lamartine himself paid tribute to
the ex-convict, saying that he would have ‘mastered the situation with only Vidocq to
help’.
     The exact truth of these and other tales is almost impossible to separate from the
mass of rumour and misinformation. In a city as large and as volatile as Paris, where
ministries came and went like commuter trains, and whole quartiers disappeared from
one year to the next, a historian is reduced to sifting through piles of suspect evidence
like a rag-picker. Most of the documents have long since vanished, and many were
probably destroyed. Within minutes of Vidocq’s death in 1857, a squad of policemen
rushed to his house in the Marais and removed his files, leaving not a single clue by
which to solve the penultimate mystery: when news of his death reached the
newspapers, eleven women turned up at his home, each carrying a signed will that made
her the sole heir to his fortune.
     The old convict had remained slippery to the end. Some of the people who attended
his quiet funeral at Saint-Denys-du-Saint-Sacrement in the Marais might have been
forgiven for wondering whose body was in the coffin. The grave in Saint-Mandé
cemetery, marked with the half-erased inscription, ‘Vidocq, 18—’, is now known to
contain the body of a woman. It is most unlikely that Vidocq’s final resting-place will
ever be known, and there will probably never be a monument or even a street name to
commemorate the part he played in making Paris safe.
