TERMINUS: THE NORTH COL
WE REACHED BONDY on our touring bikes just as the sun was turning the Canal de
l’Ourcq into a ribbon of grey steel. That morning, we had set off from the Col du Donon,
which lies nine hundred and eighty feet below the highest peak of the Vosges mountains
in north-eastern France. For centuries, the col was used by Celtic tribes and Roman
legions passing between Germany and Gaul. Its importance as a crossing-point is
marked by the remains of a temple to Mercury and, on the southern ascent, by a
memorial to the passeurs who helped French prisoners to escape from the Nazis. From
there, we had spiralled down through the pine forests, over the Grendelbruch Pass, to
the valley of the Rhine and the city of Strasbourg, then crossed the plains of northern
France. By the time we reached Paris, we had covered five hundred and eighty-one
kilometres at an average speed of 92 kph, according to my GPS unit, which, in the
excitement of reaching Strasbourg railway station on time, I had forgotten to turn off.
     A canalside bike path starts near the Gare de l’Est. It crosses the toy-town science
park of La Villette, and passes under the baleful eyes of the neo-Gothic flour mills, the
Grands Moulins de Pantin, which, until 2003, sucked in all the wheat of the Brie and the
Beauce to feed the boulangeries of Paris. After Pantin, the piste cyclable wanders
through a maze of half-demolished buildings, past the hulks of abandoned factories
inexplicably ‘under video surveillance’, every window smashed and every surface
covered by graffiti-artists as resourceful and determined as property developers. Then,
rejoining the canal, it straightens out, and the speed picks up enough to change into the
big chain-ring. Suddenly, approaching Bondy and the bridges that carry the Périphérique
de l’Île-de-France, which marks the heliopause of the Paris system, we were pedalling
alongside the Métro. A train was slowing down before veering into the Bobigny–Pablo
Picasso station, and we could see the faces of passengers staring out at the open air.
     At that time of evening, the north-eastern banlieue looked like a promotional film
for home-buyers and investors. A Black African was walking along the tidy
embankment with a friend who appeared to be Kurdish; a little girl was gleefully
escaping from her parents on a tricycle. There was a startling absence of broken glass
on the towpath; the only danger was a fast dog chasing the figures-of-eight of a fresh
smell. After Bondy, where the canal swings north-east, in the cavernous gloom of yet
another road bridge, three teenage boys were standing, looking tough and nervy, deep in
some shared concern but obviously open to distractions. When they saw us coming, they
moved to one side, and, with a shout of recognition, cheerfully saluted Margaret
because she was wearing the red cap of a French cycling team, Brioches la Boulangère.
     We left the canal at a pedestrian bridge and rode for two kilometres through the
streets of Aulnay-sous-Bois. The Hôtel du Parc was a five-storey concrete dormitory
with a view of a car park. The Senegalese man at the reception desk sent us down to the
cellar to store our bikes; then he asked us where we had come from ‘like that’.
     Every cyclist enjoys the chance to shrug off an epic expedition and to extol the
miraculous efficiency of the bicycle, and so I told him, ‘This morning, we were on top
of the Vosges mountains; we cycled down to Strasbourg and took the TGV to the Gare
de l’Est.’
     The man looked slightly puzzled, his question evidently unanswered. ‘No, no,’ he
said, ‘I mean, how did you get here from the Gare de l’Est?’ ‘We cycled out along the
canal.’ His eyebrows shot up, and he almost shouted, ‘You came all the way here from
the Gare de l’Est–on your bikes?!’–‘Yes…’–‘Oh lálá! C’est fort, ça!’ (‘Blimey! That
beats everything!’) Shaking his head, he handed us our room key, and said again, ‘Ah!
C’est fort, ça!’
     It was not the fact of having cycled seventeen kilometres that amazed him but the
thought of actually traversing that solidified ocean of shunting yards, building sites,
cemeteries, schools, hospitals, stadiums, advertising space and infrastructure that joins
Paris to the banlieue. For some reason–personal challenge, GPS malfunction or an
inappropriate foreign way of doing things?–we had spurned the merciful oblivion of the
transport network to pursue our unimaginable course through the great abstraction.
     Next morning, with the rain bucketing down, the expedition may well have
appeared to verge on the eccentric. We cycled across the canal and the unfenced
railway tracks to Clichy-sous-Bois. After exploring the area around the EDF site where
the two boys had died, we headed back towards Paris. During one of the heavier
downpours, we stopped under a bridge where a dead smiley face in blue paint
announced the supremacy of ‘The Canal Brotherhood’ and the boys of ‘North Bondy’,
all of whom had sensibly remained indoors. We left the canal near the Périphérique de
l’Île-de-France and splashed along the main street of Drancy to the hideous apartment
blocks of La Muette. It was here that Jews from the Vel’ d’Hiv had been incarcerated in
1942. The buildings had been completed after the war as though nothing had happened.
The U-shaped block around the central courtyard survived the demolition of the towers
in the 1970s and is now used as ‘social housing’. Most of the five hundred people who
live there are waiting to be moved to less squalid accommodation. Some of them were
standing under the concrete awnings as though they were ready to leave at any moment.
     On a photograph taken that morning in Drancy, a complex expression on Margaret’s
usually sunny face suggests that this would never be counted among our favourite
springtime trips to Paris. Fortunately, the visit to the banlieue was just a prelude: we
were returning to Paris on a mission. Three months before, a chance discovery in a
Paris bookshop had turned up a tantalizing trace of something that had been lost for
many centuries. It had been one of the most important sites in Paris, and was in some
ways the foundation of all the city’s future glories.
     The rain eased off as we reached the edge of the eighteenth arrondissement.
Patches of eggshell-blue sky appeared above the Sacré-Cœur. It seemed as though the
conjunction of personal adventure and historical discovery would occur. Foolishly, I
uttered the ritual phrase, ‘Paris will never look the same again.’ Almost immediately, as
though the demon twin of Saint Christopher who accompanies every traveller had been
listening, we were lost. The eighteenth arrondissement, where I had lived as a teenager,
did not look the same, and the elementary GPS unit showed only a dithering line of dots
on a blank background. The streets that were crammed in between the railway lines in
the 1930s surreptitiously change direction whilst appearing to run straight. On what
turned out to be the tiny, disproportionately confusing Place Hébert, I unfolded the
flapping map of Paris, and, after a few more ritual phrases, we set off again in the
direction of the Porte de la Chapelle.


COMING FROM GRENOBLE, where the Alps rise up ‘at the end of every street’,
Stendhal was ‘disgusted’ by his first sight of Paris in 1799: ‘The environs struck me as
horribly ugly–there were no mountains!’ The capital of France was a geographical anti-
climax, a city built on sand and puddles. One of its grandest quartiers was called ‘the
Marsh’ (le Marais); its original name, Lutetia, was thought to be derived from a Gaulish
word for ‘mud’ or ‘swamp’. Every thirty years or so, the Seine, suffering from senile
amnesia, flooded half of Swampville in an attempt to get back to its old bed, which lies
a kilometre and a half to the north of the Île de la Cité, along the line of the Grands
Boulevards. The knobbly mounds of gypsum that rimmed the city were like a botched
imitation of the Seven Hills of Rome. During the nineteenth century, some of them were
even rounded off and flattened, as though town planners had taken Isaiah’s prophecy to
heart: ‘Every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made
straight’.
     In 1899, the popular geographer Onésime Reclus found some ironic consolation in
the fact that the Paris meridian exactly bisects the peak of Mount Bugarach, six hundred
and sixty-four kilometres to the south. He declared Mount Bugarach to be a Parisian
Pyrenee, ‘the Metropolitan Pic du Midi’: Paris had a mountain after all…But a
mountain that was invisible even from the Eiffel Tower on a clear day was a part of the
Parisian landscape only in the most abstract sense. Pending future upheavals of the Paris
Basin, the capital would have to be content with its grandly named little lumps:
Montmartre, Montparnasse, Montrouge, Montsouris and the Montagne-Sainte-
Geneviève.
     It was in January 2008, while browsing in a Latin Quarter bookshop, that I
discovered what appeared to be a mountain in one of the most densely populated parts
of Paris. It was such an unlikely discovery that I wanted to leave the shop at once, with
the precious information stored away and preserved, at least for a few days, from the
inevitable disappointment. Like every visitor to Paris, I had made ‘discoveries’ that
were known already to millions of people–the mysterious little attic room on the south
face of Notre-Dame overlooking the Seine, or the crenellated brick tower that hides in a
shrubbery near the western foot of the Eiffel Tower (a chimney left over from the old
hydraulic lifts). Then there were the discoveries that were purely archival–things that
had vanished so completely that the imagination had no purchase on the present: the
unmarked location of the guillotine that beheaded Marie-Antoinette, or the little-known
Isle Merdeuse (‘Shitty Island’) that used to lie in the Seine in front of what is now the
seat of the French parliament. And finally, there were all the discoveries that weren’t
discoveries at all, because, despite plausible real equivalents, they existed only in a
writer’s imagination: the seedy boarding house ‘in that vale of flaking plaster and
streams of black mud’ behind the Panthéon where Balzac’s Le Père Goriot begins, or
the curiosity shop on the Quai Voltaire where Raphaël de Valentin in La Peau de
chagrin acquires the magical ass’s skin that makes his every wish come true.
     This time, I felt sure that something real lay behind the excitement, and that, for
once, instead of simply hoarding the memory of its treasures, I would be giving
something back to Paris. The clue was an engraving made in 1685 by an anonymous
artist. It shows the village of La Chapelle (now part of the eighteenth arrondissement)
strung out along a ridge, its little houses silhouetted against a white sky under billowing,
rococo clouds. A hedge-lined road climbs up through neatly furrowed fields to a small
church tower that stands at the highest point: it was there that the road from Paris
crossed the main street through the village before dropping down on the other side.
     To anyone who has walked or cycled through France with a vision of the map’s
lines and symbols superimposed on the landscape, the engraving is instantly
recognizable as the picture of a col. Cols or mountain passes are a kind of international
velocipedal currency: the difficulty of a ride–or a stage of the Tour de France–is
measured by the number of cols it crosses, and even if the cols are only a few hundred
metres above sea level, a rider who has crossed them is entitled to feel that mountains
have been conquered. Often, they are marked by a chapel, a cross or a standing stone,
and, if officially recognized as cols, by a special road sign. A col–also known as a pas
(or a porte if it straddles a frontier)–is a gateway to another world. At cols, as at river
confluences and tribal boundaries, human history and physical geography are in closest
conjunction.
     Ever since hearing of a cyclists’ organization called the Club des Cent Cols, I had
been keeping a list of the cols we had crossed on our travels, accidentally or on
purpose. The Donon was number 215 on the list, and the Grendelbruch Pass number
216. A cyclist who has crossed at least a hundred different cols, ‘for personal pleasure’
rather than in a spirit of competition, can submit a complete list, and, provided that all
the cols appear in the club’s catalogue, the new member receives a colourful diploma
stating that the holder has, ‘on a cycle propelled by muscular force alone, climbed at
least 100 cols, including 5 over 2000 metres’.
     As Stendhal might have guessed, Paris lies in the middle of a col desert. While the
mountainous borderlands and the Massif Central have thousands of cols, there are
barely ten between the Vosges mountains and the hills of Normandy, and only one within
a day’s ride of Notre-Dame. This seems particularly sad since the introduction of the
‘Vélib’ self-service scheme in 2007. Every day, on lumpy grey bikes that might have
materialized from a children’s cartoon, thousands of Parisians rediscover their city’s
topography: the Avenue des Champs-É lysées is once again a hill, and ‘Montagne
Sainte-Geneviève’ is no longer a misnomer. Yet there is no official recognition of the
exploits of vélibistes, and nothing that allows pedalling Parisians to celebrate the
eminence of their city.
     The hypothetical pass at La Chapelle seemed to promise reparation. If the summit
of the road that climbs up from the Seine to cross the northern ridge was a col, then the
hills on either side of it–Montmartre and the Buttes-Chaumont–could legitimately be
counted as mountains…


IN JANUARY, a preliminary investigation on foot produced some encouraging
evidence. At the church of Saint-Denys-de-la-Chapelle, opposite the Hollywood Video
shop and the Sex in the City club, the road slopes down on either side. The old Roman
road from the south and the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis converged at what is now the
Marx Dormoy Métro station. In the other direction, the road descends gently to the plain
of Saint-Denis where the gigantic medieval fair of Lendit was held. Some historians
believe that this convenient plateau above the marshes of Lutetia was the sacred ‘centre
of Gaul’ where, according to Caesar, Druids came from as far away as the
Mediterranean and Britannia to elect their supreme pontiff.
     La Chapelle still has the bustle and turbulence of a major crossing point. The main
street is a continual two-way procession of cars and trucks. With its jostling crowds and
tatty shops, it has more of the big city about it than the delicate stage sets of central
Paris. Across the road from the church, at the end of the Impasse du Curé, there is a
view through iron railings of the Sacré-Cœur on its ant-hill of roofs and chimneys. Far
below, trains from Picardy, Flanders and the Channel coast rattle through the deep
cutting towards the Gare de l’Est and the Gare du Nord.
     In the whispering gloom of the church, a parish history in the form of a small
brochure explained that this was the site where Saint Denis, who brought Christianity to
Lutetia, was buried along with his severed head: a shrine was raised there in 475 by
Saint Geneviève, the nun from Nanterre who had a genius for organizing military
resistance and famine relief. Evidently, she knew that martyrs should be buried at places
such as cols, through which travellers are forced to pass. Next door to the church, the
Joan of Arc basilica marks the site where, in 1429, the Maid of Orleans spent the night
before riding down to the gates of occupied Paris, and where she rested the following
night after receiving a crossbow bolt in the leg. The parish history was offered as ‘a
message of welcome and friendship’. We read it by the light of some votive candles. At
the top of page two, we discovered that someone had been there before us:

         The church was erected by the side of the great Gaulish road which, after
     crossing the Seine by the Île de la Cité, passes through a col between Montmartre
     and Ménilmontant, and proceeds to the town of Saint-Denis and beyond.


     The thrill of finding the first piece of corroborative evidence overcame the mild
disappointment of being beaten to the col. Three months later, this time with our
bicycles, we made what we thought was the first conscious two-wheeled ascent of
Paris’s only col. At the Porte de la Chapelle, we turned to face south, and set off up the
slope with a thousand other road-users. To mark the historic moment, I looked over at
the chapel as we reached the summit, but a furniture van was squeezing past, blotting out
the view, and the narrow strip of asphalt between its tyres and the kerb was of more
immediate interest. A lapse of concentration, and the expedition would have ended,
without even the consolation of an official commemorative plaque: ‘Died crossing the
Col de la Chapelle.’
     Then began the real challenge: how to have the col ratified by the Club des Cent
Cols. I knew this would not be easy. Every year, the club’s ‘Ethics, Reflection and
Proposal Committee’ publishes a list of ‘Rejected Cols’. Ridiculous as it might appear
to non-cyclists, some tourist offices try to attract cyclotouristes by exaggerating the
hilliness of their region. Some of them even conjure up non-existent cols and invite
cycling clubs and journalists to come and celebrate the erection of a sign. The Club des
Cent Cols has no patience with this sort of trickery. Typical entries in the list are:

        ‘Col des Cantonniers’ (Var): Invented, without local evidence, for promotional
     purposes. Contravenes article 11.

         ‘Col des Cyclotouristes’ (Savoie): Indistinct topography. Fabricated by local
     cyclists. Contravenes article 11.


     It turned out that there had been some discussion of the Parisian col after a member
of the club, on a visit to the ‘archaeological crypt’ of Notre-Dame, had noticed the
words ‘Col de la Chapelle’ painted on a papier-mâché relief map of ancient Paris. The
experts on the committee had decided that there was insufficient evidence, and the case
had been closed. The President answered my email as swiftly and efficiently as a racing
cyclist swerving past a pothole:

         This col has never been accepted. It is not shown on a map, nor is it named by
     a sign.


     At least his message left a glimmer of hope: ‘This col…’ Its existence was not
explicitly denied. Logically, then, the next step was to try to have the col inscribed on a
map and printed on a road sign.
     I wrote to the Institut Géographique National, electronically and then on paper,
including the proper coordinates, and some further evidence from research in the
library. It seemed that, back in the days when Prefects Rambuteau and Haussmann were
replacing murky alleyways with gas-lit boulevards, an archaeologist called Théodore
Vacquer, who resembled ‘a permanently curled hedgehog’, was snuffling through the
debris, trying to piece together a mental image of Lutetia. He found the Roman forum
under the Rue Soufflot, and the Roman arena by the Rue Monge. Vacquer was a digger,
not a writer, but a study extracted by a geographer from his enormous nest of notes and
sketches appeared after his death in 1912. There, for the first time, the existence of a
‘Pas de la Chapelle’ was revealed. Since then, a few geographers (but not
cartographers), stalking into the increasingly uncluttered past of Paris, across
Precambrian river beds and hills still wet with ancient seas, have written of the col that
lay on the prehistoric ‘tin route’ from Britannia to the Mediterranean.
     Weeks passed. Either an expedition to the lost col had set out from the IGN’s
headquarters at Vincennes and never returned, or my letter had continued its journey to a
recycling centre. In the meantime, I wrote to the mayor of the eighteenth arrondissement
and to the civic authorities at the Hôtel de Ville.
     A month later, a letter arrived from the IGN. It confirmed the ‘geographical and
topographical’ existence of a Parisian col–‘the lowest point between the Butte
Montmartre and the Buttes Chaumont’. However, ‘until now’, the writer teasingly went
on, the col has never appeared on an IGN map for two reasons: first, ‘the urban fabric is
very dense in this area’ second, ‘its name is not currently used by the local inhabitants’.
In other words, there were already too many place names on the map, and if an explorer
arrived at La Chapelle, asking for the col, he would be met with blank stares (unless, of
course, he happened to ask a geographer or the man who wrote the parish history).
     I waited in vain for replies from the municipal officials, who might not have shared
the cartographic scruples of the IGN. But by then, it no longer seemed to matter. A
galvanized col sign embedded in the asphalt of La Chapelle would have been nothing
but a quaint impediment, a photo opportunity for vélibistes, a slightly more durable form
of graffiti–assuming that room could have been found for it among all the other sobering
statements of urban fact: ‘PASSAGE INTERDIT’, ‘FIN DE ZONE TOURISTIQUE’,
‘VOUS N’ AVEZ PAS LA PRIORITÉ’, etc.
     Something had been obvious all along: the city, built by human beings, is indifferent
to their desires. It shows them the solid form of their fictions, their tales of intimacy and
glory, of love and everlasting pride, the legends and stories that only one person ever
knew or that recruited generations to their make-believe. It educates even the most
successful megalomaniacs in the smallness of their dreams. Paris shows its true face
from the top of the Tour Montparnasse, where guards patrol the suicide fence. Most of
that galactic scatter of illuminations reaching out to the horizons is darkness.
     Every living city is a necropolis, a settling mountain of populations migrating
downwards into the soil. Kings, queens and emperors are only its servants. They help it
to erase even the possibility of memory. The sites of commemoration built by Napoleon
III buried acres of history. A boulevard named after a battle obliterated the mementos of
a million lives, and, at the end of his reign, the Archives Nationales went up in flames.
     Five thousand miles from Paris, on an island in the South Atlantic, Napoleon
Bonaparte dreamed of what he might have done, ‘given only twenty years and a little
spare time’. In the telescopic eyes of exile, Paris was an orb that he had held in his
hand. If only time had served him, the old city would have vanished: ‘You would have
looked for it in vain. Not even vestiges would have remained.’
     On Saint Helena, Napoleon rummaged through his past: the docking of the riverboat
under the towers of the Île de la Cité, the crowds that clogged the narrow streets, the
École Militaire and the Palais-Royal. He remembered a day in the terrible year of
1792. The alarm bells were ringing, and there were rumours of a great upheaval. A
ragged army was surging out of the faubourgs towards the Tuileries. He left his hotel in
the Rue du Mail and headed for the quartier of slums and ruined mansions between the
Louvre and the Carrousel. An ugly gang of ruffians was parading a pikestaff on which a
head had been impaled. Noticing the young captain with his clean hands and laundered
clothes, they challenged him to shout ‘Vive la nation!’–‘which, as you can imagine, I
hastened to do’.
     He went on to the Place du Carrousel, where he entered the house of a friend. The
building had been turned into a kind of warehouse: it was packed with the belongings of
aristocrats who had fled the country, taking whatever money was offered for their
furniture, their trinkets and their family portraits. He made his way upstairs, through the
debris of the world that was passing away, and looked out of a window: the rabble
were storming the Tuileries Palace, butchering the Swiss Guards. From that window, as
though from the balcony of a theatre, he witnessed the end of the French monarchy.
Years later, on evenings when the Emperor prowled the streets of Paris in disguise,
eavesdropping, inspecting the faces of Parisians for clues to the world he was creating,
he looked for the house where so much history had been emblazoned on his mind. But
his orders for the renovation of the quartier had been so swiftly carried out, and ‘so
many great changes had taken place there that I was never able to find it again’.


THE COL DE LA CHAPELLE is still unrecorded on the map, and there is still no
mountain in Paris. Unlike human beings, an accident of geography requires no
commemoration, and perhaps, as the IGN’s letter suggested, it no longer exists. In the
nineteenth century, the railways passed through the col, almost flattening it as they went.
The cutting changed the landscape; white steam erupting from the locomotives formed
new skies above La Chapelle, fashioning new routes for the imagination–a strand of
pavement, a palace of chimneys, a procession of ghosts on a black canal. In 2010, only
the volume of traffic testifies to the col’s importance. This brainstem of the future city,
where travellers passed even before there was a settlement on the island in the Seine, is
now the route that is taken by the Eurostar from London. Anyone curious to know the
site should look for it on the left side of the Paris-bound train, shortly after the engine
sheds marked ‘Gare du Landy’ (from the ‘Lendit’ fair at the fabled centre of Gaul). As
the train reaches the summit, there is a faint sensation of the motors’ tug and release, but
the col is easy to miss, since the carriages pass over it when the announcement has
already been made–‘Nous arriverons dans quelques instants ála Gare du Nord’–and it
is time to put away the book, gather up the luggage and prepare to meet the miraculous
creation where even the quietest street is crowded with adventures.
