DEPARTURE
BY THE TIME I reached Paris, the Bastille had disappeared. The map supplied by the
tourist agency clearly showed a ‘Place de la Bastille’ in the east of the city, but when I
emerged from the Métro at the station called ‘Bastille’, there was nothing to see but an
ugly green column. Not even the vestige of a ruin remained. On the base of the column
was a date in dirty gold lettering–‘JUILLET 1830’–and an inscription praising citizens
who had died in the defence of ‘libertés publiques’. The French Revolution, I knew, had
taken place in 1789. Evidently, this was some other revolution. But if the King and the
aristocrats had been guillotined, who had massacred the defenders of liberty in 1830?
The monument offered no explanation. Later, an older boy at school told me of yet
another revolution, which I had missed by only seven years.
     For my birthday, my parents had given me a week’s holiday in Paris. The package
included a room in a small hotel near the École Militaire, some clues to monuments and
cheap restaurants, a voucher for a boat-ride on the Seine, and a coupon to be redeemed
at the Galeries Lafayette for a free gift. My suitcase contained what seemed an
excessive amount of clothing, some emergency provisions, and a second-hand copy of
the works of Charles Baudelaire. This was my guide to all the mysteries and indefinable
experiences that filled the space between the famous sights. I read the ‘Tableaux
parisiens’ and the chapter on ‘L’Héroïsme de la vie moderne’: ‘Parisian life is bursting
with wonderful, poetic subjects: the miraculous envelops us; we breathe it in like the
atmosphere, but we do not see it.’ Deciphering Baudelaire in a café near the Tour Saint-
Jacques, with the rain blurring the faces on the street, dissolving the Gothic stones into
misty air, I was quite certain that I could see it.
     During that week, I made a number of other interesting discoveries. I found the little
cottage across the river from the Eiffel Tower where Balzac had hidden from his
creditors to write La Comédie Humaine. I climbed up towards the white dome of the
Sacré-Cœur, and found a provincial village full of cheerful cafés and artists all forging
the same paintings. I walked through the Louvre for hours, forgetting to eat and
remembering almost nothing. I found medieval streets that were paved with sand, and
pondered graffiti that seemed to have been written by highly educated people with
serious political opinions. I walked past limbless beggars in the Métro, and, in
quartiers not mentioned in the pocket guide to Paris, I saw women of the kind described
in ‘Tableaux parisiens’.
     On the first day, after trying to practise the language I had understood to be French,
I decided that Paris was best experienced in a state of silent contemplation. It turned out
to be possible to walk from one side of the city to the other in half a day, and I did this
several times, until I began to plan my days by marking numbers on the bus-map. By the
end of the week, numbers 27, 38 and 92, and most other routes that ran buses with open
rear platforms, were old acquaintances. I left the boat-ride to the last day, and slept
through part of it. When I boarded the airport bus at Les Invalides with a bulging case of
second-hand books, some of which I suspected of being priceless treasures, I had seen
so many sights that I felt only slightly guilty about leaving my free gift uncollected at the
Galeries Lafayette.
     One of the most important discoveries came too late to be of use. On the plane
home to Birmingham, an American gentleman struck up what he must have hoped would
be a conversation. He asked if I had seen something called the Latin Quarter. I told him I
had not (though I later found out that I had). ‘Well,’ he said, ‘you’ll have to go back! If
you haven’t seen the Latin Quarter, you haven’t seen Paris.’
     The following year, I returned with enough money for two weeks, determined to
find a job, which I did, after three weeks, and then stayed for six months. Later, I came
to know Paris well enough to realize that I would never really know it. The sight of a
heavy porte cochère closing on an inner courtyard seemed to be a characteristically
Parisian sight. I made some Parisian friends, most of whom had not been born in Paris
but who were proud to think themselves Parisian. They showed me places I was never
able to find again on my own, and they shared a certain Parisian art de vivre: sitting in
traffic jams as a form of flânerie, parking illegally as a defence of personal liberty,
savouring window displays as though the streets were a public museum. They taught me
the tricky etiquette of pretending to argue with waiters, and the gallantry of staring at
beautiful strangers. As a student, I read novels and histories, and tried to match the
information to the visible facts. I learned to distinguish one revolution from the next.
Eventually, I was able to explain the column in the Place de la Bastille, and I could
even understand some of the political graffiti. But there was always something
cumbersome and incongruous about this deliberately acquired knowledge. It was the
baggage of a historical tourist. I read all seven thousand entries in Jacques Hillairet’s
Dictionnaire historique des rues de Paris, and gazed at all the photographs, but in the
open air of Paris, the most brazenly illuminated monument was still a labyrinth on many
levels. Even when my French had improved enough for eavesdropping, the crowds on
the boulevards and the faces at windows were reminders that a changing metropolis
with a population of millions can never be comprehended by a single person.


THE ADVENTURES that follow were written as a history of Paris recounted by many
different voices. The book begins at the dawn of the French Revolution, and ends a few
months ago. There are also some excursions to the medieval and prehistoric past. It
traces the spread of the city from the island in the Seine that was the home of the Parisii
tribe to the mushrooming suburbs that inspire more fear today than when they were
patrolled by highwaymen and wolves.
     The idea was to create a kind of mini-Human Comedy of Paris, in which the history
of the city would be illuminated by the real experience of its inhabitants. Each tale is
true, and each is complete in itself, but there are also correspondences and crossroads,
both literal and mysterious, which serve as landmarks in time and space. Certain
districts and buildings reappear at different stages, seen through different eyes,
transformed by events, obsessions, visionaries, architects and the passing of time.
     No completely accurate map of Paris existed until the end of the eighteenth century,
and few people wandered far from their own quartier. Even today, the discovery of
Paris, or of any great city, entails a degree of disorientation and distraction. A pattern of
streets, a certain topographical texture, a combination of climate, smell, building-stone
and the flurry of humanity create a particular sense of reality. Every vision of the city,
however private or eccentric, belongs to its history as much as its public ceremonies
and monuments.
     A single viewpoint would have turned these representative adventures into a
scripted tour. Narrative devices and perspectives were naturally suggested by a place, a
historical moment or a personality. Each tale was written with a flavour of the time in
mind; it demanded its own explanations and imposed its own forms of courtesy to the
past. Descriptions of the architectural transformations of Paris, the development of its
police force and government, its infrastructure and housing, its recreations and
revolutions, are there primarily because they serve the purposes of the tale. Nothing has
been artificially inserted, and no one–except Baron Haussmann, Adolf Hitler and some
Presidents of the Republic–discourses on the evolution of the drainage system or the
transport network.
     A tourist who follows an uncharted course like a train of thought, only later, after
retracing the puzzle of streets on a map, recognizes how much knowledge can adhere to
the accidental experience. I have tried to replicate the convenient, mnemonic effect of a
long walk, a bus ride or a personal adventure, to create a series of contexts to which
more detailed information can be attached. Almost every historian of Paris notes the
impossibility of giving a complete account of the city, and I am quite confident of having
made this impossibility even more obvious than usual. This book is not intended as a
substitute for analytical histories of Paris, some excellent examples of which are
currently in print. But it is not as remote from traditional history as it might first appear.
It required as much research as The Discovery of France, which was devoted to the
other eighty-five per cent of the population, and the intention was not to treat hard-won
historical data as an amorphous mass of modelling clay. Above all, it was written for
the pleasure of thinking about Paris, and I hope that it will be read for the same purpose,
which is why an impartial historian should point out that, in the time that it takes to read
this book, it would be possible to decipher every gravestone in the Père-Lachaise
cemetery, sit at every terrasse de café between the Place de l’Étoile and the Place de la
Sorbonne, ride a dozen different buses from departure to terminus, or examine every
book-box from the Quai de la Tournelle to the Quai Malaquais.
