REGRESSION
                                          7
AS FAR AS ANYONE KNEW, the head had last been seen in the attics of the École de
Médecine. It was an unusual item, not the sort of thing that would have been easily
mislaid or confused with something else. Unlike its neighbours–most of whom were
prehistoric bipeds, chimpanzees, murderers and lunatics–it was fully fleshed. Its owner
had not been dug out of a neglected graveyard or eaten by his enemies. He had been a
great leader, who had forged tiny nations into a powerful and righteous alliance, and
dealt a mighty blow to French national pride and interests.
     This much was known for certain: the head had been shipped to the Ministère de la
Marine in Paris. From there, it had been sent across the Seine to M. Broca’s little
museum at the École de Médecine, where it might have proved useful to scholars as
they stumbled towards a better understanding of the advance and occasional regression
of the human race.
     What was done with heads when they decayed or were no longer required by
science, no one could say, and so there was quite a flurry of paperwork and rummaging
in old storerooms when Prime Minister Rocard acceded to the request of independence
movements to have the head of their historic leader returned to the home of his
ancestors.
     That was in 1988. A century and a decade had passed since the head had arrived in
Paris, and the science that had looked to skulls for a measure of its own state of
civilization had long since been discarded as jiggery-pokery. A few objects bearing
some relation to the head had appeared at the Universal Exhibitions of 1878 and 1889,
but not the head itself, which would have been considered too precious a specimen to
be exposed to the rough and tumble of such an event. There were mummified remains, a
few tools and musical instruments, a crude bust of Victor Hugo and some weapons–
stone axes, spears and stolen rifles–that were described by the Bulletin of the
Geographical Society as ‘the last efforts of a doomed race, which, far from setting it
free, serve only to tighten its bonds and hasten the hour of its complete extinction’.
     Unfortunately, no record could be found of the head, and the negotiators from the
overseas territory had to return home with nothing but diplomatic documents and
promises. A Parisian newspaper, being less than sensitive to the political aspirations of
the former colony, joked that, once again, the administration of Prime Minister Rocard
had ‘lost its head’.


                                            6
NEWS OF THE INSURRECTION had reached Paris with an even longer delay than
usual. The telegraph wires had been cut, and the postal service to Sydney (five days in
fair weather) had been interrupted. The first detailed list of victims appeared in the
Figaro before the government received the news. A Figaro reader who had sailed from
Nouméa after the first troubles had sent it on the packet from the Sandwich Islands. The
list was divided into settlers, civil servants, gendarmes, freed prisoners, deportees and
domesticated natives. In all, there were one hundred and thirty-six names. The brief
descriptions gave readers in Paris the impression of a peaceful colony that had been
struck by a terrible disaster: there were soldiers and policemen, but also a telegrapher,
a gardener, a road engineer, a deportee who served at the hotel and two families whose
little children had been murdered by the savages.
      Though the report explicitly denied that this had ever been the case, Nouméa itself
had been threatened. The capital of New Caledonia covered approximately the same
area as Paris, but it counted barely four thousand inhabitants, almost all of whom were
European. By normal standards, its fortifications were primitive. They had been
constructed by French and Algerian deportees from the penal colony on the Ducos
peninsula, which formed the northern shore of the harbour. The harbour was protected
by gun batteries and by the white coral reefs that placed a ring of silver around the
island, as well as by a mariner’s nightmare of little coves and marshy creeks. But an
attack from the interior was hard to repel. The bare hills that looked down on the
wooden town were surrounded by forests. When the man who kept watch from the
semaphore tower was butchered and eaten, his Kanak murderers could only be driven
back into the hinterland, where a dry haze hung over the Humboldt Massif. At the time
the troubles began, only a band of soldiers and a Basque shepherd with a flock of two
hundred sheep had safely traversed the southern part of the island, though several
explorers had reported helpful and inquisitive natives who indulged their cannibalistic
instincts only on special occasions.
      It had been obvious from the outset that, despite their willingness to defend their
farmsteads to the death, the colonists would provide insufficient reinforcements for the
garrison. And so the decision had been taken, with some misgivings on the part of the
Governor, to arm the convicts and the political prisoners. On 19 June, a settler called
M. Chêne had refused to return a native woman to her tribe and had been brutally
murdered. This first hint of a tribal uprising gave everyone a keen sense of their frailty
and common purpose. Hardened criminals who had been shipped to Nouméa in irons,
anarchists who had plotted the downfall of France and Algerian freedom fighters who
had tried to repel the French invader, all served with distinction–though a small number
of anarchists lived up to their reputation. Louise Michel, known as the Red Virgin,
showed Kanak tribesmen how to cut telegraph wires, and when their forests were set on
fire, some of the savages who hoped to escape by setting out across the Pacific Ocean in
canoes came to bid her farewell and were given the famous red scarf she had worn on
the barricades in Paris.
     Apart from this predictable reversion to type, the deportees behaved with
discipline and courage. The skills they had acquired in fighting the French were put to
good use, and the people of Nouméa, seeing the columns of smoke that rose above the
forests becoming ever more distant, felt reassured. The confederation of troops and
deportees marched against the slings and spears of the Kanak tribesmen, hunted them
down like wild boar and sterilized their fields with salt. Some tribes surrendered and
were deported to the islands that lay just beyond the northern horizon. Their wives were
given to enemy tribes. Between June and September 1878, fifteen hundred Kanaks were
shot, burned and starved to death. At least some good had come of the insurrection. The
Figaro of 17 November published a copy of the Governor’s letter to the Ministère de la
Marine:

         The attitude of the deportees was excellent, and, by their knowledge of the
     country, they rendered valuable service to the expeditionary columns. In view of
     their particular devotion, I would ask that the following be granted a complete
     pardon. [There followed the names of three deportees.]


     From an objective point of view, this boded well for the future of the colony.
Before long, settlers would be more preoccupied by the price of gold and nickel on the
international markets than by movements in the dark interior. The convicts and political
prisoners who had survived the first four years of exile would eventually be absorbed
by the rest of the population. The new quarter of Nouméa, known as ‘the Latin Quarter’,
would be a thriving community in some ways more civilized than its namesake.
     Even so, the uprising had come as a shock. The native population had been
carefully studied and incorporated into a growing body of scientific knowledge. Nature
had divided the islanders into geographical zones and assigned a colour to each group:
black (the primitive race) in the mountains, bronze in the valleys and plains, yellow in
the centre, reddish-brown on the coast and half-castes in the town. A live Kanak had
been taken to Paris, and although the ethnological findings were called into question
when he was shown to be mentally retarded, there was no doubting the inferiority of a
race that was unable to count beyond its ten fingers. Consequently, when the insurrection
had broken out in several different places at once, and when previously antagonistic
tribes had banded together under the leadership of Ataï, who was black, this had been
profoundly unsettling. Ataï had effectively created a national liberation movement, and
some of his reported sayings sounded remarkably like the self-righteous sarcasm of a
sans-culotte. He had promised to fence off his property and to respect the settlers’ land
rights ‘on the day he saw his yams rise out of the ground to go and eat the settlers’
cattle’.
     The blade of the guillotine that was shipped to Nouméa was the same that had been
used almost a century before to decapitate Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette. In the
event, it was not required. A price of two hundred francs was placed on the head of
Ataï. He was betrayed by a neighbouring tribe, and his encampment was surrounded.
After a ferocious battle in which he showed the courage of a wild animal, he was killed
with a spear, then beheaded with a knife. Such had been the savagery of the rebellion
that few regretted his grisly end. Settlers were demanding the complete eradication of
the native race. In view of the atmosphere that prevailed, it is hard to say whether the
head was shipped to the Ministère de la Marine as an anthropological specimen or as a
trophy of war.


                                           5
THE MASSACRES IN New Caledonia were reported on the inside pages of the
Figaro, after domestic politics and society gossip, ‘News from the Exhibition’, the
serial, the list of commonly misused words and the day’s weather. The violent doings of
savages on the other side of the world were of little concern to Parisians. The main
local interest lay in the behaviour of the deportees. Letters had been appearing in the
London Times, accusing the French government of cruelty to its own citizens. Political
prisoners who had escaped from the island by rowing out beyond the coral reefs to a
British schooner had published bitter accounts of their torture and captivity. The
successful repression of the Kanak revolt showed that, on the contrary, the colonial
experiment had been justified.
     The idea behind the experiment was simple but inspired: the terrorists who had
turned the City of Light into a beacon of barbarism should be sent to populate the new
colony. Removed from the cobbled canyons of Paris, and forced to till the soil of a
tropical paradise, they would be civilized by their contact with Nature. Then, in their
newly civilized state, they would help to civilize the natives.
     It had been a long and difficult process. To the exiles themselves, it had often
seemed that it was designed to achieve the exact reverse. They were held for many
months in the hulks of Brest and the Île d’Oléron, and given a communal trough of
beans, but no cutlery. On the dilapidated frigates that took them to Nouméa, they were
locked in metal cages on the gun deck–each deportee and his hammock took up less than
one cubic metre–and allowed out for half an hour each day. The Arab deportees were
given pork and wine, and lost the ability to walk. Four months after bidding farewell to
the coasts of Europe, they saw the bleak, green mountains of New Caledonia, which
look grey at a distance.
     Fifteen hundred deportees had been delivered to the penal settlements of the Ducos
peninsula and the Île Nou, where sadists avenged themselves for the hell of boredom to
which greed and exotic fantasies had led them. Three thousand others–those who had
been deported for life–were each given a thatched hut and a tiny plot. They were
forbidden from making or acquiring any tools. Instead, they used their nails, and
harvested radishes that were little more than filaments. If they sang songs, cut firewood
or tried to give lessons to each other, their huts were flattened and their gardens
destroyed. Forced into idleness, they exchanged their socialist ideals for other, more
practical aspirations. A man might improve his lot if he gave away a conspiracy or
reported a careless comment. He might spend a blessed day with a bottle of absinthe,
oblivious to the sun that fell like a stone, dozing peacefully under the muddled stars in a
pool of his own vomit.
     This is why the Kanak insurrection of 1878 was such a vital event for the young
colony, and why, in spite of the loss of European life, it brought fresh hope for the
future.


                                            4
THE FIGARO NEWSPAPER, whose offices had been vandalized by some of those
reluctant colonists seven years before (‘they were half drunk, because it was only
noon’), had taken the same line throughout the whole affair–from the panic that followed
the Battle of Sedan, to the Prussian siege of Paris and then the occupation of the city by
terrorists. The editor, who had been forced to sit out the troubles on the Côte d’Azur,
had called for the complete eradication of the socialist menace, but also for the
application of science to ‘the gangrene that has been eating away at Paris for the last
twenty years’.
     The Communard insurrection in Paris and its aftermath had provided irrefutable
evidence of atavism. Among the ‘wild animals’ that had been marched to the reception
centres at Versailles, there were a fair few hunchbacks and cripples. There were
flattened brows, prognathous jaws and brutish faces etched with loathing. The females
who stood, stripped to the waist, within spitting distance of the crowd, were swarthy
and gave off a peculiar odour. Never before had the phenomenon of degeneration been
so clearly displayed. Roused from the sleep of countless centuries by alcoholism and
political hysteria, primitive traits had reasserted themselves in the modern world.
     Those who had been deported to New Caledonia were not the worst. Justice had
disposed of many others before the trials of the Communards had begun. The Parc
Monceau, where nurses sat with prams under the leafy parasol of plane trees, had been
closed for several days. Passers-by heard the syncopated rattle of shots. In the Jardin du
Luxembourg, the soldiers had dumped bodies in the shrubberies and the ornamental
lake. There had been long queues of captives outside the railway stations and the
barracks. A man leaning over the Pont de la Concorde had seen a red streak flowing
under the second arch. When the wind blew from the north-east, the smoke from the
Parc des Buttes-Chaumont could be smelled in the city.
     On a crowded boulevard, a man with dirty hands was hoisted on the bayonet of a
soldier, to the delight of a group of well-dressed women, who urged the soldier to ‘cut
the rat’s head off’. One in every six Parisians sat down to write a letter to the Ministry,
giving names and addresses and details of subversive acts. The ‘cull’, as it was called,
reduced the population of Paris by about twenty-five thousand, but it returned to its
earlier level when the bourgeoisie came back from the country.
     It was all very well for The Times to accuse the French of barbarism. No rational
person could have been expected to behave with moderation after what had happened.
In the late spring of 1871, Paris was a stage set for a scene of madness. There was a
Gothic cathedral on the Boulevard de Sébastopol, where a department store was
buttressed with enormous wooden beams. Tiles clung to the rafters of the Tuileries
Palace–whose central clock had stopped at ten minutes to nine–like fish caught in nets.
A hundred feet in the air, a porcelain vase stood on a mantelpiece, and the reflections of
birds flashed across a mirror.
     Special guidebooks were published for foreign tourists, and there were postcards
of the most impressive monuments: the wrought-iron creepers that covered the Ministry
of Finance; the empty metal tube of the Vendôme Column; the headless statue of the City
of Lille sitting on her own remains. At the Hôtel de Ville, the anarchists’ fire had
dipped its flames in a palette of ink and molten metal. Seen from the square, it was a
foundering ship with shattered masts and gaping portholes, while the side that faced the
river had been painted a range of shades from lilac to grey, reminiscent of the latest
developments in modern art.
     The Guide á travers les ruines (June 1871) particularly recommended a tour of the
Père-Lachaise cemetery. The hill on which it stood had been occupied by the anarchists
during the last days of the Commune, to hinder the advance of government troops from
the east. The emaciated pyramid that rose above the other tombs contained some
chicken bones and bottles of wine. An anarchist evening paper called Paris Libre lay
on the ground as though it had been left there after a picnic. Unused petrol bombs were
scattered all about. Shells had been fired by government troops from the summit of
Montmartre, and had inflicted poignant damage on the homes of the dead.
     Though the cemetery was a maze of paths and the gravestones had served as
shields, few had escaped. They had been encircled, then ignored while government
troops reoccupied the city, then slowly hunted to extinction. Lower down, in a quiet part
of the cemetery, a long, drab wall was pocked with holes. Soft soil was heaped up
where hundreds of bodies had been dumped. Arms and legs were seen jutting out of the
soil, and a bullet-ridden head had either been pushed up from below or deliberately
placed on the mound as a vindictive memorial.


                                            3
IN THE ‘WEEK OF BLOOD’ when Paris was recaptured from the anarchists by the
French army–watched from the surrounding heights by the Prussian army–it was already
becoming difficult to form a clear memory of those distant days of early spring, when
Paris was no longer the capital of anything but itself.
     There had been no Figaro to report events and to transmit the government’s view.
Instead, there were dozens of hysterical little newssheets written in an obscene and
barbarous form of French. Paris seemed to have been overrun by journalists who took
revenge for two decades of imperial censorship by filling their columns with foutres
and merdes.
     Oddly, though, in those two months of psychopathic democracy, there was often a
dearth of news. Nothing extraordinary appeared to be happening: the buses were
running again, the streets were being swept, dogs were chasing pigeons and pedestrians
were running into long-lost friends, as usual, on the Pont Neuf. In the autonomous urban
enclave that had once been the capital of France, the year 1871 had ceased to exist. It
was 79 in the revolutionary calendar, and the clock was running backwards towards a
new dawn. After the defeat by Prussia, and the siege of Paris, normal life was an
amazing novelty, and complete nonentities suddenly found themselves the centre of
attention.
     One such nonentity was a man called Léon Bigot. On 10 Floréal 79 (Saturday, 29
April 1871), when the streets appeared to be safe, he left his apartment on the
Boulevard Beaumarchais and set off towards the Place de la Bastille. He had every
reason to feel hopeful. He had not been blown to pieces by a Prussian shell, nor had he
been starved to death by the besieging army. Until recently, he had worked as an
interpreter at the Grand Hôtel du Louvre. As a luxury hotel with a telegraph office,
steam-powered lifts and a reputation for culinary excellence, the Grand Hôtel had been
requisitioned by the Commune’s Chief Director of Barricade Construction. But one day
soon, M. Bigot would be back at work. Tourists would want to see the bombed city, to
sketch the ruins, to hear tales of mad anarchists, and so M. Bigot kept abreast of events.
     He bought a paper at the newsstand. It was called Paris Libre–a single sheet,
twenty-four inches by eighteen, with six columns on either side. He stopped in the
middle of the pavement, urinating involuntarily: he saw his name in an alphabetical list,
BIGOT, LÉ ON, between the names of a carpenter and a schoolteacher, his job
(‘interpreter attached to the Hôtel du Louvre’), the date of his application (June 1868),
and his address (89 Boulevard Beaumarchais).
     The series had just begun, and it was already proving a great success. The editor–a
short man with a very large hump, who sat on the Commune’s Public Services
Committee–had been the secretary of the serial novelist Eugène Sue. His own literary
effort, based on documents that had been liberated from the Ministry of Police,
promised to be just as popular as Les Mystères de Paris.

        We shall publish the names and addresses of all individuals who asked for
     employment as spies under the empire.


    A daily list of names and addresses lacked the narrative complexity of an Eugène
Sue serial, but it had its own suspense and energy, and there were occasional examples
of application letters to add some colour to the list:

         ‘I know people of all classes and opinions, and am well placed to keep an eye
     out in all directions at once, in addition to which I am endowed with manly vigour,
     matchless courage and passive obedience.’
          A guard employed by the Northern Railway Company, 8 Rue de la Nation,
     Montmartre.


     The volunteer spies had come from all walks of life: grocers, bakers, office clerks,
retired soldiers and seamen, students, writers and artists. There was a house painter, a
photographer’s assistant, a solicitor and a clown. There were insurance salesmen, a
seamstress and a former Mayor of Chassenon near Limoges. According to Paris Libre,
those mouchards were all alike, driven to acts of sly brutality by hunger and hatred.
‘They deserve no mercy.’
     Naturally, the dénouements had to be left to the reader’s imagination or initiative.
Did M. Léon Bigot, for instance, return to his apartment at 89 Boulevard Beaumarchais
after seeing his name in the paper? Did he try to leave the city, or did he spend a fortune
buying multiple copies of Paris Libre from every newsstand in his quartier? Did he,
like other readers–especially those whose names came later in the alphabet–visit the
offices of Paris Libre bearing a high-denomination banknote?

         Those scoundrels thought they were immune from exposure…We shall
     continue until the letter Z is exhausted.
     Only one visitor to the offices of Paris Libre seemed to find the editor inclined to
take pity on him:

          One man appeared deserving of consideration. So great and so obvious was
     his remorse that we are convinced of his sincere repentance. His name is Fouché,
     and he lives at 20 Grande-Rue, Saint-Mandé.


     The last issue of Paris Libre (24 May 1871) was a ‘Call to Arms’. It urged all its
readers to defend the Commune by whatever means, and to prevent the nation from
sliding back into the bad old days of imperialist dictatorship.


                                             2
LOOKING BACK THROUGH the layers of history to the origins of the disaster
becomes increasingly difficult. So many documents disappeared when the Communards
set fire to Paris, and so many educated people who might have left reliable accounts of
the Commune abandoned the city when it surrendered to Prussia and the siege was
lifted. Even if the death of certain individuals on the alphabetized lists could be inferred
from their subsequent absence, it would be impossible to say whether they died in the
fire, were shot by soldiers or lynched by their neighbours.
     Two million Parisians had been dreaming the same convoluted dream. They had
gone to the ballot box, and voted for a government of idealists who might prevent them
from waking up. Meanwhile, beyond the gates, on the hills that surrounded the
enchanted enclave, the Prussians had been assessing their new domain. Prussian
cartographers had been creating relief maps more accurate than any the natives had ever
seen. They took aerial photographs, and collated data from different sources. They
itemized the estates and chattels of the region’s inhabitants, paying particular attention to
the homes of the rich.
     The Commune had been doomed from the start. With more effective barricades and
better luck, it might have defended the labyrinth of streets until some diplomatic
compromise was reached, but it was fatally handicapped by its simple state of mind, its
futile hopes and above all by the fact that the rude awakening had come before the
dream.
     Parisians had seen their conquerors march along the avenues that had, after all,
been designed for triumphal parades. Despite what the Figaro called their ‘wounded
patriotism’ and ‘popular resentment’, they had allowed the Prussians to spend two days
sightseeing in Paris without a single shot being fired. But the Prussians had taken the
sensible precaution of dressing up. They brought out the silvery trumpets and the blue-
and-white flags; they burnished the harnesses and the weaponry. The Battle of Paris was
won with flattery and polish. The indigenous population saw tall young men in freshly
laundered uniforms, riding sleek and confident horses. They saw the sun of Paris dance
on the gleaming guns, and were mightily impressed.
      The decisive engagement had taken place, not on the battlefields above Sedan on 4
September 1870, but on the Place de la Concorde on 1 March 1871.
      The triumphal parade had descended the Champs-É lysées and reached the statue of
Strasbourg, which was draped in black crêpe. The square was already filling up, and
the eddies caused by the motion of horses through the crowd had begun to scatter the
procession into separate groups. Some grim-looking men gathered around Bismarck and
his horse. They had come in from the eastern suburbs, to see, and perhaps to act. The
German Chancellor looked down from his horse and seemed to smile under his
moustache. A hiss came from one of the men, and for a moment, the crowd fell silent.
Bismarck signalled to the man with his gloved hand, bent over his holster and asked if
Monsieur would have the kindness to light his cigar. The match was reluctantly struck, a
cloud of smoke rose into the sky and the procession moved on into the Rue de Rivoli. A
little later, a café that had unpatriotically stayed open was ransacked by an angry mob.


                                            1
PARISIANS HAD NO DOUBT exhausted their courage and their ingenuity in the siege.
One hundred and thirty-two days of dog food had not been good for the rational
faculties. They had reverted to the simplest aspirations: eating and staying alive. They
had reduced the size of their stomachs and their brains. (There were medical studies to
prove it.) When buildings suddenly disappeared in a cloud of dust, they showed
remarkably little interest. The men in the bar on the Rue d’Enfer, the girl walking home
from school by the Jardin du Luxembourg, the horses at the Grenelle bus depot knew
nothing–a rush of air, a roof falling in. (All the shells fell on the Left Bank.) Everyone
else was a spectator and a collector of Prussian bomb casings and pieces of carved
stone.
     Faced with starvation and superior technology, the city succumbed to an epidemic
of credulity: Mme Bismarck had been arrested while out shopping and was being held
hostage; the Prussians were going home for Christmas; thousands of sheep were pouring
into the city through secret tunnels that connected Paris to the provinces.
     Men in top hats dreamt of annihilating human beings in numbers too large to be
counted: a battalion of prostitutes would go traipsing out across the Plaine Saint-Denis
to infect the Prussian army with syphilis and smallpox; an airborne platform carrying
scientists and cauldrons would float over the Prussian lines and dissolve their
respiratory tracts with chemicals; a machine-gun disguised as a music box playing
Wagner would be offered as a token of peace; a sledgehammer three miles wide would
be dropped from the sky.
    Even before the beginning of the siege, when the news from Sedan was printed in
the Figaro–‘People of France! A great misfortune has befallen the fatherland. After
three days of heroic struggles, forty thousand men have been taken prisoner. Paris is
in a state of defence!’–many of the sixty thousand Prussians domiciled in Paris were
hunted down. The catacombs were prepared for long-term human habitation, and
scientists were summoned to the Ministry.

           We are under attack from intelligent barbarians; civilized science must defend
     us!


    Paintings from the Louvre were evacuated, and precious archaeological specimens
were carried from the Cluny museum to the crypt of the Panthéon. An employee of the
Paris Gas Company was found to be a Prussian officer. The quarries of Montmartre
were searched for explosives. Then the Prussian army was reported to have reached
Reims, then Épernay, then Troyes. Towns in Picardy and the Ardennes were reported to
have been wiped off the map.
    The Figaro urged Parisians to remember the Breton guerrillas of 1793 who had
lived in impenetrable forests, festooned with vegetation, and who had attacked the
soldiers of the French Revolution with axes and spears.

        National defence requires nothing more of every town and village that is
     exposed to enemy incursions!


     The Government of National Defence ordered every forest, wood and copse in the
environs of Paris to be set on fire, ‘to prevent the enemy from reaching the fortifications
under cover’.
     The fortifications consisted of a road, a line of trees and then a bank of earth
leading up to the rampart, with bastions at regular intervals. Then came the parapet and
the walkway, protected by a curtain-wall, looking down into a ditch forty metres wide.
A narrow path cut into the upward slope allowed troops to move along under cover. A
man could walk all the way around Paris without being seen from either side. Beyond
the ditch, a grassy bank sloped down to the unprotected zone.
     On 15 September, lookouts on the parapet noticed the first signs of an approaching
army. Columns of smoke were rising from the region of Drancy, Le Bourget and the
Forest of Bondy. Farmers had set fire to their haystacks to prevent the harvest from
falling into the hands of the enemy. But the vast crop of cabbages, beets, potatoes and
radishes that would normally have fed the all-consuming city was not so easily
destroyed. Then someone had the idea of sending out word to all the remote villages,
where peasants lived in a state of medieval poverty as though the great city were a
thousand miles away. The supply zone of Paris had always been the first to suffer in
times of need. Its development had been stunted by the proximity of the capital.
Recently, anthropologists had explored that neglected hinterland beyond the outer
suburbs, and had recognized in certain facial features ‘the living remnants of a separate
race that predates the Cimmerian invasions with which our historical era began’.
     Despite the primitive state of the roads and the lack of modern communications,
word spread through the countryside with astonishing speed. They came from the
forgotten hamlets with wheelbarrows and baskets, mattocks and forks, with their
children, old people and cripples in ancient carts. The sun-baked horde was let loose
on the fertile fields, and that vast tribe of famished peasants grubbed up in a single day a
harvest that would have kept Paris eating for a season. They worked until their thin
shadows stretched out across the fields, whimpering with delight–according to the
Figaro’s eye-witness account–‘and with a delirious enthusiasm that is hard to
describe’. ‘Poor, benighted creatures, for whom a day of such calamity is a day of
feasting and celebration!’
