CHAPTER 6

Leaving the monumental gates for the region of the railway stations, you
enter the faubourgs. As applied to Paris, this is an odd word, since if fau
comes from the Latin fors, the characteristic of a faubourg is to be outside
the city, whereas the Paris streets that bear this name are, if not central, at
least well within the urban perimeter. This is of course a question of history.
In the early eighteenth century, after crossing the tree-planted boulevard
that marked the limit of Paris, you were in the country, where the major
Paris streets continued along paths of beaten earth bordered by market
gardens, vines and windmills. But Paris was very close, so much so that in
the course of that century these earthen paths were paved and served as
markers for an urbanization that advanced steadily from the centre despite
royal decrees. It was these routes that would form the faubourgs, outside the
official limits of the city until the end of Louis XVI’s reign – hence their
name – then included in Paris when the Wall of the Farmers-General shifted
the boundary. Previously Paris had come to an end at the Bastille, the Porte
Saint-Martin and the Tuileries, but it now extended via the Faubourg Saint-
Antoine to the Barrière du Trône (now Place de la Nation), via the Faubourg
Saint-Martin to the Barrière de La Villette (now Stalingrad), and via the
Champs-Élysées to Étoile. The next leap, the annexation of the ‘crown
villages’ in 1860 (Vaugirard, Passy, Les Batignolles, Montmartre,
Belleville, etc.), ended up making the old faubourgs almost central. Yet in
literature the ambiguity remained: the faubourgs are very present in
Baudelaire (‘Le faubourg secoué par les lourds tombereaux’ in ‘The Seven
Old Men’, ‘Au coeur d’un vieux faubourg, labyrinth fangeux’ in ‘The Rag-
Pickers’ Wine’, examples abound1), without our ever knowing their precise
location. Much later, when Eugène Dabit wrote Faubourgs de Paris in
1933, he included the Rue de Ménilmontant, the Rue de Choisy-le-Roi and
even the Rue de Montlhéry.
     From the Porte Saint-Denis and the Porte Saint-Martin, the Rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Denis, the Boulevard de Strasbourg and the Rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Martin run almost parallel – ‘almost’, as the Rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Denis bends a little towards the Gare du Nord, while the
other two make a straight line towards the Gare de l’Est. Despite the short
distance between them, each of these streets has its specific identity,
population and beauty.
     The Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Martin is open, airy, almost peaceful
despite the traffic. As Thomas Clerc wrote in his book on the 10th
arrondissement, ‘all the buildings in this fine street, which escaped
Haussmann, are different from one another – it is a faubourg, with its
irregular curve and its rebel spirit’.2 This book is almost ten years old and
the street has changed: fewer ready-to-wear wholesalers, more boarded-up
shops, more couscous and Chinese restaurants, and an increasing number of
African hairdressers as you continue. On the right-hand pavement, Le
Splendid, whose hour of glory goes back to the 1970s, now leads a discreet
existence. Further along, the Passage du Marché opens onto a
Haussmannian building that welcomes you with its sculpted décor, and
leads to a pleasant coin (a coin being less than a quartier but more than a
crossroads), a small open space bordered by the Saint-Martin market, an
ugly building from the 1960s, a fire station and, on the corner with the Rue
du Château-d’Eau, a good-quality brasserie, Le Réveil du 10e.
     Between the barracks and the mairie of the 10th arrondissement, the
little street called after Pierre Bullet is as chaste as that of his colleague
Blondel, on the other side of the Porte Saint-Martin, is light, devoted as it is
to tariffed love. The Rue Pierre-Bullet runs into the Rue Hittorff, tiny and
ending in a kind of cul-de-sac. The Paris municipal counsellors did not do
Hittorff proud, perhaps because he was ‘Prussian’. The architect who
renovated the Place de la Concorde, with the idea of centring it on the
obelisk, who built the Cirque d’Hiver, the Théâtre du Rond-Pont des
Champs-Élysées, the church of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul on the Rue La
Fayette, the mairie of the 5th arrondissement as a pendant to Soufflot’s
Faculté de Droit, and such a masterpiece as the façade of the Gare du Nord,
deserves better than this wretched little street.
     The mairie of the 10th arrondissement, built in the 1890s, is a good
culmination of nineteenth-century eclecticism. The objective is clear: a
large building in French neo-Renaissance style, neo-Chambord if you like,
more coherent and in my view more successful than the majority of Parisian
mairies, which are indecisive and often lazy in style. Opposite it is the start
of the Passage du Désir, with its almost monastic silence, low and regular
buildings alternately in brick and white stone, which despite its name is a
kind of Parisian convent. But its closed windows and its many boarded-up
shop fronts lead us rather to fear the intentions of some developer or a semi-
public company.
    After its intersection with the Boulevard Magenta, the Rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Martin widens, flaring to envelop the apse of the Saint-
Laurent church on the left and the former convent of the Récollets, now the
Maison de l’Architecture, on the right. From the large triangular square to
the east side of the Gare de l’Est, it heads towards the rotunda of La
Villette.
    The Boulevard de Strasbourg is far from being merely a corridor for
motor vehicles. We have to admit that it begins badly: of its four corners
with the Boulevard Saint-Denis, two are occupied by banks, the third by a
KFC (whose founder, as depicted on the logo, looks rather like Trotsky),
and the fourth, presently a construction site, leads us to fear the worst. But
very soon you encounter the pretty Théâtre Antoine, below whose triangular
pediment are mosaics in lively colours that illustrate Comedy, Music and
Drama. Opposite, on the corner with the Rue de Metz, is one of the finest
Art Deco buildings in Paris, ornamented with golden peacock wings that
sparkle in the sunshine.
    The boulevard then bisects a roadway that that was built as a unity: on
the right the Rue Gustave-Goublier and on the left the Passage de
l’Industrie, entirely devoted to hair products, from wigs and hairpieces to
perfumery. It ends with a Palladian window (three bays, with the centre one
higher than the other two and topped by a semi-circular arch) before
coming out on the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis. A few metres further, also
on both sides of the boulevard, is the famous Passage Brady. The left-hand
section houses Pakistani and Indian restaurants beneath a glass roof with
two continuous rows of panels. To the right is the famous costumier
Sommier, who since 1922 has hired out every kind of uniform or disguise.
You can emerge equally as a traditional policeman in a cape, a tango dancer
or a Napoleonic general. When I was an intern in the 1960s, we would go
there before parties. (Is there still this custom? To be sure, its disappearance
would be no great loss, being as it was a mixture of machismo, crude
humour and caste spirit.)
     From the Passage Brady to the Rue du Château-d’Eau and beyond is the
exclusive and unchallenged domain of African coiffure, a little bit of Africa
in Paris, where touts practise their eloquence leaning against the Métro
railings, where hairstylists work in shops of all colours, under names you
might find in Cotonou or Lagos: ‘Saint-Esprit Cosmétique’ or ‘God’s
Rock’. The whole African continent is represented, English-speakers as
well as French – even Jamaicans. The ambience is noisy and friendly, even
if there are times when you can no longer laugh: a fine short film by
Sylvain George, N’entre pas sans violence dans la nuit, captures a moment
of revolt when the whole quarter confronted the police and even repelled
them for a while, showing that African inventiveness can find applications
in many fields.




            N’entre pas sans violence dans la nuit, film by Sylvain George.

     Like the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Martin, the Boulevard de Strasbourg
widens into a large square in front of the Gare de l’Est, from which you can
see several kilometres away the dome of the Tribunal de Commerce. This is
the terminus for buses whose numbers start with ‘3’: the 30 that runs to the
Trocadéro, the 31 to the Étoile, the 32 to the Porte d’Auteuil, the 35 to the
Mairie d’Aubervilliers, the 38 to the Porte d’Orléans. George Perec, in
Species of Spaces, explains how to know where Paris bus lines start from
their numbers (those beginning with ‘2’ from the Gare Saint-Lazare, with
‘4’ from the Gare du Nord, etc.). He even claims that the second digit also
has a meaning, but here I think he exaggerates a little.
     The Gare de l’Est, with its long colonnade, its glass canopy overlooked
by statues of Verdun (on the right, with helmet) and Strasbourg (on the left),
its low buildings, its pedestrianized paved court, is the most welcoming of
the major Paris stations. It was almost provincially calm even, until the
TGV de l’Est came into service. True, you can not complain that it no
longer takes five hours to reach Strasbourg, but the station’s east wing now
houses a commercial centre in which ‘brands’ offer their usual displays. Let
us remain in the hall of the ‘Strasbourg departure’, where a gigantic
painting recalls less peaceful moments.
    For those wishing to reach the Gare du Nord from here, the best route is
the Rue d’Alsace. Above the twin flights of steps that make a fine oval, the
street becomes a balcony over the railway. There has been here for a long
time a bookshop very properly called La Balustrade, which was still
orthodox communist until a few years ago. Since the death of its owner –
whom I used regularly to see selling L’Humanité Dimanche when I lived on
the Rue de Sofia – the window instead displays scientific books. On the
corner of the Rue des Deux-Gares that leads towards the Rue du Faubourg-
Saint-Denis, a café bears another well-found name: Au Train de Vie. Here
you are already very close to the concrete lattices bordering the bridge on
the Rue Gayette, from which Gilles Quéant jumped into thin air at the end
of Jean Rouch’s Gare du Nord.3
    But let us return to the Porte Saint-Denis. On the corner between the
Faubourg and the Boulevard Saint-Denis is a building from the 1880s.
Beneath the second-storey balcony is the sculpture of a standing hooded
figure, with the inscription ‘Au grand Saint-Antoine’. He holds a book
under his right arm, and his left hand is caressing a pig, which suggests that
there used to be a charcuterie in the premises now occupied by an
optician’s. (There are several representations of St Anthony accompanied
by a tame pig – or boar?) What is certain is that the good old Paris
charcuteries, with their mountains of celeriac remoulade, their breaded pig
feet, their lobster halves and vol-au-vents, are in the process of
disappearing, often replaced by their Chinese counterparts.
                            Stairway, Rue d’Alsace.

    A few metres further is the entrance to the Passage du Prado, an L-
shaped arcade whose other branch exits onto the Boulevard Saint-Denis.
Some twenty years ago this was the domain of the sewing machine: new
and second-hand, repairs, spare parts for all makes, threads, bobbins. No
trace of this remains, perhaps because the more or less clandestine sewing
workshops of eastern Paris that employed Chinese or Turkish workers have
also gone. From two apartments in which I have lived, on the Rue du
Faubourg-du-Temple and now on Rue Ramponeau, I have seen the
disappearance of these nearby workshops, where the click of sewing
machines echoed from morning to night. They have given way to the
offices of architects, designers or photographers. The couture of the Sentier
is very likely carried out today in what used to be called the Third World,
and the Passage du Prado is rather decrepit, several of its shop fronts being
closed, its activity reduced to a few African or Pakistani hairdressers.
    After this passage, the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis is the centre of a
small Turkish quarter, or more accurately Turkish-Kurd. In the cafés and
restaurants, the vegetable stores and even the pharmacy, you find the same
welcome as in the Istanbul bazaar: a whiff of the Orient just a few steps
from the Porte Saint-Denis, where Louis XIV is triumphantly crossing the
Rhine. The Julien restaurant, on the right-hand side, was formerly a Parisian
bouillon, like the Bouillon Chartier on the Rue du Faubourg-Montmartre, or
the Bouillon Racine on the Rue Racine, where you could enjoy a bouillon
of meat and vegetables. In the 1970s, it was still possible to eat very well
here for next to nothing, but entrepreneurs who noticed its splendid Art
Nouveau décor bought the building and have developed it into a fancy
restaurant. Advertisements claim that you might meet Angelina Jolie or the
French actor Fabrice Luchini here.
    The Faubourg then crosses two parallel streets begun under Louis XVI
and continued under Louis-Philippe, the Rue de l’Échiquier and the Rue
d’Enghien. No. 10 on the Rue de l’Échiquier was the site of the Concert
Layol, displaying the talents of Paulus, Yvette Gilbert and Dranem, then in
later generations Lucienne Boyer, Marie Dubas, and even Raimu and
Fernandel. On the same side, but in a different world, a Turkish-Kurdish
bookstore bears the name Mevlana, who the owner tells me was a
thirteenth-century mystic. As well as many religious works, you can also
find here books on the Montessori method (in Turkish) or Che Guevara.
    The crossroads of the Rue de l’Échiquier and the Rue d’Hauteville has a
fine outlook, in one direction towards the monumental post office on the
Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière and the minaret of the Comptoir
d’Escompte, in the other towards the church of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul,
which encloses the Rue d’Hauteville and what remains of its Ashkenazi
furriers in an impeccable stage set.
    On the corner of the Rue d’Enghien and the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-
Denis, the café Chez Jeannette has kept its fine 1950s décor almost intact. I
frequented it when I used to train in a nearby boxing hall, whose décor and
accessories had not changed since the era of Charles Rigoulot, the strongest
man in the world, and the great Marcel Cerdan. Jeannette peeled vegetables
for the evening meal with a nobility that I found very Parisian, without
being entirely sure that she was not Breton or Picard. The young people
who run the café today do not remember her.
    ‘Fine 1950s décor’ – since when did people start appreciating this style?
When I was in my first year of medicine, in the frosty faculty on the Rue
des Saints-Pères – this was 1955 – an old bistro on the corner of the
Boulevard Saint-German was being refurbished, and we all found the new
décor horrible. Today, Le Rouquet prides itself on its neon lights and
Formica tops, its well-preserved ‘50s style’. We preferred at that time a café
nearby, in a shack with a pointed roof on the corner of the Rue des Saint-
Pères and the Rue Perronet. It was run by ‘Père Mathieu’, an old Auvergnat,
who fed for free his student friends who came like him from the Massif
Central, even paying for their books – which did not at all please his much
younger wife, who saw her husband’s consumption of alcohol and tobacco
make away with their capital. Solidarity between Auvergnats was also
expressed in higher realms: places as interns or externs were always found
for natives of that province in the two major neurology departments of the
Salpêtrière, headed by eminences who, with a background in Action
Française or its like, compensated by not accepting blacks or Jews.
    The ‘30s style’ that is also much admired today (even if little
represented in Paris outside of the 16th arrondissement) was despised by
my parents and their friends. They could not find words critical enough for
the building on the Rue Cassini where we lived – today a listed building,
and quite rightly so. It is as if each generation hates the architecture and
design in which it spent its youth. This fluctuation in taste is not specifically
French. In Warsaw today, young people enthuse over the Palace of Culture
and Science, the immense skyscraper from the 1950s that was a present
from the Soviet Union, and in comparison with which the Empire State
Building is a model of sobriety. Their parents detested it as a symbol of
both oppression and bad taste. Éditions Hazan had a stand there at the book
fair of 1990, when it was expected that the post-communist countries would
become a big market. I remember old Poles who spent hours browsing
through our books, each of which probably cost a month’s salary for them,
in sad contrast to the luxurious interior of the building.
    Will people one day find charm in Bofill’s colonnades on the Place de
Catalogne, the bay windows in the Horloge quarter, or the winds of the
Avenue de France? We cannot be sure. Each age has its good and its less
good architecture. Bernini found the dome of Val-de-Grâce ‘a smallish
skullcap for a big head’, and Ledoux made fun of the spindly columns of
Gabriel’s palaces on Place Louis-XV (today Place de la Concorde).
    A little after the Rue d’Enghien, the Cour des Petites-Écuries opens onto
the left-hand side of the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis. Fifty years ago this
was the headquarters of the leather merchants who lunched at the Brasserie
Flo, where service closed at nine o’clock in the evening. The cashier had a
large wolfhound, and the place smelled of the black soap used to wash the
wood floor. Flo and the whole court have changed a good deal, even
becoming a kind of foreign island. Elegant young people sit at the terrace
tables, and the pretty young girls in their entourage have nothing in
common with the motley proletarian population around them.
     At the far end of the court, a narrow passage leads to the Rue des
Petites-Écuries, where a cultural centre run by Turkish Maoists is adorned
with posters demanding the liberation of political prisoners in several Asian
countries. A few metres away, the celebrity of the street is New Morning, a
great spot for jazz in Paris since the 1980s, where such glories of the
trumpet and saxophone as Chet Baker, Dizzy Gillespie, Archie Shepp and
many others played.
     Returning to the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis, you cross the Rue de
Paradis, the domain of porcelain and luxury glassware: Baccarat, Saint-
Louis, Daum and Lalique have shops here, while the ancient Boulenger
pottery even has a superb 1900 building whose front wall and column are
topped by the curve of an immense glazed bay.
     Before reaching the Boulevard Magenta, the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-
Denis widens and opens to the left onto a rectangular park that serves to
provide a little chlorophyll in this mineral quarter. Behind it, the façade of a
chapel built under the Restoration by Louis-Pierre Baltard (the father of the
‘Les Halles’ Baltard) is the only remaining vestige of the immense hospital-
prison of Saint-Lazare. In the 1630s, Vincent-de-Paul was given a former
leper colony here to train missionaries, and the mission subsequently
occupied an immense enclosure between the Faubourg-Saint-Denis and the
Faubourg Poissonnière. Its main building served for various purposes over
the centuries, all aimed at the repression of deviants: a house of correction
under the Ancien Régime, where rebellious children were locked away; a
prison for sexual criminals; a political prison at the time of the Revolution
(André Chénier was sent to the scaffold from here); and still a prison in the
nineteenth century, for loose women as well as for many Communards,
including Louise Michel. In the 1930s, the building returned to its original
role as a hospital: prostitutes affected with venereal disease were treated
here; pox and clap were cared for before AIDS relegated them to second
place in pathology. After being closed for a long while, the hospital was
recently demolished to make way for the Françoise Sagan mediathèque.
The new buildings, all white and echoing the arcades of the old hospital,
have an almost Mediterranean aspect, unexpected but rather agreeable, and
emphasized by the palm trees swaying in the courtyard.
     The Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis continues across two major axes,
first the Boulevard Magenta and then the Rue La Fayette: two enormous
crossroads followed a little further by a third, where the two axes cross one
another in front of the Gare du Nord.




                        À Saint-Lazare, Toulouse-Lautrec.




    The Boulevard Magenta and the Rue La Fayette each play the same role
in the general design of the Right Bank: to join a central nerve centre –
respectively the République and the Opéra – to the first slopes of the
northern heights, Montmartre and Les Buttes-Chaumont. But despite this
affinity in terms of town planning, the two axes are in no way similar. Any
Parisian, whether by birth or adoption, and even any visitor, has the right to
prefer whichever of the two they please. For my part, I sense the dynamic
of the city by walking up the Rue La Fayette, whereas I avoid when
possible the Boulevard Magenta. The former is the older of the two –
originally known as Rue Charles X, which dates the start of this cutting.
Finished much later – the bridge with concrete lattices that I referred to
above dates from the 1930s – it has a great variety in terms of architecture,
colour of stone, and the atmosphere of the quarters it crosses. There is
nothing boring about the Rue La Fayette, whereas the Boulevard Magenta
aligns Haussmann and post-Haussmann buildings with a tiresome
regularity. The height is the same from the Place de la République to
Barbès: five storeys with a running balcony on the top floor, zinc roofs with
skylights, dark grey stone, nothing to attract the eye. The views towards the
stations, the Saint-Quentin market, and the porch of the Lariboisière
hospital, are not enough to brighten up this long and falsely flat avenue,
difficult for the cyclist, where the most numerous shops are agencies for
temporary work.
    Though many Parisians are unaware of it, the large esplanade in front of
the Gare du Nord has been known since 1987 as the Place Napoléon-III.
Very logically, the rehabilitation of Badinguet4 began in that decade, when
neoliberalism became unquestioned dogma. The shady adventurer, gang
leader and author of the December massacre underwent a surreptitious
mutation into the Saint-Simonian philanthropist, a pioneer of the modern
banking and industrial system. This is why the municipal council, then
presided over by Chirac, almost clandestinely gave Louis-Napoléon’s name
to a major Paris square. Perhaps there was already enough glorification of
his victories in Italy – Magenta, Solférino, Turbigo – and Crimea – Alma,
Malakoff, Sébastopol, Eupatoria. (We may note that no street celebrates the
disastrous Mexican expedition. Even the battle of Camarón, a great deed of
the Légion Étrangère, has no street in Paris.)
    I said above that the façade of the Gare du Nord was a masterpiece. It is
a shame that no one stops to contemplate it, whereas crowds throng in front
of the façade of Notre-Dame, whose statuary is no older than that of the
railway station. This façade has three storeys, their décor composed of
fluted Doric columns and statues. Metal grilles have been installed between
the columns implanted on the pavement, to prevent the homeless from
protecting themselves from wind and rain. Higher up, on the middle level,
statues of northern cities alternate with columns – at the corners, the effigy
of Douai on the Boulevard Magenta side, and that of Dunkirk on the side of
the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis. The upper level is a wide pediment
supported by a curved arch and framed by colossal pillars. Its ascending
stages culminate with a figure of Paris. On the sides, statues represent the
northern capitals – Berlin, London, Brussels, Amsterdam. These proud and
elegant women, dressed in the antique style, were sculpted by artists now
forgotten, but are a match for many exhibited in the Musée d’Orsay.5




                          Statues on the façade of the Gare du Nord.

    Despite its attractions, the Gare du Nord has hardly been an inspiration
to writers or artists. In this field, the palm goes without contest to the Gare
Saint-Lazare:
   those vast, glass-roofed sheds, like that of Saint-Lazare into which I went to find the train for
   Balbec, and which extended over the eviscerated city one of those bleak and boundless skies,
   heavy with an accumulation of dramatic menace, like certain skies painted with an almost
   Parisian modernity by Mantegna or Veronese, beneath which only some terrible and solemn
   act could be in process, such as a departure by train or the erection of the Cross.6

Claude Monet devoted to these glass-roofed sheds a series of twelve
canvases, and one of Édouard Manet’s most famous paintings is often
referred to as ‘La Gare Saint-Lazare’, even if this is only by allusion.7 The
difference in treatment received by these two stations is not hard to
understand: when these painters and writers left Paris to take the air, they
went to Normandy, to Balbec, to Giverny, to Honfleur, rather than to
Maubeuge or Armentières. Many of them lived and worked close to the
Gare Saint-Lazare – Mallarmé between the Lycée Condorcet and the Rue de
Rome, Manet on the Rue d’Amsterdam, Caillebotte on the Boulevard
Malesherbes.
    The Gare du Nord is the last station whose surroundings still recall the
destination of the trains that leave from here: ‘À la Ville d’Aulnay’, ‘Au
Rendez-Vous des Belges’, ‘La Tartine du Nord’, ‘À la Pinte du Nord’ – only
fast-food joints and Chinese restaurants escape this spell. The Gare
Montparnasse, at the time of the famous photograph of a locomotive
suspended in the void, was the centre of a Breton quarter in which
Bécassine8 could have felt at home. The construction of the Tour
Montparnasse, the commercial centre and the new station has left only a
scattering of crêperies. Around the Gare de Lyon there is scarcely any
southern touch, though it is perhaps not accidental that the former
Auvergnat quarter – the Rue de Lappe, the bottom of the Rue de la
Roquette, where a dance hall, ‘Au Massif central’, occupied what are now
the premises of the Théâtre de la Bastille – grew up around here.
    Among the several brasseries opposite the Gare du Nord, the Terminus
Nord used to be one of the most agreeable. It then fell into the same hands
and suffered the same fate as the Bouillon Julien I mentioned above, as well
as Bofinger, La Coupole and Le Balzar: standardization of menus,
impersonal reception, disappearance of those peculiarities that made each of
these a meeting place with its regulars, its customs, its particular dishes. Out
of all of these, it is the old Balzar that I miss the most – the others, in fact, I
rarely went to, least of all La Coupole, too marked by memories of Sunday
lunch there with my parents. But Le Balzar’s celeriac remoulade, calf’s
head and breaded pig’s feet were peerless, the waiters elegant and friendly,
the globe lamps lit women in a radiant light, and sometimes, dining there
after an operation that ran late, you might see Delphine Seyrig or Roger
Blin coming out of the theatre. The passage of years may have embellished
these souvenirs, but I could certainly find witnesses to confirm that Le
Balzar was indeed an enchanting place.
    The bulk of the Gare du Nord gives an impression of unity. The recent
extension, set back and in a judiciously subdued architecture, does not
disturb this. But this external unity is a mask. Throughout its extent, the
station is divided into three levels, one the same as the street and the others
below. This demarcation is far more than simply spatial, as upper and lower
no more communicate with one another than the world of the living and that
of the shades did in the time of Ulysses.
             Levels of the Gare du Nord, diagram displayed in the station.

     The upper level is impeccable. Beneath the great glass roof the signs are
clear, the seats are comfortable, a kiosk offers a choice of the foreign press,
the cafés are clean and welcoming. This is where the Thalys trains leave for
the northern capitals, as well as the Eurostar, protected by a security system
like that of an airport. The travellers are executives, businessmen and
women, tourists – white, clean, and well-dressed.
     Going down, level -1 is no worse than the Châtelet station of the RER.
It is the vast level -2 that needs to be seen. The ceiling is low, the colours
dark, the lighting dim, the signs incomprehensible and the announcements
inaudible. As there are more than forty suburban train lines, the result is a
gloomy labyrinth. Those who arrive every morning and leave every
evening, from Goussainville, Luzarches, Persan-Beaumont or Villiers-le-
Bel, know where they are, but all others wander across the platforms
looking for the train to take them to the Châtelet or out to Roissy. The
population on this lower level are in great majority black. The videos taken
during the station’s periodic riots show angry black crowds, yet only a few
Arabs, which illuminates the difference between the two populations. The
blacks, more recent arrivals and hence more fragile in status, are pushed out
miles from anywhere, whereas the Arabs are well settled in the communes
of the inner suburbs, Saint-Denis, Aubervilliers, Gennevilliers, accessible
by Métro. As for the whites here, they are haggard tourists trying to
decipher announcements as mysterious as ancient oracles, and muscular
railway police whose brutality is well known to the ‘users’.
    It is impossible to attempt here what Anna Maria Ortese admirably
succeeded in doing in her Silenzio a Milano9 – spend the night on a bench
observing the humanity that chooses a railway station as refuge amid the
brutality of life. Impossible because there are no benches here.
    Once you pass the station, the first remarkable point on the Rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Denis is the Fernand-Widal hospital, which until 1959 was
known by everyone under the name of Maison Dubois. Antoine Dubois was
a great surgeon under the Empire and the Restoration, consultant to
Napoleon, obstetrician to Empress Marie-Louise and later to the Duchesse
de Berry. He was director of a clinic on the Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Martin,
which moved to its present site after his death but kept his name on account
of his great popularity in Paris – he also has a street named after him
between the Rue de l’École-de-Médicine and the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince.
The Maison Dubois was a paying establishment. In a letter to Ancelle, his
family’s lawyer, Baudelaire, arranging for his mistress, Jeanne Duval, to be
hospitalized there, wrote:
   On 3 May [1859] I have to pay 120 francs to the clinic plus 30 francs for care. I cannot go to
   Paris [he was at Honfleur]. Use the Saturday (tomorrow) to have my mother cash the
   enclosed bill, and on Sunday send 150 francs (a 100 franc note and a 50) or a money order to
   M. le Directeur de la Maison municipal de santé, 200 faubourg Saint-Denis. You can say in
   your letter that you are sending this on behalf of M. Baudelaire for the stay of Mlle Jeanne
   Duval, that there is 120 francs for her stay and the 30 francs are to be handed to the patient
   herself for her care.

The Maison Dubois saw many writers and artists pass through its doors,
including Nerval, on the occasion of one of his crises towards the end of his
life, and Murger, who died there in 1861.
     The front side that faces the boulevard is in no way remarkable, but the
inner courtyards – designed by Théodore Labrouste, younger brother of
Henri Labrouste, the architect of the Sainte-Geneviève library and the
reading room of the Bibliothèque Nationale – are pleasant, the first
courtyard surrounded by arcades supported by colonnades, the second
planted with an avenue of maples. A younger brother’s architecture, modest
and well-groomed.
     It was in the Maison Dubois that I first joined the working life of a
hospital. This was on the lowest rung of the ladder (‘performing an extern’s
function’), but this tiny step was a qualitative leap. I found myself admitted
into a territory peopled by characters of a different nature, dressed in the
white coat provided by the hospital and fastened by toggles, instead of the
apprentice’s coat washed at home, as well as the perspective of earning a
few francs at the end of the month. It was intoxicating.
    The surgical unit where I practised my minuscule functions was
presided over by a disciple of Mondor, Professor Olivier: parting in the
middle, half-moon glasses, bow tie, unfailing arrogance – the typical
surgeon of that time. Fortunately he had assistants who struck me as well-
meaning and went so far as to call me by my name, naturally in the polite
‘vous’ – the familiar ‘tu’ would only come when you passed the internship
examination, a simple but decisive sign of your admission to their caste.
This (and the history of the French Revolution) is very likely why I
acquired the habit of calling everyone ‘tu’, except those whom I know will
not reply in the same way.
    The patients in this hospital were poor people from around the railway
stations, French proletarians and immigrants from Italy, Spain, North
Africa. The quarter was black and dirty with the smoke of the trains.
Electrification had only just begun. This was the time when second-class
carriages were decorated with black-and-white photographs of Bagnères-
de-Bigorre, Berck-Plage or Autun, when one of the railway staff would
strike the carriage wheels with a long-handled hammer to detect possible
cracks, and when trains to the south stopped at Laroche-Migennes to ‘take
on water’. (Evoking these images, I think of my father likewise relating
memories of another time – that his teachers wore frock coats to their
lectures, that it took five days to reach France from his native Egypt, and
that bets were laid each night on the number of miles travelled that day.)
    The faubourg had a ‘bad reputation’, as people would say in those days.
I remember an emergency admission of a man with a bullet in his stomach,
probably the stomach wall as he could still walk. He asked for the bullet to
be removed, but refused to be registered and admitted. When it was
explained to him that this was not possible, he left just as he had arrived.
    We have to fear that the Assistance Publique, in its concern for
profitability and standardization, will one day close this small hospital, as it
has closed Boucicaut, where the nurses were still nuns when I was an intern
there, the Vaugirard hospital with its fine gardens, the Saint-Vincent-de-
Paul where Gilbert Huault worked, the Broca close to Boulevard Arago
which specialized in skin diseases, the Bretonneau that took in poor
children from Montmartre, and the Laennec, where I worked for some
twenty years. It is true that these establishments were not ‘rational’. At
Laennec, for example, there was a heart surgery unit – my own – but not a
cardiology department; the technical level (not a phrase used) was
rudimentary, and patients had to be sent all over Paris to have their eyes or
their knees treated. But these small hospitals could have been improved to
meet local needs instead of destroying them, selling their land to developers
and replacing them with monsters like the Georges-Pompidou hospital
where, as if it was not enough to be ill, you are immersed in an atmosphere
that varies over the course of the day between that of an airport and that of a
modern prison. Whereas the destroyed hospitals animated their area with
the presence of students, nurses, visitors, the surroundings of the Pompidou
hospital are more like the downtown of Phoenix, Arizona. One night I
actually got lost there, and could not find anyone to show me the way back.
    From the Fernand-Widal hospital to the Place de la Chapelle, the Rue
du Faubourg-Saint-Denis is the hub of an Asian quarter that grew up a good
twenty years ago and today stretches into the adjacent streets – Cail, Louis-
Blanc, Perdonnet. In colourful shops, amid the rich smell of spices, you can
buy jewellery from junk to fine gold, saris, Bollywood films, ginger,
guavas, and many other fruit that I can’t identify. Parisians often call this
quarter ‘Indian’ or even ‘Pakistani’, but if there are certainly Hindi-
speaking Indians as well as natives of Pakistan or Bangladesh here, the
majority are Tamils. Some come from south-east India, the state of Tamil
Nadu (‘land of the Tamils’), whose largest city is Madras. Others are Sri
Lankan – perhaps they supported the independence war of the Tamil Tigers,
preserving this memory after the horrific massacres by the island’s central
government.
    This fragment of Asia is one of the Parisian quarters sometimes referred
to as ‘ethnic’, a word imported from America, where it means something
more like exotic (‘ethnic restaurant’, ‘ethnic dress’), whereas in the French
version the notion of race is scarcely concealed. Each of these quarters has
its history, with highs and lows that may even lead to its complete
disappearance, whether by assimilation or repatriation. I remember for
example the extinction of the white Russian colony around the Avenue de
Versailles. Few still remember that a Russian newspaper used to appear
each week in the postwar years, for which M. Dominique, who ran a
famous restaurant on the Rue Bréa in Montparnasse, wrote the theatre
notes. The Spanish flavour that the Avenue de Wagram had in Franco’s last
years – a time when the Parisian bourgeoisie had maids and buildings had
concierges – has also disappeared, as well as the Japanese enclave along the
Rues Sainte-Anne and Petits-Champs, leaving only a few gastronomic
addresses.
     But neither Russians nor Spaniards nor Japanese were numerous enough
in Paris to form genuine quarters. On the other hand, the old Jewish quarter
still exists in and around the Rue des Rosiers, though it is threatened on all
sides. The Yiddish-Ashkenazi part of its population, overwhelming in the
days when the Rue Ferdinand-Duval was known as the Jewish street, has
gradually aged and disappeared. On the site of Goldenberg’s grocery, where
I often went on Sunday mornings with my father to buy pickelfleisch and
malossols, and where Jo Goldenberg greeted his customers with a broad
Parisian accent unlikely in such a place, there is today a Japanese clothes
shop. The quarter is experiencing converging and even combined pressures,
that of gay bars and that of fashion, which are steadily gaining ground on
the Rue des Rosiers and nearby, where the street names – Blancs-Manteaux,
Guillemites, Hospitalières-Saint-Gervais – come straight from the Middle
Ages and remind us of the religious congregations that at one time shared
this region.
     The Arab Goutte-d’Or, the African quarter of the Dejean market, is also
under a double threat, the omnipresent one of the police and that of a
gentrification that is visibly progressing, the two being as closely tied as the
fingers of one hand, or as profit and violence if you prefer. By comparison,
the two Chinatowns, that of the 13th arrondissement and the smaller though
older one of Belleville, are prosperous and peaceful, and steadily expanding
on their margins. The Chinese have even managed to create their own
Sentier in the old Rues Popincourt and Sedaine, from which any trace of
urban life has now disappeared under the implacable monotony of ready-to-
wear. This little quarter, which was the centre of Protestantism in Paris at
the time of the Reformation, before becoming par excellence the site of
barricades in the nineteenth century, is now very sad. On the other hand, we
can only rejoice that many tabacs have been taken over by Chinese, far
more efficient than their traditional grumpy proprietors.
