CHAPTER 2

There are a number of possible itineraries from the Place d’Italie towards
the centre, the most noisy and busy of these being the Boulevard de
l’Hôpital. An imaginative effort is needed to appreciate how this used to
cross one of the poorest backwaters of the city, a district of brigands and
rag-pickers in which Jean Valjean and Cosette kept away from the world,
sheltering in the Gorbeau hovel, ‘a kind of dilapidated lean-to used by
vegetable sellers as a store’. From still remoter times, there remains the
porch of the Salpétrière, now framed by the overhead Métro, and behind it
the octagonal dome of the chapel, a masterpiece by Libéral Bruant dating
from the 1670s.
    In 1955 I spent the summer term at the Salpétrière, as an intern under
Henri Mondor. It was the last year before this lively little man retired, and
he was still taking the stairs two at a time. The interns stood at the back
when the master visited: some fifty or more individuals chatted their way
through the immense communal wards with their three rows of beds, one
against each wall and another in the middle. It was impossible to see or hear
anything – the professors and registrars were much too far away – let alone
see the patient being examined. Mondor was a prestigious figure, the author
of treatises on surgery, a specialist on Mallarmé, and a grower of roses… In
those days it was still possible for a surgeon to be all these things, but it was
better to keep oneself in good health than be treated in these hospitals that
had changed little from the time of Ambroise Paré.
    From the Place d’Italie I could also take the Avenue des Gobelins to the
church of Saint-Médard, then continue up the Montagne Sainte-Geneviève
by the Rue Mouffetard as far as the Panthéon, a trajectory that follows the
historic axis of the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, when the Rue Mouffetard ran
from the Rue de la Contrescarpe as far as the Barrière d’Italie. At the time,
as Balzac wrote in The Commission in Lunacy, the 12th arrondissement was
   the poorest quarter of Paris, that in which two-thirds of the population lack firing in winter,
   which leaves most brats at the gate of the Enfants-Trouvés, which sends most beggars to the
   poorhouse, most rag-pickers to the street corners, most decrepit old folks to bask against the
   walls on which the sun shines, most delinquents to the police courts.

Even after the upheavals of the Haussmann cuttings (the Boulevards Saint-
Marcel, Arago, Blanqui), the Faubourg Saint-Marcel remained in the 1950s
a working-class quarter, with factories such as Delahaye, which still made
sports cars, the Say sugar refinery, the Sudac compressed-air plant… But as
the arrondissement was a communist stronghold it was one of the first to be
‘renovated’, and with particular brutality (as likewise the 20th
arrondissement, for the same reason). It is no longer possible to repeat the
‘Les Misérables walk’ that I did with my father on Sunday mornings, to
look for traces of the Gorbeau hovel, follow Marius dreaming of Cosette on
the Rue du Champ-de-l’Alouette, discover Mère Grégoire’s bar on the Rue
Croulebarbe, whose customers included Chateaubriand, La Fayette,
Véranger and the young Victor Hugo. (My father, though an immigrant
naturalized in 1945, knew Paris and Hugo very well.)
    To leave the Place d’Italie, I choose a more roundabout route that leads
to an urban ghost, both buried and still present: the Bièvre and its valley.
The Bièvre is a little river whose source is at Guyancourt in the Yvelines. It
crosses Jouy-en-Josas, Bièvres, Antony, Cachan, Gentilly, and reaches Paris
at the Poterne des Peupliers beneath the Boulevard Kellermann. Its route
through Paris has been buried since 1912, and integrated into the city’s
drainage system. From the seventeenth century, however, trades developed
along the river that required large amounts of water: tanneries, taweries,
dyers, all activities seen as diseased. In Huysmans’s words:
   Deprived of its clothing of grass and its lines of trees, it was forced to set to work and
   exhaust itself in the unpleasant tasks demanded of it … It became tawed, and day and night
   washes the offal from flayed skins, macerates the piles of fleeces and raw leather, submits to
   the pinching of alum, the biting of lime and caustic.1
                  © Charles Marville/Musée Carnavelet/Roger Viollet
                              The Bièvre in the 1860s.

But if the Bièvre has disappeared from the surface, its route is still well
known. It follows first of all the line of the Rue Vergniaud – it was from
here that in winter floods the river spread its waters over a marsh whose ice,
preserved under straw, gave its name to the Rue de la Glacière. The Bièvre
then passes beneath the Boulevard Blanqui, encloses the public garden of
Square René-Le Gall between two branches, flows under the Boulevard
Arago, reaches the Jardin des Plantes and debouches into the Seine near the
Pont d’Austerlitz. But this is only a partial outlet. In the fifteenth century,
the monks of the Saint-Victor abbey (on the present site of the Mutualité)
diverted the course of the river in order to turn their mills. This ‘canal of the
Victorins’ almost dried up the natural course of the river, and ended up
joining the present line of the Rue de Bièvre to reach the Seine opposite
Notre-Dame.
                          Typography of street names.

    Formerly known as the Boulevard d’Italie, the Boulevard Blanqui was
given its present name in 1905, at the time of the Bloc des Gauches, by way
of homage to ‘le Vieux’, who spent his last years at no. 25, in a room on the
fifth floor put at his disposal by a friend. (The plaques on the boulevard
describe Blanqui as a ‘politician’ – precisely what he most despised. Not far
away, Pascal is called a ‘philosopher and mystic’, while Stendhal, in the
20th arrondissement, is a ‘man of letters’. It is not just the text on these
plaques that is inappropriate. We should protest – at least I do – at the
replacement of the old enamel plaques, with their fine Bodoni typeface, by
tin plaques printed in wretched stick characters.)
     Blanqui was freed in 1879 from the Clairvaux prison where he had
spent seven years, condemned to a life sentence for his participation in the
insurrection of 31 October 1870 against the government of ‘national
defence’. From his room on the boulevard, he wrote a long letter to Georges
Clemenceau, who had campaigned for his release. Blanqui saw Clemenceau
as a figure of hope, and his letter reads as if passing the torch: ‘Become the
man of the future, the leader of the revolution. It has not been able to find
one since 1830. Fortune has now provided one, do not take him away.’2
This reads very strangely for us, knowing what Clemenceau subsequently
became.
     The building at no. 25 – on the corner with the pretty Rue du Moulin-
des-Près, which rises towards La Butte-aux-Cailles – today bears the violet
and pink colours of a Hôtel Mercure. The plaque remains that recalls in
suitably strong terms the illustrious inhabitant who was taken from here to
Père-Lachaise followed by 100,000 Parisians.
     On the opposite pavement, at the corner of the Rue Abel-Hovelacque
where our friends at Éditions de la Découverte work, is the Estienne school
that trained several generations in the book trade, and whose students
included the young Robert Doisneau. Further on, the Boulevard Blanqui
makes an angle just after the Corvisart Métro station with its fine brick
façade. The Rue Corvisart (named after Napoleon’s personal physician)
descends gently towards the course of the Bièvre and a small quarter unique
in the heart of Paris: here you have the sense of being in a valley, where
chance and certain souls sensitive to place have combined varied
architectural styles, with a wood and an old château, the whole forming a
paysage composé, to use the expression from the time of Nicolas Poussin.
     The Square René-Le Gall (a municipal councillor in the 13th
arrondissement, shot on 7 March 1942) dates from 1938. It lies beneath the
Rue Croulebarbe, which is bordered by a high retaining wall. After walking
through a play area, as usual not very pretty – poorly designed swings and
toboggans, painted in glaring colours, since it is an established fact that
children have no taste – I enter a piece of woodland that seems almost wild,
as the gardeners have taken care to let it grow with the least constraint
possible. Then, between the edge of this forest and the side of the square,
marked by the walls of the Mobilier National, in the centre of the open
space we find a ‘creation’ – in the sense that Encelade’s copse at Versailles
is a creation. There is a topiary quincunx of box bushes, with roses in the
middle: four open semi-cylindrical arbours frame a small obelisk of raw
stone. The roses climb over the arbours and embrace the obelisk. To give an
idea of the charm of the place, you have to recall one of those painters who
were not landscape artists but painted almost by chance a single landscape –
I have in mind the Villa Medici gardens by Velasquez, or David’s view of
the Luxembourg, painted from the cell where he awaited the guillotine after
Thermidor.




              © RMN-Grand Palais (Musée du Louvre)/Philippe Fuzeau
                  Jacques-Louis David, The Luxembourg, 1794.

    To leave the Square René-Gall you have the choice between two
stairways, each with two flights of steps. One leads up to the Rue des
Cordeliers, and the other to the Rue Croulebarbe. On both sides, the ramp is
supported by a high wall inscribed with strange stone medallions, pebbles
and shells, in which you can discern human and animal figures. At the foot
of the ramps, heavy stone balls punctuate this remarkable ensemble, the
work of an architect by the name of Jean-Charles Moreau.
     ‘Remarkable’ is not too strong a word. Between the world wars there
was very little new building in Paris, apart from the sorry extension of the
Boulevard Haussmann from the Rue de la Chausée-d’Antin to the Rue
Drouot, which destroyed in its wake the Passage du Thermomètre and the
Passage du Baromètre, haunts of the Surrealists in the 1920s. But this epoch
did leave several fine gardens laid out in the peripheral quarters – the Parc
de Choisy, as we have seen; the garden where the Rue Sorbier broadens out
at Ménilmontant; the Square Séverine near the Porte de Bagnolet – along
with two masterpieces: the Square René-Le Gall and the Square du
Chapeau-Rouge, whose terraces continue along the Boulevard Sérurier
above Le Pré-Saint-Gervais, overlooking the whole of Paris’s north-eastern
suburbs and, in clear weather, the heights of the Montmorency forest behind
them.
     The stairway on the Croulebarbe side leads me up to the building of the
Mobilier National, one of the major works of Auguste Perret in Paris. Its
central courtyard is approached via a structure that might be called a porch
(though with no thickness), an arcade (but without an arch), or perhaps a
colonnade: two pairs of columns in fluted concrete, slightly tapered, bearing
a thin convex architrave. At the foot of each pair of columns rests a stone
lion. This light and almost fantastic entrance balances the severity of the
three sides of the courtyard and their large blind openings, which was a
necessity: the building is a storehouse for furniture, and furniture is stored
away from the light. (How can it have been proposed – let alone accepted –
that in the Bibiothèque Nationale books are kept in glass towers and readers
in cellars?)
     On the other side of the Rue Croulebarbe we have the first skyscraper
built in Paris, in 1960: twenty-six storeys, interrupted by a terrace on the
sixth floor designed to create a visual relationship with the streets behind it,
higher than the Rue Croulebarbe which nestles in the valley. The frame of
steel tubes is so well designed that the hostility shown at the time of the
building’s construction has disappeared. Today it is part and parcel of the
neighbourhood.
     I leave the valley of the Bièvre by the Rue Gustave-Geffroy, which rises
in hairpins towards the Avenue des Gobelins. (Gustave Geffroy wrote the
first biography of Blanqui – L’Enfermé, 1897 – and it was while visiting
Blanqui’s prison on Belle-Île that he made the acquaintance of Claude
Monet, becoming one of his main champions. The reason for Geffroy
having a street named after him here is that Clemenceau appointed him
administrator of the Mobilier National.) While climbing, you glimpse the
‘Château of Queen Blanche’, better seen from the Rue des Gobelins
(formerly the Rue de Bièvre). This authentic fifteenth-century building
probably has nothing to do with Queen Blanche, who might be either the
widow of Saint Louis or else Blanche de Navarre, wife of Philippe VI de
Valois.3 And the legend that this is where the famous ‘Bal des Ardents’ took
place (the courtiers of the mad Charles VI, covered with tar and feathers for
a masked ball, burned alive in a fire) is equally unfounded.
    Then, through the little Rue des Marmousets, I pass from silence to
turmoil as I come out on the Boulevard Arago.
    This boulevard gains from familiarity. By car and even on a bicycle
nothing leaps to the eye, but on foot it’s a different matter. Its chestnut trees
are among the earliest in Paris, they come into leaf at the beginning of April
and take autumn colours in the month of August. The buildings in the
background are in the style wrongly named after Haussmann, though they
date from the 1880s, their façades often bearing their date and the name of
their architect. (The streets, which actually are the product of Haussmann,
are often confused with the period of construction. Not so many buildings
were erected under Haussmann as is commonly believed.4) Mixed in with
these are some buildings from the 1960s, and picturesque hôtels
particuliers. At no. 65, the Cité Fleurie is a collection of artists’ studios also
dating from the 1880s, which at various times had both Gauguin and
Modigliani as tenants, and today has Jérôme Saint-Loubert Bié, who
created the design for the La Fabrique editions nearly twenty years ago.
    The Boulevard Arago then crosses the Rue de la Santé, the boundary
between the 13th and 14th arrondissements. This corner was the place of
public executions between 1909 and 1939, after which they took place
within the prison. Opposite the main gate of the prison, reinforced and
always closed, low buildings and a café with the sign La Bonne Santé were
replaced in the 1960s by an aparment block. At the corner of the Rue Jean-
Dolent, the prison wall bears a plaque with the names of eighteen résistants
executed here after being judged and condemned by the Sections Spéciales,
tribunals created in 1941 by interior minister Pierre Pucheu and justice
minister Joseph Barthélemy. No doubt we shall have to wait another fifty
years for a plaque to indicate that it was within these same walls that
members of the FLN were guillotined after being condemned to death by
military tribunals during the Algerian War, under a procedure similar to that
of the Sections Spéciales.
    Today, visitors to the Santé enter through a tiny gatehouse on the
opposite side from the main gate, on the short Rue Messier. A few years
ago, I came this way several times to see a friend imprisoned here. It was
winter, and from a caravan on the opposite pavement, nuns offered coffee to
poor people waiting in the cold. Among all the families in the queue, I
never saw a single white person. Nor were there many among the guards
who controlled the entrances. As in the Paris hospitals, subaltern jobs in the
prison system are often filled by West Indians.
    After long-running rumours of its imminent demise, the Santé was
finally demolished in January 2016. It is the last in a long series of prisons
to have disappeared since the most famous of their number – the Bastille –
was dismantled in the summer of 1789. The others included the Abbaye
prison, near the church of Saint-Germain-des-Près, where the September
massacres began; the Force, on the Rue Saint-Antoine at the corner of the
present Rue Mahler, where Claude-Nicolas Ledoux was imprisoned (he
would come out alive) and later the four sergeants of La Rochelle,
guillotined on the Place de Grève on 21 September 1822 for plotting against
the restored Bourbon monarchy; the Madelonnettes, a women’s prison on
the Rue Turbigo, where the Lycée Turgot now stands; Sainte-Pélagie,
between the Rue de la Clef and the Rue du Puits-de-l’Ermite, a political
prison under the Restoration and the July monarchy, through which all the
opposition leaders passed, as well as Gérard de Nerval, who speaks of it in
a poem:
In Sainte-Pélagie,
Under this lengthy reign
Where I lived in captivity,
Dreamy and pensive…5

There was also Clichy, a debtors’ prison that stood at no. 68 on the street of
the same name, where the inmates were locked up and maintained at the
cost of their creditors; and the Petite Roquette, a hexagonal panopticon for
women that was not demolished until 1974.
     After the Santé, at the corner with the Rue du Faubourg-Saint- Jacques,
there is a bare plinth. Before the war, it carried a statue of François Arago,
opposite the gardens of the Observatoire, of which he was for a long time
the director. An inscription indicates that the statue was destroyed by the
Vichy government, and that in 1994, Jan Dibbets, a Dutch conceptual artist,
replaced it with an ‘imaginary monument, made from medallions marked
with the astronomer’s name, fixed to the ground along the course of the
Paris meridian that crosses this place at the statue’s plinth’ – a far better
homage than the duds contemporary statuary generally produces. François
Arago was an ambiguous figure: a great scientist, an opponent of the July
monarchy, an active campaigner for the abolition of slavery in 1848, and
indeed a republican icon. But he was also minister of war in the provisional
government at the start of the Second Republic, and personally directed the
artillery barrage on the Latin Quarter during the June Days, hurling abuse at
the insurgent workers who had attacked the Republic and the result of
universal suffrage.
     From this plinth, passing the Institut d’Astrophysique, the Société des
Missions Évangéliques and the Arago clinic – summarizing in just a few
metres this site’s scientific, theological and medical achievements – I
approach the Lion de Belfort on the Place Denfert-Rochereau from behind.
     At the time of Chateaubriand and Balzac, this place was known as the
Barrière d’Enfer. The barriers of the Wall of the Farmers-General – gates in
the customs wall – bore either the name of the road that started from them
(Italie, Neuilly), or sometimes that of the road leading to them (La
Chapelle, Maine and Rochechouart). There was indeed a Rue d’Enfer
leading to the barrier, but what precise hell did this refer to? Perhaps the
street in question had been the via Inferior, when the Rue Saint-Jacques was
the via Superior: Inferior, Infera, d’Enfer… Nor do I know whether the
Barrière d’Enfer was chosen as a place of homage to Colonel Denfert-
Rochereau by an accidental homonym, or whether we should suspect a
trace of farcical spirit among the municipal councillors of the 1880s.
    Crossed by traffic in all directions, is the space around the Lion a real
square or simply a great crossroads? To be a square, it seems to me, there
should be more closed space than open, more buildings than emptiness, a
junction of streets, green or other spaces. But whatever the definition, Paris
is not a city of squares, as Louis Chevalier notes:
   What are our squares worth beside the squares of Rome – with their brilliant fountains, their
   Michelangelo marbles covered with dust? [He should have said ‘Bernini’, as I can see no
   Michelangelo statues on the Roman fountains. – E.H.] The Place de la République and its
   great bronze lady, with the barracks behind; the Bastille, immense and empty, peaked by a
   column and only needing an elephant; the Concorde, likewise decked out with an obelisk…6

Is Denfert-Rochereau a real square, then? Yes, despite everything, as it is
strongly centred, structured, organized by the two pavilions of the former
barrière that give it meaning, and make it more than a crossroads swept by
the flow of traffic.
    These two square-fronted buildings stand opposite one another,
symmetrical in relation to the avenue that has successively been called
Orléans, Maréchal-Leclerc, and more recently, in its short initial segment,
after Colonel Rol-Tanguy – who prepared the insurrection of 19 August
1944 in the basement of the westerly pavilion. In this building, the Paris
highways department now studies road surface materials, the different types
of paving and asphalt. The opposite building houses the Inspection
Générale des Carrières de Paris, and the door giving access to the
Catacombes is also here. The façades of the two buildings are examples of
Claude-Nicolas Ledoux’s classicism, the entrance framed by two pairs of
columns whose design appears simple at first sight – a cylinder broken by
three large rectangular blocks. A second look shows that the cylinder is
slightly tapered, and that the three blocs decline in width from bottom to
top. This solidity and severity – ritual words in relation to Ledoux – go
well, I think, with Guimard’s Art Nouveau ironwork for the Métro entrance
next to the westerly pavilion. In front of this, on the pavement, the trailer of
Madame Ranah, clairvoyant and medium, along with a hut selling waffles,
are the remains of a travelling fair that often used to be held here, and
where as a little boy I tried to see the knickers of girls flying up on the
swings.
    Each of these two pavilions is backed by gardens dating, like the Lion,
from the 1880s. Their design remains uncertain and their vegetation poor,
but they have a certain charm due to their dilapidated monuments built at
the start of the Third Republic. Behind the Métro station, in the garden that
bears Ledoux’s name, a little pyramid surrounded by sad-looking characters
is a monument to Ludovic Trarieux, founder of the Ligue des Droits de
l’Homme at the time of the Dreyfus affair. The adjacent garden, on the other
side of the Rue Froidevaux (a fireman who died on duty), also reminds us
of the name of a neoclassical architect, Jacques Antoine, creator among
other things of the Monnaie and the École des Ponts et Chaussées on the
Rue des Saints-Pères. The central monument has lost its statue, but the
plinth is decked on each side with a bronze bas-relief illustrating an aspect
of the life of François-Vincent Raspail. On the northern side he is shown as
doctor to the poor, his hat in his hand, taking the pulse of a dying man
surrounded by a grieving family; on the southern side he is the political
leader, with the same hat but now on his head, showing the way with a
broad gesture to insurgents armed with muskets. I had considered Raspail a
sympathetic character, who seemed to me more like Blanqui than Arago.
Passing the Rue de Sévigné, I always looked up at no. 5 where a plaque
indicates that this ‘promoter of universal suffrage’ – who was born in
Carpentras on 24 January 1794 and died at Arcueil on 7 January 1878 –
‘gave free care to the sick from 1840 to 1848’. But I changed my mind after
reading, in Gustave Lefrançais’s Souvenirs d’un révolutionnaire, that
Raspail owned a building from which he evicted tenants who did not pay
their rent – Lefrançais himself being one of them.7
                        Place Denfert-Rochereau: Ledoux
                           pavilion and Métro entrance.

    Behind the Catacombes pavilion, on the Square de l’Abbé-Migne (a
nineteenth-century churchman and philologist), a small column bears the
bas-relief effigy of Charlet, engraver and lithographer of the Romantic era,
who played a major role in propagating the legend of Napoleon. His was a
character of the same stature as Béranger – in Les Misérables we read that
‘if Virgil haunted the bars of Rome, David d’Angers, Balzac and Charlet
dined in the cheap restaurants of Paris’.
    To the east side, the square is bordered by the station of the RER B
(when I was at school, this was called the ‘ligne de Sceaux’), the oldest in
Paris still completely preserved, which is very fortunate as, with its
undulating façade enlivened by pilasters and its three large doors, it nicely
closes the space between the Avenue René-Coty and the Boulevard Saint-
Jacques.
    The buildings around the place are more opulent-looking, especially on
the side facing Montparnasse. To the south, between an Indian restaurant
and a lawyer’s office, is the Hôtel Floridor, which, even if it has only a
single star in the guidebooks, is dear to friends of Walter Benjamin, who
lived here in 1934–5, between his stays at the Palace on the Mabillon
crossroads and at 23 Rue Bénard, two steps from Denfert-Rochereau.
    I happen to have a personal relationship with the Lion. More precisely, I
owe him a debt, as he is bound up with a decisive turning point in my
existence. In 1981, I was living by the Parc Montsouris and had worked for
nearly twenty years in a cardiac surgery unit at the Laennec hospital near Le
Bon Marché. One night, called out on an emergency, I found myself waiting
at the traffic lights of the Place Denfert-Rochereau, which take a long time
to turn green. Looking at the Lion, it suddenly struck me as obvious that I
would not continue the same existence for a further twenty years. That
night, for the first time, I thought about ending my surgical career, changing
my life, and leaving a world that still seemed foreign to me despite the
many years I had spent in it. So much so that since that time, whenever I
pass the Lion, I mentally raise my hat and thank him for having steered me
towards a new life.
     Before Haussmann’s cutting of the Boulevard Saint-Michel, a long road
led from the Pont Saint-Michel to the Barrière d’Enfer, parallel to the Rue
Saint-Jacques. Certain segments of this route still remain, more or less
modified, while others have been absorbed as part of modern streets.
Starting from the bridge, the very ancient Rue de la Harpe is today cluttered
with a profusion of pizzerias, kebab shops and Greek restaurants. (When I
was a student, the Saint-Séverin quarter was deserted in the evenings, and
there were only two places open to eat, one on the Rue de la Huchette,
which I believe was called Chez Papille, and the other on the Rue des
Prétres-Saint-Séverin, run by Yugoslavs and decorated with large photos of
Mihailovic, head of the Serbian resistance and Tito’s rival.) The Rue de la
Harpe then took the present-day route of the Boulevard Saint-Michel, from
the Rue Racine up to the Place Saint-Michel (now Edmond-Rostand). There
it took the name Rue d’Enfer, skirted the Luxembourg, and followed the
present-day Rue Henri-Barbusse. From the Observatoire crossroads, the
Rue d’Enfer continued towards the barrière in a final segment that is today
the Avenue Denfert-Rochereau.
     Descending the Rue d’Enfer from the barrière (on, in present-day
terms, the Avenue Denfert-Rochereau from the square of that name), the
wall on the left used to be that of the Marie-Thérèse infirmary founded by
Mme de Chateaubriand to take in elderly widows and priests. In Book 36 of
his Mémoires d’outre-tombe, written here in May 1833, Chateaubriand, then
aged sixty-five, meditated on the improvements made to the site:
   My trees are of various kinds. I have planted twenty-three cedars of Lebanon and two druid
   oaks: they mock their master with his slender longevity … I have not selected these trees as I
   did at the Vallée-aux-Loups in memory of places I have visited. He who delights in
   memories preserves his hopes, but when one lacks children, youth and homeland what
   attachment can one have to trees whose leaves, flowers and fruits are no longer mysterious
   symbols used to count the days of illusion? … Moreover my trees scarcely know if they
   serve as a calendar for my pleasures or as death certificates for my years; they grow each
   day, as I shrink; they marry themselves to those of the Enfants-Trouvés enclosure and the
   Boulevard d’Enfer which envelop me. I see not one house; I would be less divorced from the
   world six hundred miles from Paris.

The entrance to this site, still occupied by a charitable institution, is closed
on the side of the avenue. From the Boulevard Raspail the gardens can be
admired through a gate, or better, from the path that winds its way around
the Fondation Cartier. The cedars are still there, the most impressive one
being almost integrated into the building’s impeccable glass façade, built by
Jean Nouvel in 1994.
    Returning to the Avenue Denfert-Rochereau, I pass the wall of the
Oeuvre des Jeunes Filles Aveugles and reach the front of the Saint-Vincent-
de-Paul hospital. In the Romantic age this was still the Enfants-Trouvés:
babies could be abandoned in the famous ‘tower’ described by Balzac. The
mechanism was similar to what you see in a post office: a cylinder half-
open and half-closed, which can be rotated to allow a package to be passed
from one side of the wall to the other without the person depositing the
infant being visible – or without it being possible to threaten the counter
clerk with a pistol and force them to hand over the cash.
    For me, this place is forever linked to the memory of a man who did far
more than just work here; he spent the greatest part of his life in the place.
Gilbert Huault was red-haired, not very tall, but of an imposing technical
ability and moral stature. He invented a new discipline and developed it to a
mature stage: that of neonatal resuscitation. Huault’s unit was not a factory
but the cutting edge of medical handicraft: everything was thought out,
everything was perfect down to the last piece of bandage. For years,
paediatric cardiac surgeons in Paris sent their patients to Huault: babies
weighing three or four kilos were taken by a special ambulance to what was
called the SVP. Huault was not an easy man, and I never recall seeing him
laugh; in fact, he often bawled me out for not having fixed a catheter
properly, or for leaving a drain partially blocked because the probe was too
deeply inserted. He was never satisfied, and although he was neither older
nor better qualified than me, he made a great impression. He helped
hundreds of infants survive, trained generations of paediatric resuscitators,
and never took time off. Perhaps he had to be rather neurotic to lead such an
existence, but if there is such a thing as divine justice, then Gilbert Huault
surely has a good place in heaven.
     The hospital has been closed since 2011, the courtyard invaded by
vegetation, and the metal uprights of the portico rusted. Entering through
the school of midwifery, you can walk through to the back wall that
separates the hospital from the Rue Boissonnade, one of the loveliest in
Montparnasse. All these buildings are due to be demolished and an ‘eco-
neighbourhood’ built in their place – a disturbing prospect.
     Opposite the hospital is the Rue Cassini, which skirts the façade of the
Observatoire – the work of Claude Perrault, whose brother Charles was the
famous author of fairy tales. Claude was both a doctor and an architect, and
a good one at that: he was entrusted with the Louvre colonnade after
Bernini’s plans were rejected by Colbert. As for Cassini, this is the name of
a whole dynasty of astronomers who were directors of the Observatoire for
more than a century.
     12 Rue Cassini is a 1930s Art Nouveau building, where I lived with my
parents from just after Liberation until I reached eighteen. From our duplex
on the fifth and sixth floors you could see the gardens of a convent on the
Avenue Denfert-Rochereau where the nuns grew their vegetables, and look
south as far as Gentilly and Ivry. The day’s rhythm was set by the great
Observatoire clock, which no doubt gave me my mania for punctuality. I
spent my lycée years there (there was no middle school at that time),
initially at Lycée Montaigne, which I reached via the paths of the
Observatoire, continuing below the Parthenon friezes reproduced on the
brick building that housed the Institut d’Art et d’Archéologie, then past the
pharmacy faculty and finally the École Coloniale (called the ‘Colo’), built
in Moorish style. After the quatrième class, the Lycée Montaigne students
went on to Louis-le-Grand, which was not yet the elitist school it later
became. To get there, I took either the Rue Saint-Jacques or the Boulevard
Saint-Michel, but when it rained I caught the 38 bus – its platform open at
the back (so that even if it was full, policemen or firemen could cling on to
the rails), with a conductor who slipped the tickets into a little metal
machine he held against his stomach, stamping them by turning a handle
whose sound I can still recall.
    The Rue Cassini has changed little since that time. On the Faubourg-
Saint-Jacques side, a number of hôtels particuliers from around 1900 give it
a picturesque look, even if the building at no. 1 is no longer that where
Balzac lived from 1828 to 1837 and wrote a large part of La Comédie
humaine. I remember that Bernard Lajarrige, a good supporting actor in
French films of the 1950s, lived in one of these hôtels. He played a
policeman in The Trip Across Paris, and his beautiful daughter excited the
gang of adolescents to which I belonged.
    From the Rue Cassini, a short zigzag via Rue Faubourg-Saint-Jacques
leads to the Rue Méchain, where the Union printing works used to occupy
no. 13. I often accompanied my father when he went there to see to the
printing of the classics he published around 1950, before he moved on to art
books. It was quite a spectacle to watch the typographers at work. Using
tweezers they would pick up the lead characters arranged in their box, and
compose lines at an amazing speed. This open wooden box contained a set
of compartments, one per font. Inclined at 45 degrees, these contained the
capital or ‘upper case’ letters above, and the small or ‘lower case’ letters
below, terms still used even now that typesetting is done by computer. To
change fonts, for example from Garamond to Didot, the box was changed.
    The Union printing works has a whole story attached to it. Founded in
1910 by two Russian immigrants, Chalit and Snégaroff, it initially served
the very active Russian community in Paris, and was supposedly used by
Plekhanov and Lenin. It then moved into book printing, along with
publications of the modernist movement. Apollinaire had his first
Calligrammes printed there, Léonce Rosenberg the Bulletin de l’Effort
moderne, the Surrealists Le Surréalisme au service de la révolution and the
magazine Minotaure, while Jacques Schiffrin printed the Pléiade series.
After the war Aimé Maeght and many of the major Paris galleries entrusted
the Union with their books and magazines.
    I was fond of Chalit and Snégaroff, their courtesy, their Russian accents,
their welcome. These two characters from another age, after making sure in
the mornings that everything was under control on the Rue Méchain, went
on to spend the rest of their day – so my father said – playing chess in
Montparnasse. The Union closed its doors in 1990, when most of Parisian
printing had already left for the banlieue. One of the last survivors of the
golden age, Jacques London (also an émigré Russian Jew), whose works
were on the Rue de la Grange-Batelière and printed the covers for La
Fabrique, has just closed its doors.
    From the Rue Cassini, the Avenue de l’Observatoire duly follows the
Paris meridian. On the left side, a plaque recalls that Jean Cavaillès was
arrested there before being shot in February 1944. Georges Canguilhem,
also a major figure in the Resistance, wrote a short text in which he tells
how his friend, this philosopher of mathematics, founded the movement
Libération-Sud together with D’Astier de la Vigierie, and subsequently the
military network Cahors.8 ‘Imagine one of your young professors’,
Canguilhem addressed his students,
   appearing dressed in overalls in the submarine base that the Kriegsmarine was building at
   Lorient. Do you think that behind the mask of a simple attentive worker, Carrière, in other
   words Cavaillès, could not but be aware that his life was at stake? … This was the man that
   students like you might have had as your teacher today, but whom they do not have, because
   he was a man such as I have sought to depict for you.

Opposite this black plaque, the right side of the Avenue de l’Observatoire
was formerly bordered by a long wall that hid the buildings of the Port-
Royal maternity hospital. For years, I could decipher here an inscription in
black paint: ‘Fighting for Défense de la France is fighting for liberation’
(Défense de la France was a resistance movement, but above all a
newspaper with the largest print-run of the underground press; it became
France-Soir in 1944). Today, the truncated corner formed by the Avenue de
l’Observatoire, the start of the Rue Henri-Barbusse and the Boulevard Port-
Royal is occupied by an extension of the maternity hospital, the work of the
same architects who designed the new Les Halles canopy, Patrick Berger
and Jacques Anziutti: unrelieved repetition of verticals, spandrels in
imitation marble, yellowy door-frames, botched details. The builders of
today’s hospitals often have marvels close at hand: the architects of the new
Saint-Louis hospital had before their eyes every morning the wings dating
from Henri IV; those who built the extension of the Cochin hospital could
see opposite them the Val-de-Grâce constructed in the days of Anne of
Austria; and here, at Port-Royal, the architects were only a few metres from
the buildings of the abbey and monastery. I do not mean that they should
have resorted to pastiche or eclecticism, but they had a challenge to meet, a
possible source of inspiration such as Velasquez was for Manet, or Saint-
Simon for Proust. One may always dream.
    The maternity hospital is situated alongside the big Observatoire
intersection. Crossing this, I have in mind the ending of Balzac’s Ferragus,
in which the former head of the Dévorants, at one time a fearsome
character, is now a broken old man whose cane the boules players borrow to
measure their throws. Between the south gate of the Luxembourg and the
north gate of the Observatoire, Balzac writes, is
   a space without a name, the neutral space of Paris. There, Paris is no longer; and there, Paris
   still lingers. The spot is a mingling of street, square, boulevard, fortification, garden, avenue,
   high-road, province and metropolis; certainly, all of that is to be found there, and yet the
   place is nothing of all that – it is a desert. Around this spot without a name stand the Enfants-
   Trouvés, the Bourbe, the Cochin hospital, the Capucines, the La Rochefoucauld hospital, the
   deaf and dumb asylum, the hospital of the Val-de-Grâce; in short, all the vices and all the
   misfortunes of Paris find their asylum there. And (that nothing may lack in this philanthropic
   centre) Science there studies the tides and longitudes, Monsieur de Chateaubriand has
   erected the Marie-Therèse infirmary, and the Carmelites have founded a convent. The great
   events of life are represented by bells which ring incessantly through this desert – for the
   mother giving birth, for the babe that is born, for the vice that succumbs, for the toiler who
   dies, for the virgin who prays, for the old man shaking with cold, for genius self-deluded.
   And a few steps off is the cemetery of Montparnasse, where, hour after hour, the sorry
   funerals of the Faubourg Saint-Marceau wend their way.

On the esplanade between the Rue d’Assas and the Rue Notre-Dame-des-
Champs, which is not asphalted, some of my friends still used to play
boules only twenty years ago. On reflection, the places listed by Balzac are
still there even if the names have changed, as if science, the church and the
hospital had a gift of preservation – one that also extends to the
surroundings here: the Boulevard de Port-Royal has remained the same as
when my mother went to do her shopping here, and the Boulevard
Montparnasse has kept its calm pavements and provincial shops as far as
the Raspail crossroads.
     The Boulevard Saint-Michel and the Rue d’Assas define a wide corner
that opens towards the chestnut trees of the Observatoire’s paths, which
stretch as far as the eye can see through to the gates of the Luxembourg. On
the Saint-Michel side are the station of the former ‘ligne de Sceaux’ with its
pretty ironwork; the Beauvoir Hôtel, whose neon sign stands out in a
famous night-time photo by Brassaï; the building of the CROUS [Centre
Régionale d’Oeuvres Universitaires et Scolaires], constructed in the 1960s
on the site of a small stadium where we used to go running when I was at
the Lycée Montaigne. On the Rue d’Assas side you have La Closerie des
Lilas, whose great days were before the war, even before the First World
War, but whose terrace is still worth visiting outside of peak hours.
    Two of the corners are marked by famous sculptures. In front of La
Closerie, Marshal Ney brandishes his sabre, close to where he was shot in
1815. The creator of this heroic effigy, François Rude, was first a
Bonapartist, and then a republican when he sculpted the recumbent figures
of Godefroy Cavaignac in the Montmartre cemetery (‘our Godefroy’, not to
be confused with his brother Louis Eugène, the general who butchered the
insurgents of June 1848). On the Luxembourg side is a fountain that marks
the entrance to the paths of the Observatoire, the ‘Four Parts of the World’,
gracious spiralling figures bearing above them the celestial sphere.
Carpeaux created this group just before his death, and it was Férmiet who
sculpted the bronze horses and the turtles that shoot their jets of water
towards the central motif. This pleasant halt in the shade of the chestnuts is
not exceptional; fine Paris fountains are to be found in public gardens, such
as the Médicis fountain in the Luxembourg, the elegant Quatre-Fleuves
fountain designed by Visconti for the Square Louvois in front of the
Bibliothèque Nationale, or again the Fontaine aux Lions that stands today at
the entrance to the gardens of La Villette. On the paved streets and squares,
on the other hand, I see nothing worthwhile, apart from the masterpiece by
Tinguely and Niki de Saint Phalle in the Beaubourg complex. There are
places that could do well with a fountain, such as the Place des Vosges, the
Place des Victoires, the Place Vendôme – but the preference has been to
install a king on horseback or an emperor on a column. And the modern
fountains, from the Place de la Sorbonne via the Place Saint-German-des-
Près to the Place Gambetta, are each more ridiculous than the last.
    Taking the short Rue du Val-de-Grâce, I come to the façade of the great
church of that name. Anne of Austria entrusted its construction to Mansart,
but the man was not accommodating and modified his plans as he went
along, which caused delays and budget overruns, as we would say today.
Claude Perrault said of Mansart that ‘better ideas always came to him while
working than those he had started off with, and often he had to repeat the
same pieces two or three times’, so much so that the work had hardly been
started when it was removed from Mansart and entrusted to architects who
were unworthy of it, first of all Lemercier, then Le Muet. (It was an
attractive feature of seventeenth-century France, the existence of these stiff-
necked characters such as François Mansart, Blaise Pascal, Nicolas
Poussin.) If the church of Val-de-Grâce has a badly proportioned drum and
dome – like Soufflot’s Panthéon – this is undoubtedly bound up with the
modifications made to Mansart’s plan. And it seems to me that Balzac
exaggerated a bit in referring at the start of Old Goriot to ‘the silence that
reigns in the streets shut in between the dome of the Panthéon and the dome
of the Val-de-Grâce, two conspicuous public buildings which give a
yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies
beneath the shadow of their leaden-hued cupolas’.
    From the semi-circular place in front of the Val-de-Grâce gate, I can see
further down the Rue Saint-Jacques the square bell-tower of another church,
Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas. The two buildings are neighbours and almost
contemporary, and yet opposite in every way. One is fat and the other thin,
one ornate and rich, the other poor and bare, one built according to the
rules, the other according to the builders’ taste, even if Gittard, the architect
of Saint-Sulpice, supervised the work and designed its façade. If the Val-de-
Grâce is a Jesuit church – in the sense that it is built after the plan of the
Gesù in Rome – Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas is a Jansenist temple. The
church is indeed bound up with the history of Jansenism: its foundation
stone was laid by the Duchesse de Longueville, sister of the Grand Condé
and illustrious protector of Port-Royal. Jansenist pilgrims would gather
before the tomb of Duvergier de Hauranne, abbot of Saint-Cyran and a
friend of Jansen, the spiritual advisor to the nuns of Port-Royal, who spent
five years in prison and was only released on the death of Richelieu.
    Just before reaching Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, the Rue des Ursulines
opens to the right from the Rue Saint-Jacques. It boasts a very nice hall that
was an art cinema during the golden age of Paris film around 1960s. It was
in the Ursulines that I saw the first films of Jean Rouch, Moi, un noir and
Chronicle of a Summer. At that time, art cinemas were almost all on the
Left Bank. In the Latin Quarter, apart from the minuscule Champo (the
other halls on the Rue Champollion were still theatres), you had further up
on the Rue Victor-Cousin the Panthéon cinema that still exists, valiantly
independent, and where I saw one morning in 1963 the preview of Chris
Marker’s Le Joli Mai. On the Place Saint-Sulpice, between the mairie and
the Rue du Vieux-Colombier, there was a cinema whose name I forget (the
Bonaparte?). In Montparnasse, there were two almost adjacent: the Raspail
in a fine modernist building, and the Parnasse on the little Rue Jules-
Chaplain, which still exists but is now the MK2 Parnasse. Here, each
Thursday after the last screening, the owner asked impossible questions on
cinema history, and the first to give the correct answer won a free ticket
(apparently, when Truffaut was there, he took them all). A little further off,
the Bertrand, on the street of that name, gave a bit of life to the sorry Duroc
quarter.
     On the Right Bank, if I’m not mistaken, there were only two art
cinemas: the Mac-Mahon, closely associated with the New Wave, and the
Studio 28 on the Rue Tholozé in Montmartre, famous for the scandal
aroused by the screening of Buñuel’s L’Age d’or. In the 1930s, the far-right
leagues had attacked the cinema with cries of ‘death to Jews’ (Marie-Laure
de Noailles, wife of the film’s producer, was Jewish).
     It was in these cinemas that my generation came to know the American
cinema of the 1930s and ’40s – Howard Hawks, John Huston, Frank Capra,
Ernst Lubitsch – as well as the German and Soviet classics, the postwar
Italians, not to mention such French directors as Jean Grémillon, Jean
Renoir and Jean Vigo. Since this time, the concentration of film distribution
and the proliferation of multiplexes has led to the closure of many of these
independent cinemas run by cultured film-lovers.
     That last sentence may be read as symptomatic: as the years pass, it is a
natural tendency to believe that everything was better in the past; in other
words, when we were young. I don’t claim to be totally immune to this
tendency to become a nostalgic old grouch, but it is not the only reason I no
longer feel at home on the present Left Bank. A real decadence has struck
the very heart of this area, between the Jardin des Plantes and the Rue du
Bac, the Boulevard Montparnasse and the Seine. The basic reason for this is
a transfer of population. When I lived on the Rue de la Montagne-Sainte-
Geneviève in the late 1950s, workers still lived in the quarter, if often in
small rooms on the top floor, with toilets on the landing. But they were
there. Algerian workers stayed in weekly or monthly hotels between the
Rue Maubert and the Seine, on the Rue Maître-Albert, the Rue Frédéric-
Sauton, the Rue de Bièvre. Down-and-outs colonized the Rue de la
Contrescarpe and the Rue Mouffetard. (Those who don’t believe me can
read Jean-Paul Clébert’s excellent Paris insolite, published by Denoël in
1952.) When my father had his publishing house on the Rue de Seine,
overalls were as common in the local cafés as tweed jackets. Then, starting
in the 1960s, the great renovation project launched by Malraux and
continued by Pompidou put up rents to levels that drove the working class
from the heart of the Left Bank, on their way to being pushed out of Paris
completely. (It is said that the Right Bank has suffered the same fate, but
this is not true: it is twice as large with twice the population, and contains
pockets of popular resistance that are slow and difficult to suppress.)
    During this sociological upheaval, spread over many years, events
occurred that had the effect of securing the Left Bank for commodity
fetishism. Before May ’68, the Latin Quarter fully deserved its name. All
the Paris students were concentrated there, in the Sorbonne, the law faculty
on the Place du Panthéon, the two medical faculties and that of pharmacy –
as well as the grandes écoles that framed the Montagne Sainte-Geneviève –
the École des Mines, the École Normale Supérieure, the Polytechnique, and
the Beaux-Arts on the Quai Malaquais. All these young people animated the
quarter, giving it a gaiety and beauty that could be sensed in the cafés,
libraries and gardens as well as in the lecture halls. After May, measures
were taken to prevent a repetition of such unwelcome events. First of all,
the streets were asphalted, to prevent the paving stones being ripped up.
Then students were dispersed to new faculties far from the centre, access to
which could be easily controlled. It is true of course that there was
congestion, but this could have been tackled differently.
    Another development, rather later, was the dismantling of the
stronghold of publishing in the 6th arrondissement. To recall, Hachette had
its large building on the corner of the Boulevard Saint-Germain and the
Boulevard Saint-Michel, Flammarion was on the Rue Racine, Robert
Laffont on the Place Saint-Sulpice, Larousse on the Boulevard Raspail, Le
Seuil on the Rue Jacob, Hazan on the Rue de Seine, Nathan on the Rue
Monsieur-le-Prince – the list could be continued. But with the capitalist
concentration of publishing, and the replacement of editors by accountants
concerned with return on investments, many large houses abandoned their
historic headquarters and moved out to glass and metal buildings near the
Periphérique. A few major publishers have remained in the quarter,
Gallimard, Minuit, Fayard and Bourgois among others, but they are like
vestiges of a past splendour.
    A few years earlier, contemporary art had already abandoned the Left
Bank. In 1960, at the time of the ‘new realists’, galleries were concentrated
in a quadrilateral bordered by the Rue Guénégaud, the Rue Bonaparte, the
Boulevard Saint-Germain and the Seine. On the Right Bank there was
hardly anything except antiques. By the 1990s, however, for reasons that no
doubt had to do with rent levels, contemporary art migrated en masse, first
to the Bastille quarter and then to the Marais. There are still a few fine
galleries on the Left Bank, and many excellent shops selling 1960s furniture
and African art, but once again, ‘it’s not like it was’.
    Booksellers, too – another traditional activity of the Left Bank – are on
the decline. Many small bookshops have closed, but above all, four major
establishments have disappeared that were institutions and almost symbols
of the Latin Quarter: François Maspero’s La Joie de Lire on the Rue Saint-
Séverin, which was the political university of a whole generation; Les
Presses Universitaires de France on the Place de la Sorbonne, a major
academic bookshop; then more recently the Moniteur on the Place de
l’Odéon, irreplaceable for architecture; and finally La Hune, on the corner
of the Place Saint-Germain-des-Près and the Rue Bonaparte. During my
school years, a shop known as Le Divan was run there by an old-style
author-publisher-bookseller, Henri Martineau, the great specialist in
Stendhal of his time. He was kind enough to present me with copies of
Henry Brulard and Les Souvenirs d’égotisme, in editions that were
admirable both typographically and philologically. This corner has now
reverted to luxury goods, like the former La Hune shop on the Boulevard
Saint-Germain, which is today a Vuitton outlet, the very standard-bearer of
bourgeois vulgarity.
    These various changes have had convergent effects: ‘intellectual life’
has disappeared from the Left Bank. It is true that this is an unpleasant term
that covered a great deal of snobbery and caste spirit, but something of the
spirit of Sartre, Giacometti, Perec and Genet hovered in these streets, not to
mention Mastroianni, a loyal customer of Le Balto, on the corner of the Rue
Mazarine and the Rue Guénégaud. Luxury clothes and accessories have
driven out their ghosts, and ‘made all who are Parisians at heart tremble’, as
Louis-Sébastien Mercier wrote about a certain destruction on the Chaussée
d’Antin.
    I return now to the Rue Saint-Jacques after this long parenthesis that
began on the Rue des Ursulines. Slipping between Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-
Pas and the Institut des Sourds-Muets, I enter the Rue de l’Abbé-de-l’Épée
(a good abbot, founder of this institute). It is bordered on the left by the
long wall that encloses the institute’s garden, and on the right by fancy
buildings of which no. 14, dated 1909, is given a timid Art Nouveau stamp
by its sculpted leaves, the curves of its balconies, and the ironwork volutes
at its entry. I was born here in July 1936, and lived here for the next four
years. The earliest memory I have is in this apartment: a friend of my
parents, in uniform, coming to kiss me in my bed – this was undoubtedly
autumn 1939. Then in June 1940, my family piled into a black 11CV
Citroën just like you see in all the films about this episode, and took the
road for Marseille.




       14 Rue de l’Abbé-de-l’Épée and the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.

    On the corner of the Rue de l’Abbé-de- l’Épée and the Boulevard Saint-
Michel, a recumbent naked woman pays strange homage in stone to two
pharmacists who discovered the therapeutic virtues of quinine, Pelletier and
Caventou. Walking opposite the long façade of the École des Mines, I reach
the corner of the Rue Royer-Collard. From the 1960s to about 1985, this
place was not only the terminus of the 85 bus, which ran to the Saint-Ouen
mairie by a winding and magnificent trajectory, but also the site of a
bookshop called Autrement Dit. Run first of all by Italians, it passed into
the orbit of Éditions de Minuit. In spring 1984, Éditions Hazan, of which I
had just become director, published its first book of the new era, Duchamp,
with text by Jean-Christophe Bailly and drawings by Roman Cieslewicz. It
was quite natural for us to choose Autrement Dit for the launch party, the
unforgettable premiere to a long series of ‘bookshop encounters’, as they
are called, which are one of the charms of the trade, the only moment when
the publisher meets that multifarious and mysterious being, the reader.
        Roman Cieslewicz, cover image for Duchamp, Éditions Hazan, 1984.

    A little later, when Éditions de Minuit won the Goncourt prize with
Marguerite Duras’s The Lover, the wise Jérôme Lindon, the very Nestor of
publishing, bought with the money from the million copies sold, the
Larousse offices opposite the Sorbonne and opened the fine bookshop
Compagnie there. Autrement Dit was then closed, and its corner site is
today occupied by a branch of Crédit Lyonnais.
