CHAPTER 5

In Balzac’s day, the tiny Rue de Venise, perpendicular to the Rue Saint-
Martin opposite Beaubourg, was much longer than it is now, ending in a
cul-de-sac close to the Rue Saint-Denis, to which it was linked by the Cour
Batave. This series of three courts, famous at the time, is described by
Balzac in César Birotteau, part of which takes place in and around Les
Halles:
   This monastic construction, with arcades and internal galleries, built of cut stone and
   ornamented with a fountain at the back, a damaged fountain that opens its lion’s maw less to
   give water than to request it from all passers-by, was in all likelihood invented to endow the
   Saint-Denis quarter with a kind of Palais-Royal. This unhealthy monument, buried on each
   of its four sides by high buildings, has only life and movement during the day; it is the centre
   of dark passages that meet each other and join the quarters of Les Halles and Saint-Martin
   via the famous Rue Quincampoix – damp paths where people in a hurry get rheumatism.
   There are several industrial cesspits, very few Batavians and many groceries.

Walking straight ahead, at a good pace, it should not take more than a
quarter of an hour to get from Beaubourg to the Grands Boulevards, but it is
better to go slowly so as to perceive the succession of strata between what
remains of the old Halles and the Strasbourg-Saint-Denis intersection – a
concentrate of Parisian history.
    The Rue Quincampoix is a good starting point. The buildings on it have
not changed much since the time of the regency of Louis XV, when the
Scotsman John Law established his bank there and applied the famous
‘principle’ that enabled him to rise from an adventurer to superintendent of
royal finances: the issue of paper money against gold. The regent, Philippe
d’Orléans, faced with the threatening bankruptcy of the royal treasury (its
debt being equivalent to ten years’ tax receipts), authorized Law to issue
quantities of paper money far greater than its gold coverage. So much so
that in 1720 the system collapsed, when it became apparent that the famous
paper was no longer worth anything. According to legend, in the days of its

splendour a hunchback in the Rue Quincampoix hired himself out as a
platform for those pressing to subscribe to shares in Law’s bank.
    The Hôtel de Beaufort, where Law had his office, disappeared with the
cutting of Rue Rambuteau that leads to Rue Saint-Denis. Rambuteau,
prefect of the Seine department under Louis-Philippe, opened up this street
that rightly bears his name and undertook major work in the city, including
the general extension of gas lighting and the levelling of the Grands
Boulevards. It is to him that we owe such fine canyons overlooked by
raised pavements as the Boulevard du Temple and the Boulevard Saint-
Martin.
    On the Rue Saint-Denis, where the Rue Rambuteau comes out, we again
find Auguste Blanqui. We left him a very old man in his last dwelling on the
boulevard that bears his name. Here he is a twenty-four-year-old student
receiving his baptism of fire. On the night of 19 November 1827, following
the electoral victory of the opposition in Paris, young people, so-called
casseurs, threw stones at windows, including the police station on the Rue
Mauconseil, and set up barricades made of planks and cobbles by the Saint-
Leu church, the Passage du Grand-Cerf and the Rue Grénéta. These same
rowdies repeated their misdeeds the following night, and the prefect of
police had to send troops to restore order. They fired, killing four people,
and the young Blanqui was among those injured, receiving a flesh wound in
the shoulder, though this was not serious and was treated by his mother. The
prefect concluded: ‘These events have aroused in the quarter a salutary fear,
which it is to be hoped will prevent the return of similar disorder.’ A hope,
we have to say, that was not fulfilled.1
    In actual fact, the tradition of such riots was already well anchored in
the Rue Saint-Denis. In 1709, a year of scarcity at the end of Louis XIV’s
reign, Saint-Simon relates:
   It happened that this Tuesday morning, 20 August, bread was lacking in many places. In the
   Saint-Denis quarter, a woman shouted out, exciting others. The archers positioned at the
   distribution points threatened this woman, who only shouted louder. They seized her and put
   her in shackles. Within a moment, all the artisans on the boulevard ran up, tore off her
   shackles and ran through the streets pillaging bakers and pastry shops; one after another, the
   shops closed. The disorder grew and spread to adjacent streets, without acts of violence;
   people demanded bread and everywhere they took it.2

The nights of November 1827 look like a dress rehearsal for the revolution
of July 1830. On the 28th of this month, the second day of the ‘Trois

Glorieuses’, a military column set off from the Innocents market, charged
with clearing the quarter through the Rue Saint-Denis as far as the city gate.
The task was not simple:
   The battalion, armed with two artillery pieces that the difficulties of passage and the
   narrowness of the street made useless, immediately encountered most serious difficulties as
   soon as it left the Place des Innocents. It was rapidly separated from the rest of the column
   by barricades raised behind it, obstructed by those that it found ahead, and harassed by
   constant fire coming from windows on the Rue Saint-Denis. Level with the Rue Batave, in
   particular, there was a formidable barricade. The battalion crossed it only to come under fire
   from the rioters massed behind the gates of the Cour Batave, in which each window was a
   firing point.3

The street was blocked by a good thirty barricades (in those memorable
days there were more than 4,000 throughout Paris).
   In the many riots and insurrections under the July monarchy, the Rue
Saint-Denis erupted every time. In June 1831, when the archbishop’s palace
was sacked:
   On the 17th, 1,200 soldiers were posted, but they could not be trusted. They stayed drinking
   with the mutineers in the bars of the Rues Saint-Martin and Saint-Denis, and were in a
   continual state of intoxication. Around nine o’clock in the evening, cavalry charges in the
   Rue Neuve-Saint-Denis and the surrounding streets. There were many arrests.4

In the same year, on 7 September:
   Warsaw had just been taken by the Russians and reduced to capitulation. When the sad news
   reached the capital, the people rose up and the revolutionary disturbances that are always
   latent resumed with particular intensity. The crowd gathered outside the ministry of foreign
   affairs to cries of ‘Long live Poland!’ ‘Down with the ministers!’ Dispersed by the dragoons,
   the rioters took themselves off to the Porte Saint-Denis, the headquarters of the riot.

The Saint-Denis quarter rose up again at the time of the cholera epidemic of
1832, then during the insurrection that, as we saw, followed the burial of
General Lamarque in June the same year, and once again in the course of
the riot that followed the passing of the law of February 1834 that restricted
freedom of the press (the massacre on the Rue Transnonain took place
during this disturbance). The insurrection of May 1839 organized by the
Société des Saisons (Blanqui, Barbès, Voyer d’Argenson, Laponneraye) had
its nerve centre on the Rue Grénéta.
     Alongside these ‘historical’ events in which the Rue Saint-Denis always
played a major role, the quarter also rose up in small-scale riots that were
brief, anonymous and soon forgotten:

   On 12 September 1841, around eight in the evening, a gathering of some 300 individuals
   aged from sixteen to twenty, dressed in work clothes, stationed themselves on the Place du
   Châtelet crying out: ‘Down with Louis-Philippe!’ ‘Long live the Republic!’, ‘Down with
   Guizot!’ The forces of order managed to disperse them after serious clashes, in the course of
   which an officer of the peace was seriously injured. From the Place du Châtelet, the crowd
   took Rues Saint-Denis, Mauconseil, du Ponceau and Saint-Martin towards the Boulevard
   Saint-Martin, shouting out abuse. Some clothing shops were pillaged in passing. Red
   material was seized to make flags, with sticks taken from concierge lodges.5

The red flag had made its appearance on the insurrectionary side in the days
of June 1832, a nice reversal of meaning, as it had previously been the
signal announcing the proclamation of martial law.
    Between the Rue Rambuteau and the monumental gate where it ends,
the Rue Saint-Denis has neither the same architectural style throughout nor
the same ambience. In an initial segment, as far as the intersection with the
Rue Étienne-Marcel and the Rue Turbigo, it is still noisy and busy,
takeaways jostling with second-hand clothing and sex toys. Nineteenth-
century buildings break the continuity of older ones. The church of Saint-
Leu-Saint-Gilles, which dates from the fourteenth century, has suffered
many assaults that have left it a building quite lacking in grace. During the
Revolution, on 29 Brumaire of year II, the Lombards section sent an
address to the Convention announcing that ‘it no longer recognizes any
divinity other than Reason, and is bringing the treasures of superstition,
amassed by hypocrisy, which will better serve to consolidate the Republic
than to ornament lies’.6 Following this, the church became a depot of salted
meat for the sausage-makers of the quarter. When its function was restored,
its apse unfortunately faced directly onto the Boulevard Sébastopol.
Commissioned with remedying this, Victor Baltard demolished three
chapels and closed the church on this side with a flat neo-Renaissance wall
that at least has the merit of being unremarkable.
    Between the Rue Turbigo and the Rue Réamur everything changes. The
buildings here follow with calm regularity, I would even say a gentleness
that makes this section a haven, a rest for the eyes. The majority of them
were built under the Empire, the Restoration or the July monarchy, in other
words, in the first half of the nineteenth century. The decrees on house
alignment issued then, and the new sites available – church property that
had been nationalized and divided up during the Revolution – explain why
the street was renovated at this time. All these buildings have common
features that give a sense of regular harmony: their height (four storeys),

their narrow unshuttered windows, their flat façades without balconies and
almost without ornament, the alignment of their cornices, and finally their
roughcast stucco – a creamy off-white that is the true colour of the city,
alongside the grey of raw stone I have mentioned above. It is a miracle, in
any case, that the generations of builders who succeeded each other on the
scaffolding, at one time from the Creuse and now from Mali, have been
able to preserve this colour. I continue here past traditional Paris shops, a
few fine old cafés, a newsagent, a wine-merchant, several haberdashers –
we are at the edge of the Sentier. The population is neither bourgeois nor
uniformly white: warehousemen, ‘garçons de boutique’ as they are called in
the police report written after the insurrection of 1827, building workers,
and already the female sex workers who are increasingly numerous as you
approach the Porte Saint-Denis.
    A number of arcades connect the Rue Saint-Denis with its adjoining
streets: the narrow and tortuous Passage de la Trinité leading to the Rue de
Palestro, built on the site of the Enfants-Bleus hospital (blue on account of
their uniform, not from one of those infantile heart diseases whose surgical
treatment was for a long time my everyday task), the little Passage Basfour,
and especially the local wonder that attracts a few tourists, the Passage du
Grand-Cerf. Covered over around 1825, it was until then the exit from the
hostelry of the Grand Cerf onto the Rue Saint-Denis. It was from this inn
that diligences, coaches and carriages left for towns north of Paris. In the
opening pages of A Start in Life, Balzac describes an establishment of this
kind (located, it is true, a little further up, on the corner of Rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Denis and Rue d’Enghien):

1 Passage de Bourg l’Abbé
2 Passage du Grand Cerf
3 Passage de la Trinité
4 Passage Basfour
5 Passage du Caire
6 Passage du Ponceau
7 Passage Sainte-Foy
8 Passage Lemoine

   The Hôtel du Lion d’Argent occupies a piece of land which is very deep for its width.
   Though its frontage has only three or four windows on the Faubourg-Saint-Denis, the
   building extends back through a long courtyard, at the end of which are the stables, forming
   a large house standing close against the division wall of the adjoining property. The entrance
   is through a sort of passageway beneath the floor of the second storey, in which two or three
   coaches had room to stand.

But already in the very first lines, Balzac warned us:
   Railroads, in a future not far distant [this was written in 1842], must force certain industries
   to disappear forever, and modify several others, more especially those relating to the
   different modes of transportation in use around Paris. Therefore the persons and things
   which are the elements of this scene will soon give to it the character of an archaeological
   work.

He was right, and it is in fact hard to imagine the Rue Saint-Denis as it was
in the 1840s: the major axis of north-south traffic in Paris, along with the
Rue Saint-Martin. A large number of horse-drawn buses passed along it,
belonging to various companies: the Tricycles, running between the Place
des Victoires and the Bastille; the Diligentes, one from the Rue Saint-

Lazare to Charenton; the Citadines from the Place des Petits-Pères to
Belleville; the Écossaises from Notre-Dame-des-Victories to the Halle aux
Vins.
    The Grand-Cerf has glass panels said to be the tallest in all the Paris
arcades, allowing for two levels above the shops, the first for storage and
the second for housing. (It is sometimes said that Céline spent his childhood
there, and that the Grand-Cerf was the model for the Bérézinas arcade in
Death on Credit, but this was in fact the Passage Choiseul.) As in many of
the Paris arcades, the shops – furniture, candles, jewellery, African art – are
by no means fashionable. Let’s hope that they remain this way, slightly
dusty and a little sad.
    Taking the Passage du Grand-Cerf and then the Rue Marie-Stuart, I
reach the Rue Montorgueil, opposite the Stohrer patisserie that has offered
the most exquisite macaroons ever since the reign of Louis XV. This is one
of the charms of the big city: in less than two hundred metres you cross
from the Rue Saint-Denis, a working-class fragment of old Paris, to the Rue
Montorgueil, one of those most frequented by a young and well-heeled
bourgeoisie, and by tourists from around the world.
    Reaching the Rue Réamur, I am struck by a very clear frontier effect.
This is not due to crossing from the 1st to the 2nd arrondissement. These
arrondissements have only a weak identity; ‘I live in the 5th
arrondissement’ has a clear meaning, but no one says ‘I live in the 2nd’, as
opposed to ‘close to the Bourse’ or ‘behind the Bibliothèque Nationale’. If
the Rue Réamur forms a frontier, this is because its two sides are so
different here that by crossing from one to the other you actually change
worlds. The south side is a mixture of old buildings, post-Haussmann
constructions and eclecticism. The huge Félix Potin building, between the
Boulevard Sébastopol and the Rue de Palestro, brings a touch of Art
Nouveau, with its octagonal rotunda topped by a skylight that it would be
nice to be able to climb up to. Monoprix should be taken to task for
replacing the venerable signboard that was still prominent in the 1980s. We
also owe Félix Potin another great Art Nouveau building, one of the rare
beauties on the Rue de Rennes.
    The road parallel with the Rue Réamur to the south is called after Pierre
Lazareff. The newspaper France-Soir, whose last owner was a Russian
oligarch, has finally bit the dust, so I can say without injury to anyone what
this paper represented. Under the editorship of Pierre Lazareff, as part of the

Hachette group, France-Soir proclaimed itself ‘the only French newspaper
with over a circulation over a million’, and played the same role that the
TF1 television channel does today: working to brainwash the greatest
number of people, while earning as much money as possible. It was supine
towards governments of any shade, with only one column saving its honour,
the crosswords of Max Favalelli. If Lazareff is today seen as a great
journalist, this is a collateral effect of the cult of the 1960s, the heyday of
the ‘Trente Glorieuses’, a golden age that we are told will return one day –
whereas the Gaullist years were actually ones of conformity and boredom
on the one hand, and of war and police brutality on the other, ignominies
that Pierre Lazareff and France-Soir covered with regular servility.
    The north side of the Rue Réamur is as rectilinear, homogeneous and
solid as the south side is mixed and imaginative. It consists of a regular
series of long buildings in a style that could be called ‘commercial
monumental’, the oldest dating from 1900 and the most recent from the
1930s, when the rag trade was still a flourishing industry: in the street, in
shops, and in the two or three upper levels of workshops and stores. Some
of these buildings were successful, like the two with rotunda and dome that
majestically frame the entry to the Rue Dussoubs. (Named after Denis
Dussoubs, deputy in the legislative assembly of the Second Republic, killed
on the Mauconseil barricade on 4 December 1851 while resisting the coup
d’état of Louis Bonaparte. Victor Hugo relates his heroic death in History of
a Crime.)
    North of the Rue Réamur, the Rue Saint-Denis changes in both
construction style and atmosphere. There are still many buildings similar to
those described above, but the alignment is no longer respected, and is
mixed in with post-Haussmann buildings, taller and often set back. This is
the ready-to-wear end of the rag trade, and sex workers are more numerous.
(I have used this term since we published the book by Thierry Schaffauer,
who practises this profession and is often in this quarter.7)
    The historical vestiges of this segment of the Rue Saint-Denis are only
virtual: the crossing in the wall of Charles V just before reaching the
Boulevard Saint-Denis (whereas the wall of Philippe Auguste was crossed
level with the Rue Étienne-Marcel); the memory of the great convent of the
Filles de l’Union Chrétienne on the corner with the Rue de Tracy, where the
statue of a smiling Michelet, in bas-relief and standing, recalls that his

father had established his printing works in the church of the confraternity,
and that Jules was born there in 1798.
    The arcades here are many and varied. The Passage Saint-Foy, very
narrow and dark, is often occupied by ladies who do not want to be
disturbed in their activities. The wretched Passage du Ponceau comes out on
the Boulevard Sébastopol opposite the Square Émile-Chautemps – a
Radical senator under the Third Republic, this public garden devoted to him
being one of the finest from nineteenth-century Paris. The two basins
decorated with sculptures, either mythological or ‘of their time’
(Agriculture, Industry), the perfectly designed cast-iron balustrades around
the lawns, the quite simple wooden benches, the gardeners’ huts, the great
chestnut trees, and the spacious setting between the Conservatoire des Arts
et Métiers and the façade of the Gaîté-Lyrique theatre, make this an ideal
halt in a quarter that does not have many such. Above I made a list of my
favourite Paris public gardens of the 1930s. There are just as many
successful ones from the 1850s, mainly the work of the Davioud-Alphand
team, such as the Square Louvois opposite the Bibliothèque Nationale, the
Square Montholon off the Rue La Fayette, or the Square Paul-Painlevé
between the Sorbonne and the Cluny museum. With their old trees, their
fountains, their statues and their lawns (no walking!), they are old-
fashioned and peaceable places, well suited to the student’s sandwich or the
pensioner’s cigarette.
    In this segment of the Rue Saint-Denis, the courtyards remind me of
those of the Marais of my childhood, dark, dirty and encumbered with carts,
lean-tos with tin roofs, vans – the same courtyards that you have today
outside the most expensive apartments and most elegant shops in the city.
Here the decrepitude is less marked – the obligatory face-lift has passed
them by – but there is the same contrast between the nobility of the stone
and the quite plebeian activities.

                             © J. Paul Getty Museum
                        Eugéne Atget, Place du Caire, 7903.

    Between the Rue du Caire and the Rue d’Alexandrie, the Rue Saint-
Denis borders the Passage du Caire, doyen of Parisian arcades, opened in
1799 after Bonaparte’s return from the expedition to Egypt. The
Egyptomania of the time can be traced in the street names – Alexandrie,
Damiette, Aboukir, Le Caire – as well as in the proud façade of the main
entry on the Place du Caire, decorated with three heads of the goddess
Hathor. The Passage du Caire is not only the oldest arcade, it is also totally
different from all the other Paris arcades. Whether they are more
fashionable, like Véro-Dodat, Colbert, Vivienne, or more down-market like
Choiseul or Jouffroy, these are places to stroll, to buy fancy goods or books,
to stop for coffee – in other words, as Walter Benjamin put it, ‘The arcade is
a street of lascivious commerce only; it is wholly adapted to arousing
desires.’8 The Passage du Caire, however, is nothing like that at all. It is not
made for the casual walker, and no tourists are to be found. Its activity is the
wholesale trade in fabrics, in ready-to-wear, and in supplies for shop
windows – models, stands, decorations and packaging, which is not so far
removed from its original activities, such as the printing of calico. The trade
is solidly maintained by Sephardic Jews, and the only café-restaurant, Le
Beverly, states that it is under Lubavitch supervision. The interest of this
arcade lies not in its displays, but in its architecture, its glass panels, its
complicated arrangement. Although its overall plan is rectangular, its
galleries are disposed in a star, and it has no less than six entrances, on the

Place du Caire, the Place d’Alexandrie, the Rue du Caire (three in all) and
the Rue Saint-Denis. In the mornings in front of these entries you can see
Pakistanis and Sri Lankans leaning on their trolleys, waiting to be hired for
errands or by the hour to load lorries or shift stocks. It is the client who sets
the price, and negotiation is clearly not simple for these new slaves, many
of whom are probably without residence papers.
    I remember having had one day in the Rue du Caire a kind of
hallucination, seeing in the distance a Gothic rose window whose presence
was inexplicable and almost disturbing. Glued to the spot, it took me a
moment to understand. What I was seeing was the former priory of Saint-
Martin-des-Champs – since 1794 the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers –
not far as the crow flies but at such a mental distance that it had been
impossible to identify it at first glance. Every attentive Parisian has such
strange things in their visual repertoire, the most well-known of these being
the view of the Sacré-Coeur above Notre-Dame-de-Lorette as seen from the
Rue Laffitte. These can be mere optical illusions, such as that which
disturbs me each morning when I walk to the offices of La Fabrique along
the Rue du Général-Lasalle. This street, a steep incline, comes out into the
Rue Rébeval at an obtuse angle – this detail being decisive for what
follows. On the side opposite the Rue Rébeval, facing you as you walk
uphill, is a five-storey garage, covered in white roughcast to the front and
clad with red brick on the side wall, which you see slightly on the bias. The
strange thing is that the angle formed by the two walls of the garage appears
not to be straight, failing to obey the rules of perspective set by
Brunelleschi, Alberti and Piero della Francesca. The top storey, which
emerges above the adjacent buildings, seems rather like one of those lop-
sided kiosks in which Giotto’s sacred scenes take place. Then, when the
white wall is no longer illuminated by the morning sun, everything is
restored to order.
    In their final portion before the Grand Boulevards and the portes, the
Rue Saint-Denis, the Boulevard Sébastopol and the Rue Saint-Martin
advance in parallel, in a valley framed by two heights. Sloping streets climb
up from this: on the Saint-Martin side the Rue Meslay, and on the Saint-
Denis side the Rue de la Lune, the Rue Chénier and the stairs of the Rue des
Degrés. Yet this is not the bed of any watercourse. There is nothing natural
about the relief, it is entirely the result of human activity. From Charles V to
Louis XIV, Paris was surrounded by a fortified wall that followed the line of

the present boulevards from the Bastille to the Porte Saint-Denis, then
turned towards the Louvre in a straight line along the Rues de Cléry and
d’Aboukir (the sharp difference in level between these two streets is due to
the rampart: Rue de Cléry, the higher one, corresponds to the top of this,
and Rue d’Aboukir to its ditch). In the 1670s, Louis XIV decided to
demolish the wall and replace it with a boulevard right around the city,
planted with a double line of trees. This was a colossal project, since the
wall was both high and thick, having been further reinforced in the late
sixteenth century by the supporters of the Ligue, when they defended Paris
against the royal troops. The amount of debris was enormous, and there
could be no question of moving it away, given the means of the time. It is
the accumulation of this that today forms the hills around the Strasbourg-
Saint-Denis intersection. The western hill was for a long time known as the
‘butte aux gravois’, and it is probably on account of the instability of its
artificial subsoil that the bell-tower of Notre-Dame-de-Bonne-Nouvelle
leans slightly.




                     The Sacré-Coeur above Notre-Dame-de-
                      Lorette, as seen from the Rue Laffitte.

    Until not so long ago, the incline of the Rue Meslay was still the almost
exclusive domain of artisanal footwear, which has declined somewhat in the
face of factory products but remains present in this working-class street. At
the top, the stairs of the pretty Passage du Pont-aux-Biches lead down to the
Rue Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth, where fine groceries, children’s clothing,

design galleries and elegant hairdressers are so many signs of the rampant
gentrification of the part of this quarter that adjoins the Marais. The third of
these parallel streets, the Rue du Vert-Bois, only just escaped a disaster. A
very rich man had the plan of making it the most fashionable and expensive
street in Paris. He bought up several shops to establish galleries and luxury
restaurants. The latest information is that his plan has failed, but many of
the shop fronts of former pharmacies, bakers or haberdashers are still closed
behind grilles, and the street has a desolate look.
     On the other side of the valley, beyond the Rue Saint-Denis, the Rue
Poissonnière, Rue de Cléry and Boulevard de Bonne-Nouvelle define a very
particular hill. True, this is geographically part of the Sentier quarter, but
the early seventeenth-century streets are so narrow that it is hard going for
delivery vehicles, hence a certain calm in this crowded and busy district.
The slender André Chénier building between the Rue Cléry and the Rue
Beauregard – perhaps as often photographed as the Flatiron building on the
corner of Broadway and Fifth Avenue; the very simple church where the
funeral of poor Coralie took place at the end of Lost Illusions; the squashed
shop fronts on the Rue Notre-Dame-de-Recouvrance; the view down to the
Porte Saint-Denis from the Rue de la Lune: this little triangle is hardly a
quartier, yet every stone here holds a memory, like that of Jeanne Poisson,
born on the Rue de Cléry, who would become the Marquise de Pompadour.
     Across the Rue Poissonnière I come into the heart of the Sentier, then,
through the Rues de Jeûneurs and du Croissant, into what was still thirty
years ago the press quarter. From L’Humanité to Le Figaro, all the papers
had their editorial offices and printing works here – the sole exception being
Le Monde, on the Rue des Italiens. As soon as the ink was dry, the
deliverymen scattered in all directions on bicycles fixed with large front
panniers, weighed down with impressive piles of newsprint. (Later, they
drove BMW motorbikes, with the papers in a sidecar.) A plaque above the
door of a large building on the Rue du Croissant, ‘Imprimerie de la Presse’,
is the last vestige of this world, where lorries bringing rolls of paper for the
presses caused memorable traffic jams.
     In the days of June 1848, it was at the Porte Saint-Denis that the first
shots were fired. This episode is described by two contemporaries who were
not eye-witnesses – if I am not mistaken, none of the participants left a
written record – yet their accounts concur. The first is Victor Hugo, who

was one of the sixty representatives of the people charged with restoring the
morale of the troops. Things Seen, Saturday 24 June:
   The National Guard, irritated more than intimidated, advanced in a rush to the barricade. At
   that moment, a woman appeared on top of the barricade, young, pretty, wild-haired and
   terrible. This woman, who was a prostitute, lifted her dress up to her belt and shouted to the
   National Guards, in the horrible brothel language that one always has to translate: ‘Cowards,
   fire on the belly of a woman if you dare!’ Events now took a terrifying course. The National
   Guard did not hesitate. A platoon-fire toppled the wretched woman; she fell with a loud
   scream. There was a horrible silence, both on the barricade and from the attackers. Suddenly
   a second woman appeared. This one was still younger and prettier: almost a child, scarcely
   seventeen years old. What a wretched situation! She too was a prostitute. She lifted her
   dress, showed her belly, and cried: ‘Shoot, you brigands!’ They shot. She fell in a hail of
   bullets on the body of the first. It was thus that the war began.

Hugo, as we see here, was not yet the defender of the people who would
write History of a Crime three years later.
    The second account is that of Daniel Stern, the pseudonym of Marie
d’Agoult, a marquise and the companion of Franz Liszt. She was equally on
the side of order, but it is clear that this is written by a woman:
   I have said how Pujol [a major figure in the insurrection] had the first barricade constructed
   level with the Porte Saint-Denis. It was flanked by two others, which closed the entrance to
   the Rues de Mazagran and de Cléry. A detachment of around fifty men from the 2nd legion
   came down the boulevard, with drums beating the muster, not suspecting that the insurgents
   were so close until they found themselves unexpectedly facing the barricade. The National
   Guard showed that they were not firing, and continued to advance until about forty paces.
   But, either because their signal had not been understood, or because it had not been heeded,
   a fusillade from the terrace of a house on the corner of the Boulevard de Bonne-Nouvelle
   and the Faubourg-Saint-Denis hit them sideways; a dozen of them fell dead or wounded …
   Soon a battalion of the 2nd legion was seen to arrive, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel
   Bouillon, along with a company from the 3rd legion. They were met with a terrible fire, but
   advanced steadily on the barricade; a second discharge forced them to retreat. A struggle
   began. There was fighting hand to hand; twelve National Guard were killed, and some forty
   others seriously wounded. Nothing however shattered their courage. The National Guard
   returned to the charge with vigour. The leader of the insurgents, who was directing the fire
   from on top of an upturned carriage, was struck by a bullet and fell. It seemed that the battle
   was over. But at the very moment that the flag fell from the leader, a young woman, who had
   not previously been visible, seized it. She raised it above her head and waved it with an
   inspired air. With thin hair and bare arms, in a strikingly coloured dress, she seemed to defy
   death. On seeing her, the National Guard hesitated to fire; they shouted to the young woman
   to get back; she remained undaunted, and provoked the attackers with her gestures and
   voice; a shot was fired, and she staggered and collapsed. But another woman suddenly
   rushed to her side; with one hand she supported the bloody body of her friend, with the other
   she hurled stones at the attackers. A new volley of shots echoed, and she fell in her turn on to
   the body that she was embracing.9

Who knows whether the ladies of the Rue Blondel will take part in the
coming insurrection.
     The project of a circular boulevard, designed by François Blondel and
Pierre Bullet, involved the construction of the Porte Saint-Denis and the
Porte Saint-Martin. Today these still focus and organize the Strasbourg-
Saint-Denis intersection. They are linked by the short Boulevard Saint-
Denis, between the Boulevard Saint-Martin on one side and the Boulevard
Bonne-Nouvelle on the other. This is one of the two territories where
Chinese sex workers practise, the other being the Boulevard de la Villette in
the 19th arrondissement.
     Blondel, the director of the project, was given the Porte Saint-Denis, the
larger and more ornate of the pair, through which royal processions would
pass. The bas-reliefs by François and Michel Anguier, on the theme of the
victories of Louis XIV in Holland, are certainly a success, but the prevailing
impression is of an enormous enterprise of sycophancy financed by Paris
notables in the 1670s. My own preference is for Bullet’s Porte Saint-Martin,
smaller, less solemn, and in a gentler stone to which the vermicular
embossment lends an almost Italian tone.
     All the same, looking not so much at the gate itself as at what surrounds
it, the advantage seems to me to lie with the Porte Saint-Denis. Not that the
surroundings of the Porte Saint-Martin lack attractions: the theatres of the
Renaissance and the Porte-Saint-Martin have fine façades, the Rue René-
Boulanger serving as a corridor between them in an arc that follows a
salient of the old rampart. And the perspective extends south towards the
bell-tower of Saint-Nicolas-des-Champs, and north to the fine profile of the
mairie of the 10th arrondissement and the windows of the Gare de l’Est.
     The setting of the Porte Saint-Denis, however, has a kind of natural
nobility, without either deliberate arrangement or planning. The two large
buildings that frame the end of the Rue Saint-Denis, the magnificent
balustrade of the Rue de la Lune, the perspective of the Boulevard Bonne-
Nouvelle inseparable from the memory of André Breton (‘Meanwhile, you
can be sure of meeting me in Paris, of not spending more than three days
without seeing me pass, toward the end of the afternoon, along the
Boulevard Bonne-Nouvelle between the Matin printing office and the
Boulevard de Strasbourg’),10 the semicircle in the background where the
faubourg begins, Le Petit Pot Saint-Denis where Gérard de Nerval was a
regular customer – all these elements may seem disparate, yet they compose

a landscape where I always feel one of the city’s hearts beating, amid the
din and exhaust fumes of the traffic.
    Breton, Benjamin, Baudelaire, Nerval, Balzac, Chateaubriand – perhaps
my references lack variety. But there is nothing I can do about it, this is my
paper family, as good as any other. (It has other members as well, but too
distant from my present itinerary: Diderot at the Palais-Royal, Stendhal in
Milan, Mallarmé on the Rue de Rome). Their books are the most worn ones
on my shelves, their covers discoloured and their spines so tired that they
stay open by themselves. I know so well where to find them that I can do so
in the dark. The ties that link this artificial family are not only literary but
also political. It may seem strange to make such a connection between
Breton, whose sympathies ran more to Trotskyism, and such defenders of
throne and altar as Balzac and Chateaubriand. Yet they did have, besides
their proclaimed opinions, certain essential common characteristics: respect
for the people and contempt for the ‘elites’. Chateaubriand never forgot the
humiliation he had felt in his youth, when, as an émigré from the petty
Breton gentry in the army of the princes, he slept in a ditch and saw the
brilliant carriages of the general staff roll pass. During the revolution of
1830, when the dynasty he tried to save collapsed, he was enchanted to be
carried in triumph by students ‘to cries of Vive la Charte! Vive la liberté de
la presse! Vive Chateaubriand!’11 And we have seen the respectful
admiration with which he spoke of the insurgents of June 1832, whereas he
had seen Charles X and his entourage as blind and blinkered. As for Balzac,
we sense in him a real tenderness towards the poor, the disinherited, those
left behind by life, whereas the harshness and corruption of the upper
classes are a basic theme throughout La Comédie humaine. Here he is in
Ferragus speaking of beggars, the lowest on the social scale:
   They often cause a laugh, but they always cause reflection. One represents to you
   civilization stunted, repressed; he comprehends everything, the honour of the galleys,
   patriotism, virtue, the malice of a vulgar crime, or the fine astuteness of elegant wickedness.
   Another is resigned, a perfect mimer, but stupid. All have slight yearnings after order and
   work, but they are pushed back into their mire by society, which makes no inquiry as to what
   there may be of great men, poets, intrepid souls, and splendid organizations among these
   vagrants, these gypsies of Paris.

Balzac’s preferred heroes are marginal characters, humiliated women or
such saints as the good judge Popinot in The Commission in Lunacy, or
Mme de La Chanterie in The Brotherhood of Consolation. Neither

Chateaubriand nor Balzac speaks of the villainous mob, of alcohol-soaked
and idle masses. True, both were men of order, and Christian compassion
plays a part in their sentiment towards the people. But no matter, you never
find with them that mixture of contempt and fear, the ‘spites and acerbities
… the ancient bile of Flaubert, of the Goncourts, and of Gautier’ that Sartre
speaks of.12 This may be seen as a difference bound up with the epoch, but
it is not. These people, at table in the Magny restaurant, had a
contemporary, Baudelaire – whom they rightly despised (‘Baudelaire had
supper at the next table to ours. He was wearing a cravat, his shirt open at
the neck and his head shaved, just as if he were going to be guillotined. A
single affectation: his little hands washed and cared for, the nails kept
scrupulously clean. That face of a maniac, a voice that cuts like a knife, and
a precise elocution that tries to copy Saint-Just and succeeds’13). And with
Baudelaire, precisely as with Saint-Just (‘The unfortunate are the powers of
the earth’), it is love that one reads for the poor of both sexes, for ‘The
Little Old Women’:
Ruins! My family! My fellow-minds!
Each evening I will bid a grave adieu!
What of tomorrow, Eves of eighty years,
Pressed by the dreadful talon of the Lord?

Or, in ‘Morning Twilight’:
       Poor old women, with chilled and meagre breasts,
       Blew the embers, then fingers, roused from rest.
       It was the hour, when frozen, with money scarcer,
       The pains of women in childbirth grew fiercer …

Or again for the father in ‘The Eyes of the Poor’, with his children in front
of the café brightly lit by gas lamps; for ‘The Widows’, again poor (‘The
mourning of the poor always has something lacking, an absence of harmony
that makes it more shattering. It is forced to skimp on its pain’). It was not
accidental that Baudelaire should have placed Balzac above all the other
writers of his age, and that the Goncourts saw him as a madman.
