CHAPTER 8

I do not know of any other capital city where the transition from inside to
outside is as marked as it is in Paris. In London, Tokyo or Berlin – not to
speak of Cairo or Mexico City – it is none too clear where the boundary
falls, and the very distinction between the city and its surroundings is
vague. There are two main reasons, I believe, for the sharpness of the
boundary in Paris. The first is the existence of the portes. In earlier times
these had an evident material existence, when they were openings in the
fortified wall. But even after the destruction of the fortifs in the 1920s, even
without gates and officials, these are not places that you cross without being
aware of it. They are dislocated spaces where you can expect to find the
starting points of bus routes (with three digits instead of the two for those
inside Paris), petrol stations and car washes, trams, signs indicating nearby
destinations – Drancy, La Courneuve, Enghien – or distant ones, Melun or
Lille. The original meaning of porte has not been eradicated.
     The second element that makes the limits of Paris so clear-cut is the
Boulevard Périphérique, far more so than the Boulevards des Maréchaux,
which without the Périphérique would eventually have been digested,
including their thin belt of social housing from the 1920s, built as the city
continued its centrifugal growth. The Périphérique, with its wide footprint,
its anti-noise barriers, its slip roads, and the new buildings that reinforce it
with an almost uninterrupted strip of corporate ugliness, is something else
again. At the time of its construction, there were not many people who
predicted that this road, mawkishly christened a ‘boulevard’, would
constitute a terrible barrier between the old Paris and what might become
the new. Louis Chevalier, one of the clearest minds of the time, describes a
number of urban catastrophes in L’Assassinat de Paris – Maine-
Montparnasse, the Italie quarter, La Défense, the massacre of Belleville,
and of course Les Halles1 – but if I am not mistaken, he has nothing to say
about the Périphérique. Nor does Guy Debord mention it in Panegyric,
published twenty years after its inauguration by the happily forgotten Pierre
Messmer; according to Debord, ‘this city was ravaged a little before all the
others because its ever-renewed revolutions had so worried and shocked the
world’.2 The only person, I believe, who understood what was happening,
was Jean-Luc Godard. In 1967, in Two or Three Things That I Know About
Her, his description of the Paris in which Marina Vlady wanders – juke-
boxes and pinball machines in the cafés, dark green cups with gold bands,
Citroën Ami 6’s and Peugeot 404’s, France-Soir and the Vietnam war – is
shown in a clashing counterpoint with shots of the works on the
Périphérique, where the movements of cranes, concrete mixers and
bulldozers are emphasized by sudden loud and almost painful sounds,
bringing home the seriousness of the threat.




                   The Porte de Pantin at the turn of the century.

    The barrier imposed by the Périphérique is not only physical, it also
affects the representation of the city. By confining Paris to the twenty
arrondissements, it contributes to the image of a city that is mummified and
museum-ified, in which working-class life is reduced to a more or less
narrow sector, confined to the north-east between Montmartre and
Charonne. But as this walk has confirmed to me, such an image is
completely false. From Châtelet to the Porte de la Chapelle, in the heart of
the historic city, the quarters I have crossed remain largely working-class. It
is true that the pockets of gentrification are tending to expand, but this
phenomenon still remains limited, even marginal. Whether in the Saint-
Denis quarter, around the railway stations, along the faubourg and in the
long valley of La Chapelle, the city I have walked through is a working-
class one. Perhaps I more or less consciously chose my itinerary for this
reason, and maybe my view would have been different had I started from
the Rue Montmartre or the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière. But the fact that
central and eastern Paris are largely working-class districts is not a recent
phenomenon, as is well shown by the map of the barricades erected in the
time of the June Days of 1848.
     To classify quarters as ‘working class’ or not is a dichotomy that may
fail to recognize the grey zones, encroachments, advances and retreats that
shift from week to week. In the extreme case – the Rue des Francs-
Bourgeois or the Rue de Verneuil on the one hand, the Rue d’Avron or the
Avenue de Flandre on the other – the diagnosis is clear. But is the Place de
la République, for example, working class? Yes and no. No, since almost all
the cafés, shops and restaurants belong to chains, and what goes on there no
longer has anything in common with the working-class life in which people
meet their friends in such places or can chat with the owner. And yes, as the
women and men who cross the square on foot, on bicycle or on a
skateboard are a representative sample, varying according to the time of
day, of the people of Paris. (Compared for example with the Place Saint-
Germain-des-Près or the Place des Vosges, where, apart from tourists, the
population represents a homogeneous and minority share of the human
beings living in Paris.)
    Despite all legitimate qualifications, there are certain markers to the
working-class quarters. The Métro stations are dilapidated, the passages
dirty, the escalators often broken and the exits equipped with anti-fraud
systems that are unknown at La Muette or Franklin-Roosevelt. The police
presence is constant and visible, showing that the object is to keep the poor
quiet rather than to protect the rich. Bank branches are few and far between
– just one, if I am not mistaken, along the long axis of La Chapelle, a Crédit
Lyonnais so old that you can still see on its façade the date ‘1863’ when the
bank was founded. On the other hand, there are many shops where you can
send money to what used to be called the Third World. Others offer phone
calls at unbeatable prices, or offer to ‘unlock’ your mobile. The
supermarkets are ‘super-discount’, Leader Price or Dia rather than
Monoprix. The cafés are Kabyl, the tabacs are Chinese, and the PMU
betting shops always packed. On Wednesdays, groups of children set out on
excursions, and whites are a minority in their multi-coloured ranks. And
you can see in these quarters something that is for me the very symbol of
sadness – an old Algerian worker alone on a bench with his imitation fur
cap, his moustache and walking stick, or an elderly woman with swollen
ankles, hobbling while she carries her shopping with difficulty in plastic
bags.
    The Boulevard Ney is so long that it borders on three adjacent
communes – Saint-Denis in the centre, Saint-Ouen to the west and
Aubervilliers to the east. To reach Saint-Denis, the end of this walk, several
routes are therefore possible. You can follow the banks of the Canal Saint-
Denis, in a dilapidated industrial landscape that crosses Aubervilliers,
becoming residential when you pass into Saint-Denis, and even fashionable
in the sector after the Pont du Landy: small white houses, clean
surroundings, a well-kept landscape. Those living here are likely to be
managers working close by in the newly built office blocks of the Plaine
Saint-Denis.
                     Crédit Lyonnais façade, Rue Marx-Dormoy.

    Another possible path is to leave Paris by the Porte de Montmartre or
the Porte de Clignancourt, cross the Foire aux Puces and then old Saint-
Ouen obliquely towards the mairie. By avoiding major roads, this itinerary
is full of charm, the streets are calm, bordered by low buildings with ‘villas’
here and there, cul-de-sacs in which each house has a garden. The Paris
banlieue has dozens of quarters like this, from Clichy to Montreuil, Vanves
to Gentilly. If the ‘Grand Paris’ project ceased to be a subject of political
gestures, these pleasant enclaves could be taken as the starting point,
instead of which they become islands in a sea of brutal ugliness.
    After the mairie, you cross the Rue du Landy, a long transversal
stretching from the Pont Saint-Ouen to Aubervilliers, whose name recalls
that in the Middle Ages it was in these surroundings that the largest fair in
the Île de France, the fair of Le Lendit, was held. A little further along is the
Carrefour Pleyel, named in memory of Ignace Pleyel, a pianist and
composer, pupil of Joseph Haydn, who founded a piano factory here in the
early nineteenth century – both Chopin and Liszt used his instruments.
Despite this noble origin, the crossroads has been dislocated by new
constructions that seem thrown down at random – the central roundabout,
moreover, is not round, and has no definable shape to respond vaguely to its
surroundings. The ensemble is dominated by the Tour Pleyel. I belong to
the probably rather small group of those who like this tower, its slight
tapering, its rigorous metal curtain wall, its empty floor below the top and
even the enormous and more or less elliptical advertising sign that rotates
on top and at the moment vaunts the merits of Kia, the Korean car
manufacturer. Today the metal is painted white, faded slightly grey by the
weather, and is fine like that.
    To reach Saint-Denis, I have chosen the simplest itinerary, the straight
line along the A1 motorway starting from the Porte de la Chapelle. The first
few metres are rough going, and only a few pedestrians chance to take the
narrow path misguidedly named the ‘Avenue de la Porte-de-la-Chapelle’.
On the right is ‘the bowling alley that occupies the ground floor of the
multi-level car park wedged between the Périphérique, the motorway
junction, the Boulevard Ney and the railway tracks cutting this diagonally’,
a passage from La Clôture that well evokes the crushing of walkers beneath
a series of bridges between which the view of the sky and the open air are
so narrow that they advance in a tunnel of concrete and metal.3 To the left, I
can see what used to be called the La Chapelle rubbish tip, now adorned
with the sign CVAE (Centre de Valorisation et d’Apport des Encombrants):
pyramids of debris, green lorries, black workers.
    Once the last bridge is passed – the connecting slip road from the
motorway to the westbound Périphérique – I continue parallel with the
autoroute, covered after the first kilometre by a landscape improvement that
was entrusted in the 1990s to Michel Corajoud, who also created the
pleasant Jardin d’Éole that borders the Rue d’Aubervilliers. The plantations
and street furniture manage to liven up a bit this endless straight line that
bears the name Avenue du Président-Wilson, interspersed with car parks
and ventilation shafts for the autoroute beneath. The gardeners have left
room for vegetation, with a mixture of nettles and weeds. In short, the worst
has been avoided, which is certainly not easy. On both sides of this ‘avenue’
is a sad and dilapidated banlieue, with a multi-coloured but mainly black
population.
                           Concrete and metal tunnel,
                        Avenue de la Porte-de-la-Chapelle.

     All this suddenly changes once you cross the Rue du Landy. With the
Stade de France, new office blocks housing the headquarters of big
companies, SFR and SNCF, Bouygues and Matmut, a good part of the
stock-exchange top forty installed in steel and tinted glass, this is the most
striking architecture of the moment. The population are no longer the same,
they are well dressed and you even hear English spoken. In the adjacent
streets, instead of kebab shops and ruined warehouses, a line of luxury
apartments stretches as far as the eye can see – an amazing transformation
of the Plaine Saint-Denis which, after long having been the domain of
heavy industry, was the very symbol of misery in this department only a
short while ago. Be reassured, it has simply been pushed a bit further out.
     At the end of the Avenue du Président-Wilson, the horizon suddenly
widens. With the elevated curve of the A1 autoroute which turns eastward,
the saucer on spikes of the Stade de France, the Canal Saint-Denis below
forming a wide basin and the old town of Saint-Denis just close, this little
hill creates a kind of frontier effect. To emphasize this, the apartment block
that disfigures it should be pulled down and a monument erected in its
place, for which Alexandre Vesnin or Erich Mendelsohn could be
resurrected. This would emit invisible waves directed at the Tour Pleyel in
one direction and the Saint-Denis basilica on the other, which has the only
tower in the old town centre.
    In reality, to get from Paris to Saint-Denis, almost everyone takes the
Métro – line 13, the most neglected, the most irregular, always packed in its
proletarian sector between Saint-Lazare and its northern destinations,
Aubervilliers and Gennevilliers. Emerging from the Basilique station, the
quarter resembles the centre of Ivry, which is understandable as it was built
by the same architect, Renée Gailhoustet. The result here is a little less
convincing, even if we find the same raw concrete, acute angles, planted
terraces and overhead passageways that give its Ivry counterpart its charm –
most likely because this development is smaller and more dense, and the
choice to build everything on stilts creates dark corners that are scarcely
welcoming.




                                 © Artedia/Leemage
               Einsteinturm, Potsdam (Erich Mendelsohn 1917–1921).

    I had intended this walk to lead from one bookshop – Envie de Lire in
Ivry – to another, and this other is here at the heart of this quarter, on the
Place du Caquet. Folie d’Encre is both the opposite of and the equivalent to
Envie de Lire. It is larger, lighter, more orderly, with no unstable piles or
outside bins, but it is for Saint-Denis what Envie de Lire is for Ivry: a
centre, a meeting point, a place of political animation. The owner, a woman
whom we shall call S. and whose children come from East and West Africa,
has been able to establish ties with the neighbouring cinema, the Gérard-
Philipe theatre and even with the basilica, where she organizes lectures.
Children come and do their homework among the books, voluntary
organizations hold their meetings here, and the local people speak of ‘their’
bookshop. Gatherings for which mothers prepare African dishes take place
not to discuss successful titles but rather questions facing a population who
are in great majority Arab or black. ‘Public hearings’ are envisaged, which
will not be debates where boredom is on the agenda.
    The mairie, still communist today, supported the establishment of this
bookshop in the town centre. On the Place Jean-Jaurès, its ‘Third Republic’
architecture sits next to the façade of the neighbouring basilica without too
much discomfort. Nothing recalls the serious events that took place here
between the wars, which is understandable since such disagreeable
memories cannot help anyone. Yet it was Saint-Denis, and particularly its
mairie, that saw the spectacular rise of Jacques Doriot: an engineering
worker demobbed in 1918, leader of the Young Communists after the Tours
congress, at the front of anti-militarist and anti-colonial struggle against the
war in the Rif, deputy for Saint-Denis at the age of twenty-five when he
came out of prison, and, as mayor of the town when he was thirty, the most
popular member of the PCF leadership. But his opposition to the ‘class
against class’ line would lead him first to a break with Thorez, followed by
a drift into fascism that culminated in his alignment with the Nazis under
the Occupation. A terrible story, of which I imagine many present-day
inhabitants know nothing.
    The Place Jean-Jaurès is the start of the Rue de la République, the town
centre’s pedestrian axis. It is reminiscent of the Rue du Faubourg-du-
Temple, yet still more diverse if that is possible – veils, turbans, braids and
dreadlocks, baseball caps, beanies – a whole world of young people, amid
poor shops selling clothes and perfume, or unlocking mobile phones. The
pace is slow and the ambience peaceful, as in an Oriental town. The most
penetrating eye would not detect any symptom of embryonic gentrification,
yet this is the very opposite of a ghetto, rather a different form of life that
has taken root in this street bordered by working-class flats from the
nineteenth century, where I feel as much at home as if I had always lived
here.
    It ends opposite a rather ugly church built by Viollet-le-Duc. Strange
that this restorer of so many magnificent monuments – including the
basilica at the other end of the street – should have been the author of such
mediocre architecture when he turned to original work. Going round the
church on the left, following the line of the RER and Transilien railways in
a desolate landscape, you end up where the Canal Saint-Denis joins the
Seine. A worn-out lawn and a few poplar trees mark the confluence. Let us
hope this will remain as simple, and not undergo the fate of another meeting
of waters, that of the Marne and the Seine spoiled by an ill-sited hotel in the
form of a pagoda.
    To return to Paris I walk through a landscape of shacks, recent buildings
and construction sites until I reach the Saint-Denis station. Before arriving
there, I learn from a hoarding, written in the style particular to this kind of
announcement, that ‘a new eco-quarter, a new way of living, an industrial
heritage upgraded by the presence of artists, a quarter at the gates of Paris,
connected, accessible and alive’ is to be built here. In the overcrowded
station, dirty and uncomfortable, you have to be careful not to upset the
brutes of the Sécurité Ferroviaire and find yourself up against the wall,
hands in the air, and intimately searched. The spectacle is permanent. Such
are the two faces of Saint-Denis, one radiant, the other sordid and brutal,
between the Californian ‘Marlowe’ of Raymond Chandler and the African
‘Marlow’ of Joseph Conrad.
    Images of Paris have always been multiple and contrasting, from
Baudelaire’s ‘Paris sombre’ to the Hollywood dream of An American in
Paris. And yet, at certain disturbing moments, when the city ceased to be ‘a
festival’, a particular picture is constructed whose features are strangely
similar in different epochs: a city threatened by the influx of foreign
elements, by invasion – Paris was often taken as a metonym for France.
Under the Second Empire, the guests of Princesse Mathilde – Taine,
Flaubert, the Goncourt brothers – feared the Paris populace and were
relieved by the crushing of the Commune, which according to Maxime du
Camp was composed three-quarters of foreigners. Seventy years later, under
the Occupation, Céline, Brasillach and Rebatet denounced (sometimes in
the literal sense) the Jews omnipresent in Paris, claiming that ‘it took the
insane dogma of equality between men for them to parade among us once
more’.4 Today, another seventy years on, ever more successful authors
speak of ‘Islamists’ in the banlieues – especially in Paris – in the same way
as Maurras treated the Jews and Dumas fils treated the rebellious workers.
The same mixture of contempt and fear appears in their discourse, always
with a police component, a more or less explicit appeal for a muscular
response to those who trample on our precious ‘values’.
    I am confident that Paris will shake itself up and get rid of this miasma
once again. I would be tempted to follow the illustrious example of
Stendhal, who wanted the words on his tomb to read: ‘Arrigo Beyle,
Milanese’, since ‘Parisian’ is indeed what I feel myself to be, far more than
French or Jewish – garments that do not suit me at all.
    Having always lived in this great city of ten million human beings, I
understand and am even sorry for those who live in the ghettos of the rich,
and are scared when they emerge and see so many people who do not look
like them. They reassure themselves by thinking that all will be well so long
as they themselves, their newspapers and their TV channels, ensure the
ever-lasting resignation of the Parisian people, of cashiers and waiters, bus
drivers and building workers, unemployed, delivery drivers and illegal
immigrants – this proletariat who people the streets I have crossed in this
short walk across a much wider city. I think they are mistaken. I think that,
with new music and words, this multi-coloured proletariat bears the
inheritance of the memorable journées whose traces I have shown. Despite
its disorganization, and its lack of clear awareness of this inheritance, it is
united by the sense of its endless exploitation, and will show one day that
the people have not lost the battle of Paris.
