Walk 2: La Huchette

      La Huchette



Voici la rue de la Huchette, mais prends bien
garde a ta Pochette.

This is the rue de la Huchette, but better
watch out for your wallet.
Starting Point: Place Saint-Michel, 5th arrondissement
Métro: Saint-Michel, RER
Buses: 21, 24, 27, 38, 85, 96


When you leave the boulevard Saint-Michel and turn left into
the rue de la Huchette, imagine yourself back in the crowded
and dirty Middle Ages. This neighborhood of tangled streets
and narrow houses looks in many ways the same as it did hun-
dreds of years ago. Aside from the contour of the land—which
then sloped down to the water’s edge instead of rising to the
level of the present embankments of the Seine—this quarter is
the same maze it was in the twelfth century, although the
houses date from the seventeenth.
     Baron Georges Haussmann, Napoléon IIl’s famous city plan-
ner,    cut wide   swaths   of boulevards   (Saint-Germain,   Saint-
Michel, Saint-Jacques) all around this neighborhood but was
stopped from touching the interior. He did, however, widen the
western entrance to Huchette, which is why the houses from
Saint-Michel to the Hotel du Mont Blanc are nineteenth century.
       The Hétel du Mont Blanc, on the left, marks the spot
Pariswalks




                                                                      Saeeeey
                                                                      a
                                                                       -




World War II commemorative plaque on the rue de la Huchette

where the street once narrowed. The hotel has had its ups and
downs, going from country-style inn to badly run down. Now it
is on the upswing again, and half of the ground floor has been
converted into a French restaurant. The hotel is reasonable, and
all the rooms have been redone and include direct-dial phones
and double windows.
     It was in one of the back rooms of this hotel that Elliot Paul
started his nostalgic, intimate account of life on the rue de la
Huchette, The Last Time I Saw Paris. The title was taken from
the song of the same name, which recalls the happiness and
sweetness of Paris before the German occupation.
    To the right of the door, against the wall that juts out and
narrows the street, you will see a plaque commemorating an
event from World War II. Before the Allies entered Paris, street
fighting broke out all over this area and barricades were erected
at each end of Huchette. Just across the Seine, Parisians liber-
ated the Prefecture of Police from Nazi control and used the
spot as a vantage point for shots at the enemy. One of the
tragedies of the fighting on the rue de la Huchette was recorded


40
                                                       La Huchette

on this plaque: HERE FELL JEAN ALBERT VOUILLARD, DEAD IN THE
COURSE OF DUTY, KILLED BY THE GESTAPO THE 17TH OF MAY 1944, AT
20 HOURS. RAINBOW. “Rainbow” was the name of his cell of resis-
tance fighters. The bullets that were sprayed into the wall have
been plastered over.
     The irony here is that the width of the street at the top was
the unfinished work of Haussmann. His intention was to widen
all these narrow pathways so that revolutionaries would be un-
able to barricade the streets as they did in the Revolution. At the
end of the German occupation of the Second World War, how-
ever, it was the resistance fighters’ ability to do this that permit-
ted them to defend Paris against the Germans at this spot.
     Across and down the street, at no. 23, you will find the
smallest theater in Paris. It used to perform only lonesco—The
Bald Soprano and The Lesson—the same plays since the mid-
fifties. A third avant-garde play—one that changes and is not
one of Ionesco’s—has been added to the repertoire.
     The plays are performed at 7, 8, and 9 pM. You can buy tick-
ets for one, two, or three of the performances. The theater holds
eighty-five persons, seated straight across the room, no aisle. If
you visit after five in the afternoon, try the door to the box of-
fice, then smile at the lady who sells the tickets, open the inside
door, accustom your eyes to the dark, and get a glimpse of this
tiny theater. At one point the son of the founder wanted to tum
this into yet another restaurant (!) but fortunately he was
stopped by the government. Attend a performance if you can;
Ionesco’s French is easy to understand, and the plays are pure
fun. The intermission is almost as good as the play; this street is
really a night street. Turn to the right for some Tunisian delights
before going back to see the rest of the play.
     In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries Huchette was
called the rue des Rdtisseurs,      the street of roasters. Whole
sheep and oxen were turned on spits over open wood fires, and
beggars held up their bread to soak up the smoke and the
aroma. A papal delegate called it “verily stupendous.”
     Today Greek and Tunisian restaurants have returned the
street to its old activity, and the roasting goes on. Starting at 11
A.M., the lambs and pigs turn and crackle on spits, a sight that


                                                                  Ale
                              ep            WANTATRICE
                          MIS€ en seine de ene
                                                         Cassciee -

                          mise en Pin LECON




                          sip ta moe ME
                      Theale neiaHucnetie




The Ionesco Theater
                                                     La Huchette

takes some getting used to. The schwarma (lamb on a spit) and
the stacks of kebabs ready for the grill wait for your order.



                    Rue   Xavier      Privas

You are now at the crossing of rue Xavier Privas and Huchette.
Xavier Privas was a singer from Montmartre who was famous in
the 1920s, and although that is not particularly interesting, the
previous names for the street are. At first this part, from
Huchette to Saint-Séverin (to your right), was known as Sac a
Lie (bag of lees). Lees are the dregs of wine, which, when dried,
were used to prepare and clean leather hides and parchment.
This was in the days when streets were known by their activi-
ties. Since few people could read, written street names were not
displayed until 1729. With time and the disappearance of the
sacks of lees, the street name changed from Sac a Lie to
Saqualie. This was finally engraved into no. 19, at the far end of
the street, as “Zacharie” in the seventeenth century, and so it re-
mained for almost three hundred years.
    The opposite end of Xavier Privas, which runs from
Huchette to the quai, used to run downhill, not up, to the
Seine: it was filled with the life and business of fishing scows,
which were moored at the bottom of the street. Owing to many
unpleasant incidents and the general filth, the street was gated
in during the first half of the seventeenth century. Recently,
when the Paris sanitation men went on strike, the street rivaled
its medieval reputation. You will notice that there are no entry
doors on this small section of the street, between Huchette and
the river. No one’s territory, so everyone’s dump. One morning
the pile reached over six feet high, and the army was forced to
come down and shovel away the mountain of rubbish.
    Each moming, however, the pedestrian walkways (no cars)
take on the most picturesque and old-fashioned appearance.
The shop- and innkeepers are outside in their white aprons
washing their windows and their walks; the residents stop and
talk or hurry about with their baskets of bread and meat
(which, however, they now are forced to buy five blocks away,


                                                                43
Pariswalks

at the place Maubert). Huchette once boasted a butcher, a
baker, and even a candlemaker; in fact, rue Xavier Privas, from
the rue de la Huchette to the quai, was once called the “street of
three candlemakers.”
     Look    across   Huchette   to no.   14, a five-windows-wide
seventeenth-century building. The ironwork of the balconies is
hand-wrought, made to order for the original owner. He had his
initials, D.C., laced into the decoration, except for two windows
on the French first floor, which have a Y in wrought iron in a
circle. There is still another Y to be found. You can see it on the
stone space between the two windows—a framed circle with a
graceful Y incised in its center. What is this all about? Shoppers
two hundred and fifty years ago understood. The letter Y (called
a Greek i in French: i grec, pronounced é-grek) advertised the
wares of the shop below. The shop was a mercerie (sewing
shop), famous for its needles and sewing materials. There was
also an important article of clothing sold here—a garter that
tied a man’s breeches to his leggings. The tie was a lie (as in the
word liaison) and breeches were gregues. One of fableist La
Fontaine’s rabbits has a pair; in a moment of danger he “tire ses
gregues” (hitches up his breeches) and runs away. When you
put the tie and the breeches together (the lies and the gregues)
you hear i grec. Now look once more at the incised Y on the wall
between the windows—it looks like a garter. There are more of
these amusing plays on words, called calembours (rebuses), left
in Paris, one close by, on Saint-Séverin. Among the best of them
was a sign with six circles, Os, which when spoken (seez-6)
sounded like ciseaux (scissors). It represented a scissors and
knife shop on the rue du Dragon.



                  Rue du Chat qui Péche

Look down the alley to the left at one of the most nondescript
but oft-described streets in Paris, the rue du Chat qui Péche
(street of the fishing cat). It took its name from a sign that hung
above a shop, no doubt a fish shop, though no source actually
says it was. Before the street took its present name, it was called
the rue des Etuves (street of steam baths). There were half a

44
                                                    La Huchette

dozen such streets and alleys in the Paris of the late thirteenth
century, and some twenty-six bathing establishments. Every
morning the crier was out on the street calling to prospective
clients: “Li bains sont chaut, c’est sanz mentir!” (The baths are
hot—no fooling!) They were hot in more ways than one. Many
of them provided mixed bathing and supplementary services.
One preacher warned his flock, “Ladies, do not go to the baths,
and don’t do you-know-what there.” The combination of cleri-
cal disfavor and public harassment reduced the number of
these establishments to two by the early seventeenth century.
The result was a malodorous population. Those who could af-
ford to doused    themselves with perfume;     the others—well,
people’s noses must have been tougher then.
    This narrowest street in Paris was, contrary to what you
might expect, wider in the sixteenth century. The six-foot-wide
alley, with its gutter of water (and urine) running down its mid-
dle, looks and sometimes smells like a medieval street. Walk up
the alley, away from Huchette. The alley suddenly widens,
brightens, and then opens onto the Seine and, to the right, a
surprise view of Notre-Dame. In the sixteenth century this
street, like Xavier Privas, tumbled down into the Seine. It too
was gated in at night, though no sign of the gate can be seen in
the stone.
    Return to the rue de la Huchette. No. 12, on the corner of
Huchette and Chat qui Péche, was built at a later date than its
neighbor and is the reason why Chat qui Péche is narrower to-
day than it once was. No. 10, next door, is the “corner” house
where Bonaparte lived in his poorer days, in a room at the back,
facing the Seine. He was reputedly dying of hunger when Paul
Barras, later important in the Directory (France’s executive
power between 1795 and 1799), gave him a chance to show his
mettle. Bonaparte began his rise to glory when, with a “whiff of
grapeshot,” he dispersed the Paris mob in front of the church of
Saint-Roch. Jacques Hillairet, in his superb dictionary of the
streets of Paris, summarizes Bonaparte’s career in a change of
address: “From this point on, fortune smiled on him. When he
resided once again on the banks of the Seine, it was, in 1800, at
the Tuileries.”
    Notice the absence on Huchette of the wide doorways

                                                               45
Pariswalks

(portes cochéres) that were often built to allow a horse and car-
riage and later an automobile to enter a courtyard. Huchette
was never a luxury street. The doors are narrow, and the halls
lead back deep inside to reach the one staircase that serves both
the front and back of the house. Long and narrow buildings
were common in the seventeenth century because street-front
property was so costly. Open any of the doors, and if a restau-
rant kitchen hasn’t filled the space, you will find a long, dark
walk to the courtyard and stairs.
    At no. 5, the Caveau de la Huchette, dedicated to the jazz
of the 1920s, calls itself “the celebrated cabaret of jazz where
one dances.” It is open every weeknight and Sunday from 10:15
PM. to 2 A.M., and Saturdays until 4 A.M. Friends of ours spent a
night of nostalgia there dancing the lindy (named after Charles
Lindbergh) to tremendous applause from the young connois-
seurs who frequent the club. This is a good place for singles. Al-
though the French dance style is different from ours, you'll have
fun. There is a low cover charge, but no drink minimum.
     The building that houses the Caveau dates from the six-
teenth century and was connected by secret passageways to the
Petit Chatelet, then a prison at the Petit Pont. A publicity flyer
put out by the proprietors states that the Templars, a religious
military order formed during the Crusades, used the cellar as a
secret meeting place in the late thirteenth century. Their riches
were so great that King Philippe IV felt the need to suppress
them in order to relieve them of their wealth. It was the curse
the Templars laid on the king and his descendants that Maurice
Druon took as the theme of his series of historical novels, Les
Rois Maudits (The Accursed Kings).
    In 1772 the Freemasons met here in secret. Then, during
the Revolution, these cellars and subcellars served as tribunal,
prison, and place of execution. The process was swift. A deep
well in the lowest level is said to have washed away all traces of
this summary “justice.”
    During World War II, secret resistance cells found their nat-
ural home here, while outspoken patriots filled the cafés. Jacques
Yonnet, in his strange and haunting book, Enchantement sur Paris,
describes the street as one of the ignition points of the occupied
city. Perhaps the “Rainbow” resistance fighters met here.

46
                                                     La Huchette

     There is also a story of the discovery of a two-thousand-year-
old bracelet during excavations in the Caveau. A huge treasure,
including a five-hundred-pound gold cross, is supposedly buried
under these buildings, hidden during the French Revolution.
     No. 4 is a large seventeenth-century building, originally
with three portes cochéres, that was redecorated in the eigh-
teenth century. Typical of this kind of face-lifting was the plac-
ing of masks on the facade. Here, fortunately, in a black
rectangle, someone has preserved an old sign reading A LA HURE
Dor (at the golden boar snout), dated 1729. Look above the
awning for the sign.
     Leave the narrow rue de la Huchette and enter the rue du
Petit Pont, which becomes the rue Saint-Jacques. To the left is
the quai, the Petit Pont, and Notre-Dame. To the right is a long
avenue that stretches south toward Orléans and, for the pil-
grims who went on France’s most popular pilgrimage of the
Middle Ages—to Santiago de Compostela in Spain (see Walk
1). The building on the south corner of the rue du Petit Pont
and the rue de la Huchette looks like a seventeenth-century
structure but was actually built from scratch in 1979.
     Face the Seine and look to your left, to the northwest cor-
ner, where the street is renamed place du Petit Pont. Close to
the ground, you will find a plaque commemorating bravery in
World War IL. It tells of two anonymous civilians and one sol-
dier, Jean Dussarps, who were killed defending the little fort on
the street. Below that, honor is paid to Béatrice Briant, who was
the leader of a group of voluntary fighters against the Germans.
    Turn around and walk south to no. 6 rue du Petit Pont,
where an old and elegant grocery finally closed after holding out
for more than fifty years. The shelves of the bookstore now at
this address, the Librairie Saint-Nicolas, date from the grocery.



                   Rue    Saint     Séverin

Continue walking away from the Seine down the rue du Petit
Pont, and turn right into the rue Saint-Séverin.        Countless
nineteenth-century descriptions of this street and its neighbors
all sound the same theme:

                                                                AT
Pariswalks

     All these streets, as I say, are picturesque and dirty. Between
     Cluny and the river is a network of very old, squalid, and
     very interesting streets.

     To some degree the same comments can still be made. If
you happened to walk here in the early morning when the
crowds had gone home (whenever that may be) and the rub-
bish remained, you would be tempted to use the same adjec-
tives. Half of the food from the restaurants seems to have
landed in the gutter. But at 7:30 the street cleaners arrive, and a
new day begins.
     The street was widened in 1678. If you look at the massive
Gothic church on the left, it is not difficult to see why the
houses on the other side of the rue Saint-Jacques were chosen
for removal. The houses opposite the church date from the late
seventeenth century.
     The Latin Mandarin, at no. 4, is a small restaurant with a
minute kitchen in the back. The restaurant may once have been
a hall or a courtyard. It was started twenty-five years ago by a
tiny lady, Mme Duc, who ran the restaurant with the help of her
ten children. Her husband worked elsewhere, as an accountant.
Vietnamese women often run small restaurants and food shops,
but you rarely see Vietnamese men in the neighborhood; they
work elsewhere. On the other hand, you rarely see North
African or Greek women;          the men run the restaurants. The
present owner is a close friend of Mme Duc and he offers the
same fare, with some new dishes of his own.
    Impasse Salembiére, now impasse Eliane Drivon, is a
closed alleyway. Once it was an open street, notorious for its
piles of rubbish and sleeping clochards, who found it a haven.
Now that the doors are locked at night, the alley is immaculate.
Take a few steps back and see how the walls of the buildings al-
most touch one another up above, typical of many medieval
streets, to protect the pedestrian from the rain. Look at the old
street name cut in stone above the street sign—RUE [BLANK]
SEVERIN—and the number 10 for the section of the city. The
Saint was scraped out here as elsewhere during the Revolution,
when the passionately anticlerical populace ravaged all things
religious. Look for evidence of this on other streets named after

48
                                                    La Huchette

saints. Look down through no. 8 to see how long the corridor
runs.
     Notice the very low, narrow seventeenth-century door to
no. 12. Press the top button of the keypad to the right. Push
open this small, heavily carved door to a centuries-old entry
that boasts rafters in the ceiling, exposed building stones on the
walls, a wrought-iron gate too heavy to budge, and an iron stair
rail followed by an odd hand-carved wooden one.
     Turn left now and look to the entrance of the church of
Saint-Séverin. In the sixth century, when everyone else lived
on the Ile de la Cité, a hermit named Séverin found a patch of
dry ground in the swampland across the river and settled there.
The site was ideal for a hermit—separated from society but
close enough to receive visitors. Contrary to popular belief, the
main aim of a hermit was not to cut himself off from humanity
but to induce it to beat a path to his solitary door. Séverin must
have received many, for at his death his reputation as a good
man was so widespread that an oratory was built in his memory
and called Saint-Séverin. From that early date onward, several
churches have been built on this site and destroyed—one by
fire, one by a Viking invasion—but all have been named for the
hermit Saint Séverin.
     After you have looked at the massive exterior, partly
cleaned, enter the church. Take a seat in one of the back rows
and take in the whole of the structure. The present church rep-
resents a combination of styles that stretches across the cen-
turies, from the thirteenth to the twentieth. There was never
enough money to complete the building at any one time, so the
work went on and on, and still does. Before the nineteenth cen-
tury, architects and builders felt no compulsion to preserve or
restore original forms. No age or style was sacred, and all con-
struction was “of the day.” As a result, the church has a parade
of arches that tells the story of Gothic architecture from its
primitive beginnings to its last flamboyant manifestations.
     Look up the right-hand aisle. The three pillars enclosing
two arches closest to the entrance are early-thirteenth-century
Gothic and are among the few remains of the previous church,
which was destroyed by fire. The two arches between them,
though broken (or pointed), are almost round, as in the earlier

                                                                49
Pariswalks

Romanesque style. The pillars are short, cut by capitals halfway
up their length. On the wall above the arches and above the
columns is a simple cloverleaf pattern, sculpted in stone. Look
now at the next four arches, done two centuries later. The
columns are tall and straight, and the arches meet at a tighter
angle. The goal of Gothic architecture was to reach higher and
higher into open space, up to God. Notice the arcs that radiate
outward from the stone trefoils on the wall above these arches.
The small semicircles turn on themselves to make new ones,
and the effect is that of a flame, from which we get the term
flamboyant. All of this is still controlled, however, in contrast
with the late flamboyant pillars behind the altar.
    Look at the pillars and arches surrounding the altar. Study
the stonework carefully and you will notice that the basic struc-
ture of the arches is the same as that of the fifteenth-century
ones just described. Why, then, do they look so different? It’s a
seventeenth-century story.
    The famous and capricious cousin of Louis XIV known as
“la Grande Mademoiselle” got into a dispute with the curé of
Saint-Sulpice, her neighborhood church, and decided to change
parishes. To show her pleasure with the one and annoyance
with the other, she bestowed her gifts and her idea of fashion on
the church of Saint-Séverin. The priest dared not, or at least did
not, refuse. In the spirit of the Renaissance, la Grande Made-
moiselle wrapped the pillars in red marble and rounded off
the archways with the same red marble. There is more of the
same stone in the shape of an altar, now in a side chapel on the
left. (Formerly it was placed in the center to match its sur-
roundings.) The lady was busy elsewhere as well. If you look at
the bottoms of the early flamboyant pillars of the fifteenth cen-
tury (numbers four through seven, counting from the entrance),
you can see the remains of fluting that was added to the simple
pillars.
     Now let us go to the flamboyant pillars behind the altar. The
effect is astonishing and marvelous. This spot is often called the
Palm Grove; the pillars do look like trees spiraling up into
palms overhead. The central twisted pillar is the prime example
of French flamboyant Gothic. The spirals begin at the bottom
and palm out above into so complex a network that it is almost

50
                                                     La Huchette

impossible to trace their path. The grove has been called “a
sanctuary of serenity,” but we find this particular pillar anything
but calm. It is known as “Dante’s pillar”; Dante is reputed to
have leaned against it often. The fact that he lived two centuries
before the pillar was built did not stop the nineteenth-century
chroniclers of old Paris from linking it to him!
     Now, as you face the entrance, follow the outside aisle be-
hind Dante’s pillar around to the left (back toward the entrance)
until you come upon a stout pillar capped by the figure of a
magnificent broad-shouldered man holding up the arch and
reading out a message. Half of this pillar was built in the four-
teenth century and the other half in the fifteenth. It would have
been simple to complete the pillar as it was begun, but here is
proof that emulation of the past or any idea of unity of style was
totally absent from the thinking of the time. And so it stands,
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries both embodied in one pillar.
     Continue up this side aisle toward the entrance and on the
wall to your left you will find one of the best collections of vo-
tive tablets in Paris. This was the parish church for the Latin
Quarter, and grateful students covered the walls with votive
tablets that gave thanks to God for success in exams. The sex-
ton told us that “they” planned to remove them because grati-
tude was no longer a la mode, but he was wrong. They remain.
     Cross over to the other side aisle (on the left side, walking
away from the entrance) and, in the first chapel, you will find a
red porphyry marble altar. Professor Raoul Gaduyer, a venerable
theologian-sociologist who knew every stone in this church,
spent hours explaining and telling us stories. At the red altar,
however, he hesitated, smiled, then hesitated again. We waited
patiently for the smile to reappear and the story to begin. This
large porphyry altar was another of the gifts of la Grande Made-
moiselle. But the antiheroine of this story was Louis’s mistress,
Mme de Montespan. During her long liaison with the king she
was concemed about his attentions to other, younger women.
In her anxiety and despair she finally contrived to get the priest
(Heaven help him!) of Saint-Séverin to say a black mass on the
red altar to ensure Louis’s fidelity. The tender hearts of two un-
fortunate turtledoves served as the unholy instruments of her
black magic.

                                                                51
Pariswalks

     Bad enough, but her magical exploits continued (and here
we are discussing only her black masses, not her poisoning of
some of Louis’s other mistresses). Another mass was said else-
where in Paris with the same thought in mind—Louis and his
love. That time the red altar was supplanted by a smaller and
softer one, the naked body of Mme de Montespan. But the
chalice would not stand upright, because of either her curves or
her trembling. The solution was to place it securely between her
thighs. All of this, as you can imagine, was done in great se-
crecy. Private records were kept, however, and these have re-
cently turned up in the archives of the Prefecture of Police.
     Continue down this side aisle to the chapel where the mod-
ern windows begin. The sixteenth-century painting on the wall
to the right of the windows was uncovered in 1968, when the
modern stained-glass windows were installed. The painting,
barely visible, is a Last Judgment. The words on the right call
up all saintly souls, men and women, to Heaven. On the left
(sinistre) side, however, aré those damned to eternal Hell—they
are all of them women, beaten on their way by devils, all of them
men. An interesting testimony to the artist-priest’s view of the
roles of the two sexes. Look at the nonrepresentational stained-
glass windows. During World War II the fifteenth-century win-
dows were shattered, and temporary ones took their place. In
1966, enough money was finally raised to commission an artist,
Jean Bazaine, to make new ones. Bazaine is a fine colorist in ab-
stract art who also did the mosaic at the UNESCO building in
Paris. He drew his inspiration from the Bible, using quotations
about fire, earth, and water. The bold primary colors of the win-
dows set in solid shapes, one next to the other, create a striking
contrast to the quiet strength of the stone.
    This is a marrying church. Come any Saturday moming and
you will be sure to see a wedding. Outside, go to your left and
look at the freshly cleaned cloisters and garden.
      Across rue Saint-Séverin, at no. 22, is one of the narrowest
houses in Paris. It is eight feet (two windows) wide. This was
the house of the Abbé Prévost, an eighteenth-century minister
who wrote voluminously, though only one original manu-
script remains, that of Manon Lescaut (1731). It is the tale of a
young noble man who falls in love with a prostitute, who is

Sy.
                                                      La Huchette

ultimately arrested and deported to the New World (described
as a New Orleans complete with a desert and wild Indians).
We are convinced that the inspiration for his book came from
his proximity to Saint-Séverin and a shocking practice the
church then indulged in: each year an award was given to the
five most virtuous maidens in the parish. It was not enough,
however, to praise the good. To warn against immorality, the
church placed the most scandalous and unvirtuous women of
the parish in cages and exposed them outdoors to the scorn
and not-so-tender mercies of the passersby. It was the Last
Judgment—the blessed and the damned—translated from life
to art.
    In 1763 Abbé Prévost, then living in a suburb of Paris, suc-
cumbed to a stroke of apoplexy. An autopsy seemed in order,
but when the doctor used his scalpel on the corpse, it rose up
and called out. The abbé was not dead after all! A few minutes
later, the abbé obligingly passed away, not of apoplexy, but of
the doctor’s deep cut.
    The corner house, no. 24, is a lovely rounded building, and
on the corner above the blue street sign you can still see the
street name cut into the stone, as you saw earlier. It says RUE on
one line and on the next line SEVERIN. Here is another example
of the removal of Saint from the street name. The number 18
cut into the stone refers to the old divisions of Paris.
     Look through the window down the long narrow hall of no.
30 at the plaster-and-wood construction of the walls. In the sev-
enteenth century, walls were built of timber framing with a grav-
elly mixture filling the spaces between. This mixture was held
together by pieces of wood and rags, just as clay bricks are held
together by straw. This filler was usually covered over with
white plaster, with timbers exposed, but the heavy incidence of
fire in these oil-lit interiors led King Henri IV to decree that any
wall with exposed timbers had to be completely plastered over.
A white clay, which was found just belowground in Paris not far
from here, was quarried and used widely in the area around
Notre-Dame, Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre, and Saint-Séverin. “Plaster
of paris” has since become the generic term for any white plas-
ter. Many walls were so weighted down with their coat of plas-
ter, however, that they buckled and even collapsed.

                                                                 D3
Pariswalks

     On the French first floor at no. 13 there is a fourteenth-
century enseigne (standard) for what was once an inn; it depicts
a swan whose neck is wrapped around a cross. This is another
rebus, like the Y on the rue de la Huchette. A swan in French is
cygne, a homonym for signe (sign). Combining the cygne with
the cross yields the “sign of the cross,” the standard symbol for
lodgings.
     The first commercial standards were put up by taverns and
hotels so that a foreigner could find a place to eat and sleep in a
strange city. These standards often represented a bundle of
straw, which gives a good idea of the character of the sleeping
accommodation. Even today there is hardly a city in France
without a hotel called the Lion d’Or (golden lion) or, in rebus
form, le lit [ou] on dort (the bed [where] one sleeps).
     In the thirteenth century, the commercial       standard was
soon understood to be a smart way to advertise; by the fit
teenth, it had become a serious problem. The standards were
made from sheets of iron’, cut and painted and hung on long
poles to extend into the street past the large shop shutters. Like
signs today, they were hung out as far as possible and made as
large as possible to attract the most attention.
    A parfumerie (perfume shop) had a standard of a glove, each
finger of which could have held a three-year-old child. A dentist
hung a molar that was the size of an armchair. These standards
were constantly threatening to fall; one man was reputedly
killed when the dentist’s tooth fell on his head.
     The combination of the shutters, an open sewer running
down the center of the unpaved street, and huge groaning and
clanking signs blocking out the sun made the streets dark and
cluttered.
     For reasons of safety rather than aesthetics, the government
tried to pass legislation to limit the size of signs. In 1667 they
said the signs could be no more than thirty-two inches wide
and had to be hung at least fifteen feet above the ground, so
that horsemen might ride safely in the streets. It was not until
1761 that standards were banned altogether, to be replaced by
the old-style wall decoration like the Cygne de la Croix. Visit
the Hétel Carnavalet, the Museum of the History of Paris, in the
Marais (Walk 5) for an exhibit of standards.

ot
                                                 ard for an inn
The sign of the cross, a fourteenth-century stand
Pariswalks

     Since literacy was rare, the names were more often simply
visual recognition or mnemonic devices. Some were mystifying:
The Bottle Tennis Court, The Small Hole, and The Cage. Other
names were clearer. The Tree of Life was a surgeon’s house; The
Red Shop, a butcher shop (the surgeon might have used that
one too); The Reaper, a bakery (another possibility for the sur-
geon). One common name whose symbolism was clear in the
Middle Ages was the Salamander. Salamanders were at that time
believed to be impervious to fire, and therefore salamander was
the old name for asbestos, the “wood that wouldn’t bur.”
Bakers often took this name to symbolize their clay baking
ovens, and the word is still in use today for the ceramic room
heaters commonly found in Europe.
    Many of the names were religious, some specifically so: The
Golden Cross, The White Cross, The Red Cross, The Name of
Jesus, The Fat Mother of God (which was not vulgar but, rather,
complimentary in the hungry Middle Ages). Some names were
only vaguely religious in that they used the number three and
thus invoked the Trinity. The number three was extremely pop-
ular: The Three Catfish, The Three Goddesses, The Three Prun-
ing Knives, The Three Torches, The Three Panes (this was a
bakery and not a glazier’s), The Three Nuns’ Coifs, The Three
Doves, The Three Fish, The Three Pigeons.
     No. 34 is the most elegant building of this street and was a
stylish private home in the seventeenth century. One sure sign is
the presence of a large coach entrance for the carriages of the
proprietor. The other residents of the quarter obviously were not
expected to own coaches or, if they did, were expected to keep
them elsewhere. The Ministry of Cultural Affairs has classified as
monuments the entrance doors, the courtyard, and the iron stair
rail of no. 34. The wide and graceful courtyard is decorated with
eighteenth-century mascarons (mask decorations) just above the
ground floor. One is missing, however, as a result of fire.



                     Rue de la Harpe

Turn left into the rue de la Harpe. This was one of the great
streets of Paris from Roman days until the middle of the last

56
                                                       La Huchette

century. It ran parallel to the rue Saint-Jacques and wound its
serpentine way from the river down toward the South of France.
This long street, which was the principal north-south thor-
oughfare of its day, was amputated by two thirds when Hauss-
mann laid out a new, wide, straight north-south route across
the Left Bank, the boulevard Saint-Michel, which took over
much of the old right-of-way.
   From the earliest times at least fourteen different names for
the rue de la Harpe have been recorded, several of them used
concurrently. To some, the street was known by a standard or
an inn or a school; to others by the people who lived there. It
was the street of Reginald the Guitarist or Reginald the Harper,
the street of Old Jewry, the street of the Old Buckler, the street
of new Saint-Michel, and so on.
    A standard of King David playing a harp finally won out and
gave the street its present name. The standard is said to have
identified the house of Reginald the Harper but may bear some
relation to the fact that in the eleventh and twelfth centuries
there were Jewish schools on the rue de la Harpe, between
Huchette and Saint-Séverin.
     The first recorded synagogue in Paris, built in the tenth cen-
tury, stood on the corner of the rue de la Harpe and rue Mon-
sieur le Prince, approximately four blocks south. Nothing at all
is known about it, except that it was just inside the wall of King
Philippe Auguste, which encircled and protected Paris. When
the Jews were expelled from Paris and their synagogue confis-
cated in 1182, Philippe Auguste gave their houses to twenty-
four drapers and eighteen furriers.
    The rue de la Harpe has been the heart of the Latin Quarter
for centuries. Roger de Beauvoir in Paris Chez Soi, published in
1855, describes it as it was in the early sixteenth century, when
Latin, though losing ground to French, was still spoken. To
quote his description:

    There was a time when a mass of strange costumes could be
    seen milling around the greasy, dirty street. There was first
    of all the mire, the first doctor of early times, who sold his
    drugs and unguents in the street, escorted by a child with a
    monkey that was bled by the “practitioner” on request [for

                                                                     Dit.
Pariswalks

     what we can’t imagine]. Then followed the hanging sleeves
     and furs of a professor as grave as Erasmus, the flowing
     cloaks of the students mixed in with the jackets of the men-
     at-arms, the pointed hats of the Jews, and later on the wig of
     Dr. Diafoirus. ... How many little working girls, the girl-
     friends of the students, did these black, filthy houses not
     shelter? Girls singing like canaries in their cages, the fright-
     ful cages of the seventh floor of the rue de la Harpe. The
     whole anthill of the schools... begins every morning to
     move its thousand legs from the bottom of the rue de la
     Harpe—the medical student who goes off, nose to the
     wind, hand in pocket, looking at his colored anatomical
     plates; the high school student buying a cake; the law stu-
     dent ogling a shop girl; the tutor taking the rich man’s son
     to his exam for the baccalaureate. The point is that rents
     were reasonable; even so, no chance that a Chinese, a Turk,
     an Arab, or even an Englishman would lodge there. It is a
     special people that enlivens this quarter; a people with ink
     on its fingers and in its lips; an undisciplined, haughty,
     noisy people, the people of the schools, the drinking joints,
     the furnished rooms; the rue de la Harpe with its thousand
     side streets is the “heart of the students.”

     Today it is not the “heart of the students” but the heart of
the tourists. As you have noticed, the Arabs and the Vietnam-
ese, if not the Chinese, the Greeks, and the Turks, have found
their way to this quarter and have changed the business of the
street from one of student housing and small food shops and
workshops to one of restaurants, cafés, boutiques, jazz clubs,
and hotels. The street must be seen at night, and Saturday night
is the best night of all.
     The “frightful cages of the seventh floor” are now restored
as studios (one room and a cubby of a kitchen and bath) rent-
ing for large sums, and are snapped up before the rental signs
are put up.
     No. 33 is a narrow, one-window house called La Petite
Bouclerie. Remember, the street was once called the street of
the Old Buckler. The name is written inside a sculpted stone
frame above the door.

58
                                                     La Huchette

    Look up at nos. 35, 45, and 47. You will see elegant
eighteenth-century houses with impressive doorways, rounded
stone window-frames, and sculpted facades. The old coach en-
trances are now filled in, the courtyards occupied by restau-
rants; but up above, the ceilings are twelve feet high and the
rooms are large and bright. The cellars, once filled with mud
from Seine floods or used as wine cellars, are fast giving way to
restaurants and movie houses.
     Look in the courtyard of no. 35, past the entry on the right.
You'll see a staircase with a classified (historically recognized)
iron railing and a wall of beige building stones.
     This wide street is a pleasant place to walk, despite some
poor-quality clothing stores. In pleasant enough weather musi-
cians and singers vie for the comer of rue de la Harpe and rue de
la Huchette, one block north. Enormous crowds gather and often
richly fill the empty hat in appreciation of good music or just the
pleasure of the spectacle. We once heard a violinist who really
was first class, probably on holiday from a symphony orchestra.



               Rue   de la Parcheminerie

Turn left into the rue de la Parcheminerie. In the Middle Ages
this street was the “bookshop” of the rue de la Harpe. Before
1530 it was called rue des Escrivains (street of writers); then it
was renamed for the parchment the writers wrote upon. The
first parchment paper was thick and rough and lent itself poorly
to handwriting. It was only in 1380 that the experts developed
a grain so tight they were able to write the whole Bible in one
small volume. The scribes who worked here were privileged
souls, exempt from taxes and held in high esteem, though their
morals were infamous. This street has been cleaned up and
widened, and so transformed from its former dark-alley appear-
ance to a quiet and pleasant residential street.
     The odd luxury of the street is no. 29. It was built in 1750
for a gentleman named Claude Dubuisson. One of its beautiful
doors was removed when the building served as a wine depot.
Each pair of the tall, curved, graceful windows, all three stories
of them, opened onto a large room. Today these rooms have

                                                                39
Pariswalks

been divided into apartments; the previous occupant, who was
there during the restoration of the splendid facade, explained to
us that the original walls were so thick, architects today could
squeeze in the necessary bathrooms.
    The second door of no. 29 now opens to The Abbey Book-
shop, competition for Shakespeare and Company, especially
since the former offers free coffee. Opened in 1989, the shop
has a large and carefully chosen selection of books in English,




|—
oe!




The Abbey Bookshop
                                                       La Huchette

especially Canadian books. The shop’s owner, Brian Spence—
Canadian, intelligent, informed, and charming—claims that in
this busy and crowded part of the Latin Quarter, his bookstore
is a refuge for the poet, the scholar, or the pilgrim. The piles of
books teeter as you squeeze past. Join the Canadian Club of
Paris for a small fee and attend book discussions, artists’ shows,
and wonderful outings, often hiking or biking.
     The recently built Hétel Parc Saint-Séverin, at no. 22, ben-
efits from a sunny, open site in this neighborhood of crowded,
twisted streets. Room number 70 is the hotel’s penthouse
suite, with a circular terrace that spans views from Notre-Dame
to Montmartre.
     In 1935 plans were drawn up that called for a complete mod-
ernization of the area, a transformation of these winding, narrow
streets into neat, airy thoroughfares flanked by modem apart-
ment buildings. But then the campaign to save old Paris took
over; the Ministry of Cultural Affairs classified every possible trea-
sure and forbade the destruction of most of the buildings, though
they could be restored. Alterations were usually permitted in the
interior, hence the opportunity for profitable conversion to new
commercial uses and to luxury apartments. And so the restora-
tion goes on, but always far behind the rise in demand.
     The medieval name of the rue Boutebrie, on your right, con-
nects the street to the rue de la Parcheminerie. It was known as
the street of illuminators, rue des Enlumineurs, when the other
was the street of writers. This was the book center of Paris, and
Paris was the intellectual center of the world. Follow the contin-
uation of Parcheminerie to the rue Saint-Jacques and turn lett.



                    Rue Saint-Jacques

Cross the rue Saint-Jacques to the store side—the better to see
the back of the church of Saint-Séverin, which was smothered
by shops until the street was widened a hundred years ago. The
stores on this street change with time and style, but many of
their names—the Cloister, the Pilgrim, Tentations—still tell the
history of past centuries.
    To the left of no. 31 rue Saint-Jacques and to the right of no.

                                                                    61
Pariswalks

27, on the right corner of the wall that juts out, there is a
plaque that tells of the death of a soldier, a policeman who was
killed at the barricade in 1944. On the adjoining wall, high up,
is an etching by Salvador Dali of a strange sundial. At no. 21,
Man’Ouché, they make galettes Libanaises, which are prepared
on a large metal dome, called a tannour. These crépes can be
covered in a variety of spices and filled with a wide choice of in-
gredients. After being removed from the tannour, the crépes
cool and become crispy. They make an excellent snack or an
easy lunch.
     A new and charming hotel, the Hétel Henri IV, at nos.
9-11, is clean and cozy. In the lobby there are tables for break-
fast and newspapers to read while you eat. If you stay in a room
in the front of the hotel, you will have a beautiful view of the
back of Saint-Séverin; and because it is a new hotel, the rooms
are soundproofed and are just as pleasant and quiet on the
street side as they are in the back. The hotel even offers umbrel-
las by the front door for the typically rainy Paris days.
     Métamorphoses, at no. 15 rue du Petit Pont, is true to its
name: it changes its wares. It was originally an eccentric 1900s
store. Today, Suzanne Sauvanaud (a poet as well) sells strictly
jewelry—80 percent is old pieces and the rest is a collection of
mainly Art Deco reproductions made by the same companies
that made the jewelry in the 1920s and using the original
molds. Her stock may be more expensive than others in Paris
(still very reasonable), but the quality and selection are superior.
The store and front window are crammed with treasures, so
take your time.
    Polly Magoo, at no. 5 rue du Petit Pont, is a trendy bar with
a fancy mosaic-tile exterior. It was once located at no. 11 and
was a place where people gathered to play chess, but the chess
disappeared when the bar moved to its larger, swankier location.



                   Quai     Saint-Michel

Cross the street to the corner of place du Petit Pont and the quai
de Montebello, and walk right, toward the Pont au Double. You
will pass in front of the famous bookstalls of Paris and be across

62
                                                     La Huchette

the street from Shakespeare and Company (Walk 1). The book-
sellers (bouquinistes) represent one of the oldest trades in Paris,
and one that has changed very little. The men and women
lucky enough to get a spot on the parapet to hang their metal
boxes consider themselves a special breed. They love the out-
doors and the freedom to open and close at will. When the quai
is quiet, they sit and read, or sleep, or knit, or smoke, or play
chess with their neighbors. Story has it that they are never sick
and live to very old age. Most of them have a specialty, but
many buy whatever looks salable.
     The real fear of the bouquinistes is the automobile. The
noise is deafening, the air polluted, and the traffic so dense
and steady that they see themselves as under siege. Even
worse are the huge tourist buses that park themselves directly
in front of their stalls. Although plans to transform the quai
into an expressway have been abandoned, the fear is always
there.
     Many of the bookstalls offer the usual fare of pages torn
from old books, reproductions of Daumier prints, and modern
paintings of children with large liquid eyes. But many have a
specialty worth a closer look. We found the stalls between the
Petit Pont and the Pont au Double more interesting than those
near the Pont Saint-Michel. Some stalls down, M. Lanoizelée
has a serious stand. He collects first editions, many of which
have inscriptions from the author on the flyleaf.
     On the west corner of the Petit Pont, stall no. 1, opposite
no. 9 quai Saint-Michel, is the stall of Véronique Le Goff, who
has followed M. Korb as the president of the bouquinistes’
union. Participants pay a yearly fee of $50. The union offers an
annual literary prize that is celebrated with a fine repast and
copies of the speeches in its journal, Bouquinistes des Quais de
Paris. Union members also help each other out in bad times.
     Go back to the comer of the Petit Pont and the quai de
Montebello. Diagonally across the street you will see the usual
souvenir and poster shops that fill the quai Saint-Michel, but
tucked in between are serious galleries and entrances to choice
apartments that look out on the Seine and the bustle of the
quai. A gallery of fine engravings has moved out to make way for
a métro elevator for the physically handicapped. We once lived

                                                                 63
Pariswalks

in 13 quai Saint-Michel, and the building quaked during the
underground drilling.
    No. 15 is home to an elegant hotel, Les Rives de Notre-
Dame. We were impressed by the beauty of its décor. We vis-
ited the wonderful sitting room with its glass roof sheltering
wooden vaulting, Provencal fabric—covered couches, and caged
birds singing. This is a four-star hotel with only ten rooms, so
reserve early.
     Sartoni-Cerveau, at no. 15, begins a row of serious collec-
tors’ stores. M. Sartoni-Cerveau’s shelves are packed with an-
tique books and etchings. The major topics of his collection are
travel, maps, landscapes, and decoration. His motto is “The
love of books unites us.”
    The cupboards on the walls of the Galeries Michel, at no.
17, are filled with original seventeenth-, eighteenth-, and
nineteenth-century prints. M. Michel, whose father ran the
gallery before him, is both informative and friendly. Now his
daughter works there as well. The labels on his cases cover any
subject you might think of—circus, interiors, romantic,
mountains—as well as individual artists. M. Michel will be glad
to give you a chair and a standing wooden frame to rest a folder
on and leave you on your own. Prices range from numbers with
one zero to numbers with many. Most of M. Michel’s business
is done with collectors by mail, despite his location on this very
busy street of tourists. Ask to see the back room, which is a
small museum of fine etchings.
    Gibert Jeune: there are three of these, two on the quai and
one around the corner, on the place Saint-Michel. They are off-
shoots, though now separate, of the older firm of Gibert, chief
bookseller to generations of students at the Sorbonne and the
Lycée Louis-le-Grand, farther up the Boul Mich.
    Gibert Jeune, like every other Paris enterprise that can get
away with it, sets up displays of merchandise on the pavement
outside to catch the fancy of the passersby. These take up a
good half of the pavement, and although they create a minor
pedestrian traffic jam, it’s a lot of fun. Take your time walking
through the crush during morning and evening rush hours. At
those hours parking is not tolerated on that side of the quai,


64
                                                     La Huchette

and cars tear along in the outside lane a foot or two from the
pavement.
   The first Gibert Jeune, at no. 23, offers art books, guide-
books, and books for collectors (about dolls, playing cards,
trains, buttons, pipes, anything) at remainder prices.
     The second Gibert Jeune, no. 27, has perhaps the largest se-
lection of school books in Paris; these range from beginning
readers in the back of the store to Keynes on economics in the
front. When secondary school starts, in the fall, lines stretch
around the corner, and students wait for hours with their lists of
books in hand. The shop closes at five, the line at three.
    The third, and the largest, Gibert Jeune is at no. 5 place
Saint-Michel. Turn the comer and you will see a book and sta-
tionery shop literally in the street. Every moming and evening
the stands are carried in and out. The ground floor has all kinds
of stationery and office supplies. Enjoy yourself buying new
kinds of pads, pencils, and paper clips.
    It is certainly time to sit down at the corner café, Le Départ,
for espresso, fresh lemonade, hot chocolate, or beer. If you like
lemonade with bubbles, ask for a siphon (seltzer bottle) with
your citron pressé. Le Départ is a choice spot for people-
watching.
   You are now back where you started, but there are a few
more remarks we would like to make. The métro, with its easy
map of instructions, will take you anywhere faster than a taxi.
This particular entrance is one of the seventeen remaining in
Paris that were built around 1900 by Hector Guimard, the ar-
chitect of the period. Go to see the facade and interior of one of
his prize-winning houses, at no. 14 rue La Fontaine, in the
sixteenth arrondissement. Sometimes the art of the period, Art
Nouveau, is called Style Métro because these subway entrances
typify the imaginative floral spiraling that marked the style so
clearly. Note the curved squares on the sides of the métro en-
trance. We watched painters one day, as we sat at the café,
preparing to put on three layers of paint to get the exact soft
green coloring they wanted.
    An Art Nouveau show at the Museum of Modern Art in Paris
in 1960 appropriately used a métro entrance as the passageway


                                                                 65
Pariswalks




               Art Nouveau métro railings designed by
               Hector Guimard



into the exhibit. The appreciation of 1900s métro entrances
soared, but the Museum of Modern Art in New York managed to
buy one before Paris realized their future worth. The entrance in
the place Saint-Michel is missing its curved arch. It has been re-
placed by a straight pole, typical of the Art Deco of the 1930s,
which holds up the rectangular nameplate.
    Look across the street at the very high, large fountain that
marks this central outdoor lounge and meeting place. On a Sat-
urday, after school had begun, Alison’s daughter, Elana, who
was spending a semester with her grandparents in order to at-
tend the Ecole Active Bilingue J.M., went with Sonia on the
hunt for a special history book. What they found were at least a
thousand students staking out territory on the place to hawk
their secondhand school books. It was a lot of fun pushing
through the shouting and the hustling and bustling.
    The fountain was built between 1858 and 1860 by Davioud
to hide the back wall of an apartment building that ruined the
view down the boulevard. This accounts for the unnatural height
of the fountain/monument. Four red-marble columns surround a
bronze statue of Saint Michel, by Duret. With outspread wings,

66
                                                    La Huchette

he stares down at a demon in the water below. At the time of its
construction, the work was not appreciated, as evidenced by this
rhyme in the press:

   In this execrable monument
   one sees neither talent nor taste
    The devil is worth nothing at all
   Saint Michel isn’t worth the devil.


    If you look down the boulevard, you will see how jammed it
is with people and sidewalk vendors. The Musée National du
Moyen Age is three blocks south, away from the quai, and the
Sorbonne, five. The rue Saint-André-des-Arts, to your right, is a
busy, funky street that leads to the Saint-Germain-des-Prés area.
