Walk 4: Place des Vosges

Place des Vosges


C’est le coup de lance de Montgomery qui a
créé la place des Vosges.

It’s the blow of Montgomery’s lance that
created the place des Vosges.
                             —Victor Hugo
z8 A .
 BASTILLE
    @
Starting Point: Rue de Birague, south entrance of place des
    Vosges, 4th arrondissement
Métro: Bastille or Saint-Paul
Buses: 29, 69, 76, 96



Walk up the rue de Birague (stop and look at interesting shops)
and continue into the place des Vosges (pronounced plass-day-
voge) before you. A place is a square; this one has a large park in
the middle and symmetrical townhouses all around. Sit in the
garden near the children’s area so that you can watch the chil-
dren play d la francaise (despite the mix of Hebrew, Yiddish, and
Arabic you'll hear). If it is cold, try the café Ma Bourgogne, on
the northwest corner of the place.
    Read the history of this place and some of its surroundings.
While the Left Bank was inhabited as far back as the sixth cen-
tury, the Right Bank, or Marais (marsh), was not settled for an-
other five hundred years or more.
    In 1407, a hétel (grand private residence) known as
Tournelles—for the small towers in its walls—came under the
ownership of the crown and replaced the previous royal residence.
Pariswalks

It remained the royal residence until 1559 and the joust that
cost Henri II his life. The king had fought and won two jousts
already that day, but he insisted on a third against the captain of
his Scottish Guards, Gabriel de Lorges, sire de Montgomery. At
the first pass, both combatants splintered their lances. The king
wanted another run; Montgomery was reluctant. Of course, the
king, savoring his success, had his way. Once again Mont-
gomery’s lance broke, but this time, by a freak accident, the
point pushed up the visor of the king’s helmet and entered his
head above his eye. For ten days Henri suffered. The greatest
doctors were called; Ambroise Paré and Andreas Vesalius came
all the way from Brussels. Four criminals under sentence of
death were decapitated so that the doctors could study their
cranial anatomy, but to no avail. Henri died, of infection if noth-
ing else, and his widow, Catherine de Médicis, persuaded her
son Charles IX to demolish the palace with its unhappy memo-
ries.
     Once royalty abandoned the palace, the ground on which it
had stood was given over to a succession of improvised roles.
The militia used it for its exercises. The city installed stables and
used some of the buildings to store powder. For many years the
interior courtyard housed an active horse market that attracted
many rogues, posing a growing problem for the authorities. The
answer was found by Henri IV. The horse market would be re-
placed by a development project, Paris’s first. It would be a spa-
cious, symmetrical public square to be known as the place
Royale, a place of respectable residence and assembly. The
parceling of terrain began in 1605, and the first building fin-
ished was the large pavilion at the south end of the square. It
marked the start of an epoch in domestic architecture and set
the example for the remaining construction.
    The place Royale was only one of Henri IV’s three urbaniza-
tion projects. Another, a set of large avenues that would radiate
out from the place, was never built, and the third, the place
Dauphine, on the tip of the Ile de la Cité, was only partially
completed. (Ioday at the place Dauphine you will find a splen-
did statue of the gallant Henri IV on horseback looking out over
the Seine.)
    The place Royale, however, was the king’s pet project, and

116
                                                Place des Vosges

he visited the construction site daily to speed the workers
along. In his plan for the large square, he reserved the south
side for himself and the north for a silk factory a la fagon de Mi-
lan. The east and west sides were to be sold in parcels to private
owners.
     The Duc de Sully filled 50 percent of the pavilions with his
friends. The Duc de Guise did likewise. The result was one that
pleased Henri, a convert to Catholicism: a mix of Protestants
and Catholics.
    The facades were to be all the same, built of brick with pierre
taillé (cut-stone) trim. The ground floor, planned for shops, was
set back to create a covered walkway of four arcades per lot:
each building was to have two floors above that, the whole
capped with a steep slate roof encompassing another two floors
pierced with mansard windows. The style was known as bleu,
blanc, rouge—for the slate roofs, the white stone trim, and the
red bricks. At the center of the south end would be a raised
pavilion for the king. Within a year or two, when the silk pro-
ject failed, the north end was given its own pavilion for the
queen and private residences matching those opposite it.
     The open space in the center would be promenade, tourna-
ment ground, and stage for public events, functions that no
street, however wide, could perform. There was no other public
square in Paris at this time, and it was Henri’s intention that all
visiting foreign dignitaries arriving in Paris would enter by the
gate just to the east of here, at the Bastille, travel down the rue
Saint-Antoine, and then turn into the place Royale from what is
now the rue de Birague, where you entered.
    In principle, the buildings around the square were to be
made of brick with stone trim. In fact, only the first structures,
including the Pavillon du Roi, lived up to the plan. It took a
long time to lay brick, and Henri was in a hurry. Bricks and
mortar were also expensive, especially in a city that had never
before (and has never since) considered brick to be fashionable.
Nor did the local workers have the skills necessary for this huge
undertaking.
    In any event, the owners of the later buildings were only too
happy to construct them of plaster on wood framing and then
paint them to resemble brick, in colors ranging from dusty pink

                                                                UM
Pariswalks

to dark red. Some of this trompe V’oeil is still visible. It is sur-
prising that these masterpieces of French architecture—praised
for their concept, size, proportions, and colors—were mostly
facade.
      The artifice, however, does not seem to have dimmed the
square’s glory. Although no king ever lived here (the Pavillon du
Roi was far too small to accommodate the king and his retinue),
the square was inhabited in the seventeenth century by the best
society. Before the Faubourg Saint-Germain-des-Prés became
the chic neighborhood, the Marais, and especially the place
Royale, was the place where anyone who was anyone lived.
     Unfortunately, Henri IV was assassinated shortly before the
square’s completion. The square was therefore inaugurated by
the young Louis XIII. This is why the equestrian statue in the
center of the square is of Louis XIII, and not of Henri IV.
    On April 5, 6, and 7, 1612, a fabulous tournament was
held at the resplendent place Royale. Jousting was forbidden,
but five equestrian ballets were organized for the cavaliers, each
with different exotic costumes—including one group dressed
as American Indians. A description of one of the quadrilles will
give you some idea of how elaborate these festivities were: the
Duc de Longueville and his retainers were dressed in gray violet
satin with silver embroidery; the pages and the horses were
dressed in red velvet; four winged horses pulled a chariot with
two rhinoceroses harnessed to the back; and two giants in blue
satin preceded the duke himself, who rode a horse draped with
repoussé plaques of silver and gold. There were one hundred
and fifty musicians, as well as games, continuous parades, and
fireworks at night.
    The square was packed with ten thousand people, some
crowded onto viewing stands, some at the windows. Members
of the royal entourage had been assigned different houses and
balconies from which to observe the tournament. In fact, the
residents had been required to make their balconies available to
the noblemen assigned to them. It was the first time that
houses had been built with real balconies; until then Parisians
had had only small stone ledges to lean on. Once the place
Royale had shown the way, balconies quickly became de


118
                                                Place des Vosges

rigueur. The common people had to hang from the chimneys or
squeeze into the recesses of the arcades.
    The place Royale was used frequently in the seventeenth
century, for tournaments and spectacles. Visiting ambassadors
staged elaborate processions to show off the riches and cos-
tumes of their home countries. For many Parisians this was
their only contact with a foreign culture, and dress and appear-
ance were carefully scrutinized and criticized. Of one delegation
Mme de Motteville wrote, after describing their rich clothes
studded with jewels, “In general they are so fat that they give
you heartburn, and concerning their bodies, they are dirty.”
     The place Royale was also the favorite dueling ground for
the hotbloods of the French aristocracy. The fashionable ladies
of the place enjoyed the spectacle, and the swordsmen were en-
couraged by these ardent admirers. The fights were more than
show, however. In 1614, three out of four antagonists were
killed in one encounter, and over the years France lost some of
its most valiant cavaliers in this square.
    In 1626, Richelieu, first minister of Louis XIII, forbade duel-
ing on pain of death. The very prohibition was a challenge to
French manhood. Only one year later there occurred a six-man
duel (two principals and four seconds, who were expected to
do more than hold the combatants’ coats) right in front of the
Pavillon du Roi. Results: two dead, two fled to England, and
two off to Lorraine. The latter two were caught en route,
brought back to Paris, and decapitated, over the protests and
appeals of the nobility of France. Richelieu was not a man to
take insolence lightly. The incident cooled the ardor of the
young blades, but only for a time.
    In 1643, after Richelieu’s death, the last scion of the Protes-
tant Colignys dueled with Henri, Duc de Guise, grandson of
the man who had killed Coligny’s grandfather, Admiral Coligny,
in the aftermath of the Saint Bartholomew’s Day Massacre, the
slaughter of the Protestants during the religious wars (1572).
The duel was supposedly fought to champion two quarreling
women, but who is to say that old, unavenged grievances did
not enter into it? Anyway, the ladies watched and cheered their
men on. Guise was wounded first, but managed to grab Coligny’s


                                                                119
Pariswalks




Northwest corner of the place des Vosges




épée (sword), hold it, and simply finish him off. This time the
king, hoping to end the enmity between Catholics and Protes-
tants, chose not to punish the victor.
    Not all the action in the place was outdoors. The place
Royale was the center of Parisian social life, and such fashion-
able ladies of the neighborhood as Ninon de Lenclos and Mar-
ion Delorme invented a new and durable institution. They met
at intimate gatherings called rvelles, at which the elegant guests
rivaled one another in wit, fine speech, and social finesse.
Moliére parodied their excesses in his play Les Précieuses
Ridicules.
     The predecessors of the fashionable salons of the eighteenth
century, these encounters took place in the hostesses’ bed-
rooms, perhaps because an amazing number of the hostesses
were as renowned for their sexual as for their social prowess.
Several of the great ladies of the place Royale could hardly keep

120
                                                Place des Vosges

track-of their lovers. We shall meet them later as we visit each
house individually.
    The fashionable lifestyle of the place Royale spread to the
rest of the Marais, and large hdtels sprang up everywhere
throughout this sparsely settled part of the city. Houses here
were larger and more elegant than anything Paris had ever seen.
One can imagine the constant visits and receptions of the no-
bility, the clergy, and the officials who thrived here. The busy
streets hummed with ladies carried in their sedan chairs, berib-
boned soldiers strutting in high boots, and clergy of all levels
carrying out their errands.
     It was also the era of great changes in interior decoration,
brought about mainly by the women. Mirrors replaced paint-
ings above the fireplace for brightness, armchairs were more
comfortable than thinly upholstered straight chairs, moveable
torchéres around the fireplace supplied both light and heat.
Wallpaper began to replace tapestries, and ceilings, copied from
Italy, were painted.
     But there was misery outside. The poor lived in the streets
as much as possible to avoid their miserable and dingy hovels.
People wore big boots that were mud encrusted. The joke was
that the favorite color in Paris was brown. When night fell, any-
one with honest intentions went home. There was no protec-
tion from those who roamed the dark streets. Lanterns were lit
on moonless nights only, and one toss of a stone could throw
an entire area into total darkness. What guards there were, were
generally not interested in losing their lives to some brigand, so
they chose to appear only after the battle was done and the
bodies lay dead.
    Tallement des Réaux, a chronicler of the Marais, reports an
incident one night involving the Duchesse de Rohan, a member
of the great aristocratic family that lived throughout the quarter.
She was returning from a ball when she was stopped by thieves.
“Immediately,” he recounts, “she put her hands on her pearls.
One of these gallant men, to make her let go, grabbed her
where women     ordinarily defend themselves best; but he was
dealing with a tough lady: ‘That,’ she said, ‘you can’t carry off,
but you can take away my pearls.’” Luckily someone happened
along, and the duchess was saved.

                                                               121
Pariswalks

    Beginning in the eighteenth century, the Marais went into a
decline. The center of Paris fashion and social activity moved
steadily westward. The aristocracy moved to the Faubourg
Saint-Honoré, where the Palais Elysée and the British and
American embassies are now located (see Walk 7). The decline
continued into the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The
fashionable neighborhoods grew toward the west, in part be-
cause the prevailing winds came from the west and carried the
unpleasant odors of central and eastern Paris away from the res-
idents of these fine new neighborhoods.
     Palaces were abandoned to manufacturing and trade. Heavy
machinery was bolted to elegant parquet floors; paneled walls
were stripped or covered over; large reception rooms were di-
vided into two-floored workspaces; spacious courtyards were
filled with homely utilitarian sheds and shops.
     The whole area eventually grew into an industrial center of
small enterprise and craft shops, running from the old market,
Les Halles, in central Paris, to the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, east
of the Bastille. If not for these enterprises, the place des Vosges
would have disappeared. They kept the buildings heated,
roofed, and occupied.
      In the years after World War II, the trend reversed. The
newly elegant districts of Passy and Auteuil filled up, and well-
to-do Parisians, unwilling to settle in distant suburbs, began to
look again at the long-abandoned buildings of the older neigh-
borhoods. The first areas to benefit from the new mode were on
the Left Bank. Old residences came to have a new cachet, like
old furniture and objets d’art.
     Serious renewal of the Marais came later, with a special push
from the law of 1962 that required the cleaning (ravalement) of
the facades of all buildings at least once every decade or so. The
law created a massive new industry that transformed the ap-
pearance of Paris. Suddenly, black and gray structures took on
the colors and details of their youth. Paris became once again a
city of light.
    The Marais was one of the areas that benefited the most
from the new cleanliness; the hétels were spectacular once one
could see their lines and details. Some of them were restored by
the state; others by developers. There was no lack of customers

£22
                                                Place des Vosges

waiting to pay small fortunes for apartments in renovated build-
ings. But there was also no lack of residents who were very
happy to stay in their old quarters at low rents.
     The result was a small, quiet civil war. French tenancy laws
made removal hard enough; politics made it even harder. There
were abuses on both sides. Tenants organized themselves into
defense committees and solicited support. Some of them were
eventually scared or bullied into leaving. Later, tenants held up
badly needed improvements even when generous provision had
been made either for their subsequent return or their relocation
into what was often better accommodations. Militant denuncia-
tions and calls to resistance covered neighborhood walls. We
found one petition in a courtyard and started to copy it down.
The concierge came out and asked us what we were doing. She
was furious at the “troublemakers” and tried to scratch out the
poster as we stood there. She was no doubt on the side of the
 “improvers.” They would bring in better and richer tenants, and
that would mean a substantial gain in status and income for her.
Can’t blame her.
     The Marais has become the neighborhood of choice for in-
tellectuals, professionals, and those who want the feel of old
Paris. Jacques Lang, the former minister of culture, was an early
resident of the restored place des Vosges.
     Before you begin a close look at the different houses in the
place, take a look at the garden and the facades. The railings that
you see today, surrounding the garden, are merely a poor imita-
tion of the wrought-iron version with elaborate gold trim that
originally stood here. The gate was locked at night, and resi-
dents had their own keys.
     During the Revolution the railing was almost torn down to
be made into spears but was saved because a depot for military
equipment already existed in the place. The gate was inexplica-
bly torn down, however, during the reign of Louis Philippe, de-
spite the eloquence of Victor Hugo on its behalf. It was replaced
in 1839 by the uninteresting grille that you see before you to-
day.
     During the Revolution the place Royale was renamed the
place de I’Indivisibilité, after the new Republic, one and indivis-
ible. Then, in 1800, the name was changed again. It became

                                                               L235
                                           een




A typical facade on the place des Vosges
                                                Place des Vosges

the place des Vosges to honor the region that paid its taxes first.
Lovers of old Paris argue heatedly for the return of the original,
historic name, place Royale. Imagine the confusion between the
place Royale and the Palais Royale.
    At first glance you might think that all of the houses in the
square are identical. But although the architectural plans for the
square were strict, the individual owners still managed to put
their marks on the buildings in discreet yet effective ways. As
we noted earlier, the original plan for each dwelling (pavillon)
called for four arcades. Each pavillon was to have mansard win-
dows, two round oeil-de-boeuf windows, and two square win-
dows, all framed by the roofline. Yet every set of windows is
slightly different. Look to see how, with time, ownership has
changed the original four-arcade plan into any number of varia-
tions.
     Today, the most noticeable difference between buildings is
between those that have been restored and those that have not.
When you get inside the courtyards you will see that some with
glowing facades are in terrible shape on the inside, and some
with marvelous courtyards are in disrepair outside.
     The garden before you is the subject of great and ongoing
controversy: to keep or not to keep the trees. To preservationists
and purists, the large leafy trees are an intrusion. They weren’t
there originally, and for good reason: they block the view of the
place. The French have always been devoted to vistas, which is
one reason why Paris is such a beautiful city. Here in the place
des Vosges, the original garden was minimal—lawns with paths
cut on the diagonal—in order to leave an unobstructed view of
the whole square.
     The trees that are here today are the second set of trees to
be planted in the garden. The circle of trees that had sur-
rounded the statue were stricken with dutch elm disease and
were replaced. The new trees obstruct more of the view of the
entire place. When you visit the Musée Victor Hugo, look out of
the windows from the second story onto the place. You will be
astounded to see how magnificent the whole square looks
when it is uninterrupted by the trees. You too may be tempted
to side with the historical preservationists.
     Children move about freely here, in a relaxed atmosphere

                                                               aD
Pariswalks

that is unusual in a Parisian park. Older people sit on the
benches in the leafy shade and converse, knit, and play check-
ers and chess while their children and grandchildren play hap-
pily. The park really fills with children between noon and 2 PM.,
when those attending the three schools tucked away in these
imposing houses—plus two more schools backing onto the
place—come out to play. On sunny weekends the grass is
packed with hordes of young adults sunbathing and sharing
picnics. This park, once the social center of the seventeenth-
century upper class, has now become a playground for the
highly diverse neighborhood population.
     Begin walking at the Pavillon du Roi, at no. 1 place des
Vosges, the center of the south wing. As you face the pavilion,
odd numbers are on your right, even numbers are on your left.
     Saturdays and Sundays, from noon to 6 pPM., the Minor
String Quartet plays to more than a hundred admirers in front
of no. 1. The quartet sells CDs on the spot.
     The pavillon was never occupied by the king but rather by
his concierge (gatekeeper), who was the first resident of the
building. Since 1666 it has been rented to different tenants,
and today it is divided into apartments that are served by the
unattractive stairs and elevator built into the right-hand side of
the entrance arcade. This blocking of the arcade, done in the
eighteenth century, still rankles. Even more important, the
stairwell blocks part of the vista from the rue de Birague into
the place—and, as we have already noted, vistas are serious
matters for the French. The building is a classified historical
monument and therefore should be returned to its original con-
dition. But how would the residents enter their building?
      As early as 1752, the writer Germain Brice said that these
three arcades themselves should be torn down to leave the view
of Louis XIII’s statue unobstructed from the rue Saint-Antoine.
This is perhaps too much to ask, but he also wrote:

      It has to hurt to see one of the three arcades under the pavil-
      ion blocked to make a nasty stairway which defaces entirely
      the entrance from the side of the rue Royale [rue de Birague
      today]. But we have such little care for public embellish-
      ments in Paris that we do not hesitate to spoil a vista or an

126
                                                 Place des Vosges

    entire square for the minor interests of some private person
    who has influence with the officials who are supposed to
    look after the decorations of the city.

    Looking up at the facade of no. 1 you will see that the bal-
cony here is stone rather than wrought iron and that the build-
ing is adorned with a bust of Henri IV which was added at
some unknown time. Walk through the arcade and look at the
other side of the building from the rue de Birague.
     On this side the pavillon is decorated with the arms and ini-
tials of Henri IV just above the arches; these date from the orig-
inal construction. In the spring and summer many of the
residents fill window boxes on their balconies with flowers, and
the building looks more as if it should be part of a narrow
Mediterranean street, not a king’s pavilion in Paris.
     Reenter the place and tum to the left, at no. 1 bis. This four-
arched residence, the Hétel de Coulanges, was the last to re-
main in the hands of a single owner, Mme Cotin. More than
thirty years ago she undertook the gigantic task of restoring the
entire structure. She changed architects and contractors every
few years, working first on the facade, then on the interior, then
back again. It has been a source of wonder to the neighbors,
who watched with great interest. One contractor, M. Sachet, of
Sachet and Brulet, said in 1989, with some pride, that this was
 a prestige job and therefore he had decided to face the building
 with real brick even though false brick was stated in his con-
 tract. He planned to make up the difference in cost himself. He
 has long since departed and work has ceased.
      We haven’t seen any progress here for years, let alone some-
 one to ask about the situation. The building is in terrible condi-
 tion and shows no sign of restoration. Of the six arcades, the
last two are in false brick, because each pavilion of four arcades
must match, and the first proprietor to restore sets the style of
brick for the rest. The next two arcades had already been realis-
tically restored in false brick.
      The building has one of the oldest wrought-iron balconies in
Paris, built in 1655. Its straight, plain support poles are the sign
of its authenticity. There are more of these early balconies in the
place, but most are more modem, with elaborately decorated

                                                                   WT
Pariswalks

supports. The rooms of this hétel are reputed to have kept their
seventeenth-century size as well as the painted walls and
beamed ceilings that were so fashionable in the early days of the
place Royale. The last windows on the right-hand side of the
second floor have seventeenth-century interior shutters (pan
clos).
      This grand house, the Hétel de Coulanges, is famous as the
birthplace, in 1626, of the Marquise de Sévigné, née Marie de
Rabutin-Chantal. Note the plaque on the wall. This was the
home of her maternal grandfather, Philippe de Coulanges.
Marie, orphaned at two, lived here for ten years. At seventeen
she was married off to the Marquis de Sévigné. She had two
children, one of them a daughter, with whom she remained
very close. After the death of her husband, who was killed in a
duel in 1651, when she was still a very young woman, Mme de
Sévigné lived in many different homes, always in the Marais.
She was often courted and proposed to, but she chose instead
to remain a widow, turning her aspiring lovers into friends.
    Meanwhile, her daughter married the Comte de Grignan,
who took his new wife to live in Provence, far from Paris and her
mother. The separation was painful for Mme de Sévigné, who
often disagreed violently with her daughter when they were to-
gether but missed her desperately when she was away. Their
separation prompted one of the most famous collections of let-
ters in French literature and a picture of high life during Louis
XIV’s reign. In her last years, Mme de Sévigné lived in the Hétel
Camavalet, now the Musée Carnavalet (Walk 5). Much of her
furnishings, personal belongings, and portraits can be seen
there.
    In 1627 the Comte de Montmorency-Bouteville hid here in
the Hotel de Coulanges after the duel, described earlier, that so
piqued Cardinal Richelieu. As soon as things quieted down, he
took off for Lorraine, but he would have done better to have run
immediately. He was caught and put to death. Montmorency
was well known in the place Royale; he had been the lover of
many of the women who lived here.
    Fashion has been coming to the Marais in the form of avant-
garde designers. The first major designer, at no. 3, Issey
Miyake, combines inventive and practical ideas with high but

128
                                                 Place des Vosges

wearable fashion. He often designs in pleated washable poly-
ester that looks like a piece of sculpture. Most of his customers
are between thirty and thirty-five, but one well-known cus-
tomer is ninety-five. The door to his shop is locked. Ring to be
admitted—or you can just look in the windows.
     The entrance to the courtyard at no. 3 place des Vosges can
be unlocked by pressing the button marked porte. Push the
door open and walk into a charming courtyard. This was one of
the first buildings in the place to have been restored, and the
owners are justly proud of their work. The door is open on prin-
ciple: people should be able to see the interior courtyards as
well as the facades. This is also the only building in the place
with “brick” walls in the courtyard. If you look closely at the
front facade of this courtyard you will see that the “brick” is
painted, even down to the pipes in the comers. The pipes are
painted pink when they are in front of “brick” and ivory in front
of the stone trim. The color is bright, but it has a pleasing effect,
especially with the small garden and the elegant glassed-in ter-
race on the second floor of the back section of the building. If
you come and cannot get in the courtyard, it can be viewed
through the windows of Issey Miyake.
     Note the windowed arches on the ground floor below the
terrace. They were originally the entrance to a stable; this house
was built in 1613, on the remains of the stables of the Hétel des
Toumelles. Two huge bronze urns stand against the back wall.
    The front staircase, on your right as you leave, is lovely, with
wide stone steps and a wrought-iron railing. During the nine-
teenth century the banister was remodeled with wooden inlays,
which are handsome but, as a resident informed us, not au-
thentic.
    As you go past no. 5, look at the pavement to see rails in-
stalled that used to facilitate the delivery of heavy loads to the
factory inside. If you want to see what the factory-filled place
des Vosges was like, open the door here and look inside.
     Next door—always open—leads you to the back garden of
the Hotel de Sully (described in Walk 6).
    Just around the comer, an attractive shop called Alix carries
inexpensive costume jewelry.
    At no. 9 is the Hétel de Chaulnes, where there is much to

                                                                 129
Pariswalks

see and read about. Press the bell for Galerie N. D. Marquadt to
enter the courtyard; the door is always open because of the art
gallery inside. This is one of the larger, more elegant hétels, and
it is part of a guided tour given by the Monuments Historiques
(once a month only), which will take you inside this building
and inside the Hotel de Sully. The tour, given in French, is an-
nounced in Pariscope and LOfficiel des Spectacles. If you under-
stand even a little French, it is well worth going.
     The history first, then the present-day offerings. The Hotel
de Chaulnes, built in 1607, was one of the most luxurious
houses in the place Royale. Louis XIII stayed here when the
tournament inaugurated the place. The hétel was also the site of
the royal reviewing stand during all the public events that were
held here. In 1644 the building was bought by Honoré d’Al-
bret, maréchal (marshal) de France, Duc de Chaulnes, and peer
of France. The Chaulneses were a wealthy family, and much of
the decoration was done by them. When the duke died, his
widow remodeled the house to include a new dining room and
an oratory in the left wing. In 1655 her third son, a man who
was accustomed to living well, inherited the residence. He
hired Mansart, the famous architect, to extend the right wing of
the house back to the rue de Turenne. Mansart designed a
facade with a large triangular fronton (pediment) in the roofline.
    Today this wing is partially obscured by a gallery that cuts
into its center. Mansart also built a monumental staircase to
serve this newly expanded wing, but the wrought-iron stair rail
was sold to someone in England in the nineteenth century. In
the expanded courtyard, the new duke had a huge formal gar-
den planted; it had a fountain and a trompe l'oeil perspective
painted on the back wall. One of the few touches remaining to-
day from the Chaulnes era is a room with a painted-beam ceil-
ing, in the left wing. This was the duchess’s oratory, but it was
later converted into a kitchen and plastered over. It was the
thick covering of plaster that happily has preserved the wooden
beams for us.
     In 1695 the building was sold to the Nicolai family. They re-
stored it in a neoclassical style, with stucco ceiling decorations,
which were recently uncovered when layers of paint were
                                                Place des Vosges

stripped off. Legend has it that during the Revolution, Aymard
Charles de Nicolai hid in his wife’s boudoir when the sans-
culottes (working-class revolutionaries) came looking for him.
He was discovered and led straight to the guillotine. The hotel
itself was seized and not returned until 1795, after the Terror
had run its course. By that time only one of the four Nicolai
brothers still had his head.
    Elisa Félix (1820-1858), better known as Mlle Rachel and
one of France’s most famous actresses, lived here in the mid-
nineteenth century. She was renowned especially for her perfor-
mance in the role of Phédre, which she played for the first time
in 1838. Rachel died in Egypt, but her body was returned to
Paris, and a great funeral service was held in the synagogue at
no. 14, on the other side of the place des Vosges.
     Today the entire premiére étage of no. 9 is owned by the Ar-
chitecture Society, an élite group of one hundred members who
use this center for conferences and reflection. They are respon-
sible for the restoration of the building and the cleaning of the
facade. They also did some marvelous work in the interior,
which you should try to see.
     The courtyard of this hdtel is very large. One of the first
things you notice is a statue of a satyr. Viewed from the side, it
has an amusing symmetry of profile. The right wing of the
building still reflects the work of Mansart, despite the gallery at
the back. Note the arched doorways with the mascarons (mask
decorations) above them. The large fronton gives a pale idea of
how grand the newly designed wing must have been in the sev-
enteenth century.
     Look in the doorway of the right wing to get a feeling of the
volume of the stairway Mansart designed, even though the rail-
ing is now gone. In the left wing, through the last second-floor
window—f the lighting is right and the curtains are open—you
can see the painted pink and green beams of Mme de
Chaulnes’s oratory. The beams, decorated with a C and a D for
“Chaulnes” and “Dailly” (the duchess’s maiden name), were
painted in 1654, among the last in Paris to be thus decorated,
for that fashion ended around 1650.
    There is a second courtyard behind and to the left of the


                                                               bak
Pariswalks

one we are in now. It is marked private, so be respectful of the
owners and just trust our description. The courtyard is a charm-
ing, hidden comer of Paris, one that most visitors to the place
des Vosges never see. The houses here are privately owned and
may have been the stables or servants’ quarters of the original
estate. In a tiny garden a statue of a girl holding a bunch of
roses is surrounded by real roses.
     Today, a huge warehouse-like gallery, Nikki Diana Mar-
quadt, has moved into the courtyard after the retirement of the
owner of a lighting fixtures factory that had been a resident of
the place since the beginning of the century. While the factory
was busy and noisy and full of people, and friendly too, this
huge gallery contained only two twelve-foot-high, trophy-
shaped sculptures. On the right wall was a ten-foot-square tile
mural, decorated with black-and-white photographs of people.
The last time we visited, a fashion house rented it for a fashion
show. You will surely see something odd when you visit.
    In the courtyard, look to your right and through the win-
dows to the restaurant next door. The chandeliers will give you
an idea of the luxury of the restaurant.
    LAmbroisie, also at no. 9, is one of the points of pride in
the revitalized place.   A Michelin three-star restaurant, it is the
only world-class restaurant in the Marais. Sonia and spouse
David went there for lunch (dinner reservations were unavail-
able for at least a month) as an anniversary present from the
children. Fifteen years ago lunch cost $250 for two of us. Today
dinner for two is about €700.
    Chef Bernard Pacaud’s food is extraordinarily fine, in nu-
ance and taste. The flavors are subtle, and yet the essence of
each ingredient remains clear and distinct on the palate. The
menu changes, but there are three standard and supplementary
offerings that accompany each meal. The trou normand (cleans-
ing the palate between courses) consists of a fruit sorbet set in a
sabayon sauce. (The trou normand was originally a glass contain-
ing a shot of alcohol—calvados, no doubt. Maupassant writes
 [free translation] in his Contes de la Bécasse, “Between each serv-
ing, the cleansing of the palate was done with a glass of eau-de-
vie that lit a fire in the belly and madness in the head.”) Custom


La
                                                  Place des Vosges

continues, but in a much weakened form. The other additions
to the meal are a feathery light warm chocolate mousse and a
mix of citrus fruits in syrup to help cut the sweet but light
desserts.
    The décor here is sober and refined. The tables are far apart
and the seating is luxurious. Service is, as to be expected, ab-
solutely perfect. Closed Sundays and Mondays, and in August.
    Popy Moreni, at no. 11, is an ultramodern women’s shop,
and was the first clothing shop in the place. Their collection is
avant-garde. No. 11 also houses part of Virgin Records, al-
though they are not visible from the street.
     No. 13, Hétel d’Antoine de Rochebaron, once the prop-
erty of the Marquis de Villequier, was originally one of the most
elegant houses of the square, and it is now restored to its grand
state. According to a description of the house as it once was, it
was a gem, with decorations by all the best artists of the time.
Stucco omaments by Van Obstal were painted by Vouet; an al-
cove was decorated by Buirette, the foremost wood sculptor of
the time, who had “epuisé tout son savoir” (exhausted all his
skill) in making it. There was a salon a l’italienne with a huge
fireplace decorated with silver and gold. The salon itself calls for
elaboration. It was two stories high, with a ceiling in the shape
of a lantern, and was lined with mirrors, a rare commodity in
the seventeenth century. A chronicler writes:

    When reclining in this salon, if we look to the right, we see,
    through the two glass doors, opening on to the place, car-
    riages, people on foot or on horseback, and all that is hap-
    pening in the place Royale. If we tum to the left, the same
    thing reflected in the mirrors is presented to our sight, so
    that, without getting out of bed, in summer as in winter, in
    sickness or health, we can enjoy the diversion.

    After the Marquis de Villequier, the house was owned by the
ambassador to Venice, M. des Hameaux, who added to its lux-
urious appointments, installing precious paintings, furniture,
and even more mirrors, brought from Italy. The stables were
large enough to hold three carriages and seven horses.


                                                                     le3
Pariswalks




No. 13 place des Vosges




    Today we have new wonders of restoration to see here in-
stead. The property was bought by the Société Frangaise de Pro-
motion et de Gestion Immobiliére (SFPGI), which administers
apartment houses, and the work was financed by the Banque
de Indo-Suez. Elegant as the building looks now, the Société’s
first set of plans was rejected by the Monuments Historiques as
being too pompous for a popular neighborhood.
     To see the splendid courtyard of no. 13, look through the
windows of Antiquités Philippe Magloire, specializing in Mid-
dle Eastern antiquities. The back wings in the courtyard were
re-extended all the way to the rue de Turenne, which was how
the building stood in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The wings had been demolished by the twentieth century. The

34
                                               Place des Vosges

entire back section of the building is therefore new, though
built in the style of the eighteenth century, while the front half
has been redone in the seventeenth-century brick style.
     The garden in the center is a copy of a classical French de-
sign, but here, too, old and new merge; it is automatically wa-
tered every evening at eight o’clock by sunken sprinklers.
Under the garden is a garage for the residents. This is the first
underground garage in the place des Vosges. A parking space
in Paris is like gold. The entrance to the garage is just past the
back grille, on the rue de Turenne, and looks like the entrance
to an apartment building of grand standing rather than a
garage door.
    The apartments are fabulous: parquet floors in the Versailles
pattern, restored or rebuilt; huge fireplaces of red marble in the
living rooms; ceilings almost sixteen feet high. Many of the
rooms have interior lofts accessible by spiral staircases. Eleva-
tors have been recessed into the thick walls because the stairs
are classified as historical monuments and may not be touched.
    No. 15 was one of the last pavillons to be restored, but on
our last visit restoration was complete. The building looks beau-
tiful, and the exterior has been finished in real brick.
     At no. 17, the Galerie de la Place replaces a previous one,
which replaced a previous one. Since the galleries unfortunately
change almost yearly, we will let you find what interests you as
you walk. You can enter the courtyard. While the exterior of the
building looks very plain, there is a beautiful garden within. Be
aware that there is often a concierge just inside the door to the
courtyard; just smile and take a quick look around.
    At Musatamo, also at no. 17, the Japanese designer can
sometimes be seen sitting at a small table, designing men’s
clothes. The store is spare. Each item stands by itself. Many of
the clothes are in black leather.
    Next door, at no. 19, is the very popular café Ma Bour-
gogne. Stop here for a cup of coffee with steamed milk (café
creme) no matter what the time of day, and if it is lunchtime,
have one of their charcuterie platters from Auvergne. Ma Bour-
gogne specializes in these and in wine from Burgundy and Bor-
deaux, but the café also serves meals whose prices can add up
quickly. The waiters here are characters and enjoy teasing; they

                                                              13)
Pariswalks

offer advice whether asked or not. The café also has a good WC.
There has been a café here since 1920. Note: Beware of sitting
on the curbside. The pigeons may drop gifts from above. Open
daily.
     In the seventeenth century this building was owned by the
Conseiller d’Etat Robert Aubrey, who lived here with his wife,
 Claude de Pretevel. Tallement des Réaux, the contemporary
 chronicler of life in the Marais, wrote astonishingly of this cou-
 ple: “Elle le méprisait beaucoup, de sorte qu'elle a pissé plus dune
fois dans les bouillons qu’elle lui faisait prendre” (She hated him so
 much that more than once she pissed into the soup that she
 gave him). Hardly an appetizing legacy for a building that
 houses a café. Fortunately those manners are far behind us.
     No. 21 is another one of the larger and more elegant build-
 ings in the place, with eight arcades. It was given to Cardinal
 Richelieu by Henri IV, but no one knows for sure if he ever lived
 here. Possibly he stayed here briefly while waiting for the Palais
 Royale to be completed: He bequeathed the building to his
 grand-nephew, who then passed it on to his son. The son never
lived here either, but he is rumored to have made good use of
 his pied-a-terre to get to know almost every woman in the place.
     This hétel was restored in the summer of 1978. Residents
here have put a lot of money and care into the work. These ar-
 cades had originally been done in real brick, and the residents
wanted to return them to their original condition. The Monu-
 ments Historiques was not eager to do it, but the owners in-
sisted. They went to the brickworks in Versailles, which had
made the original bricks in the seventeenth century, and they
matched the missing parts as closely as possible. Compare this
 arcade with the fake paint and etched plaster of the others. The
beauty of these arcades has now inspired other residents in the
place to restore their buildings with real brick.
      From out in the street, look at the facade of no. 21, above
the fifth pillar from the left, at some stones cut in little squig-
gles, like vermicelli, the same kind used to decorate the Seine
side of the Louvre. Some of these, the sharply cut ones, are
new; the worn ones—the sixth to ninth squiggles on the left
column—are      the originals. M. Balmés, the owner of the an-
tiques shop here, says that the Monuments Historiques helped

136
                                                Place des Vosges

pay for the restoration of the fagade and for the part of the roof
that shows from the square and will also pay a small amount for
any classified stairways or railings. Other renovations must be
paid for by the owners of the building, which is one reason why
the work goes so slowly and erratically.
    Look closely at the sides of the arcade pillars right above the
pediments and you will find little square stone patches. These
patches date from the Revolution, when this section of the ar-
cade was used as a forge for making arms. The patches cover
the points from which metal curtains were hung to close off the
forge. As you walk you will notice many more of these patches
in the sides of the pillars. Until around 1930 the arcades were
filled with shops of all kinds—butchers, shoemakers, and so
on—and each shop walled itself in by setting beams into cuts
in the stone. There were so many little shops it was hard to
make one’s way through the arcade. The last survivor of this era
was a shoemaker, who is said to have worked in the arcades as
recently as the 1950s.
     The courtyard is large and sunny, well maintained and
charming. It is usually locked, but you can look through the
keyhole. Inside the second floor the original pans clos (interior
wooden shutters) that were used in the seventeenth century
still remain.
      On the right is a small private garden (you may see a cat
stalking the birds) and the entrance to a large staircase. The
stair railing here was unfortunately sold to the United States in
the nineteenth century. M. Balmés explains that Englishmen
and Americans would come and ask the building owners to sell
stair railings, offering them enough money to restore a whole
building. The owners were thrilled then, but the current owners
are sorry now.
     In the back there is a kind of orangerie (greenhouse for rais-
ing oranges), dating from the latter half of the eighteenth cen-
tury. No one knows what it was built for, but now it is a small
factory with a small, carefully tended garden. On the left were
the stables of the hétel; today they make a sunny apartment
with a terrace on top. The buildings in this courtyard all seem
to vary slightly, which is partly explained by the fact that they
were built at different times. But the layout has been the same

                                                               TES=f,
Pariswalks

since about 1750, as shown by Turgot’s famous map of that
time.
      Also at no. 21, Richelieu specializes in scientific instru-
ments from earliest times to the twentieth century: clocks, opti-
cal devices, navigational aids. M. Balmés has a number of
 “masterpieces,” the graduation projects that guild apprentices
have made as a test of their skills and proof of readiness to work
on their own. The guilds were all abolished in 1791, so these
masterpieces are usually more than two hundred years old. (To-
day, artisans learn their trade at the Compagnons du Devoir
described in Walk 6.) We saw a small wrought-iron balcony and
miniature staircases of exquisite detail here. We also learned
how lace was made by examining a carreau, a box with a square
cushion overlaid with a paper pattern stuck with pins to weave
the threads around. The threads were drawn from small bob-
bins, which in this case were still attached to the half-finished
piece. M. Balmés is as much a collector as a dealer, and his shop
often looks empty. But do try the door. He is usually upstairs,
but his wife will wait on you. If you are interested in something
special, he will come down to help you. He also knows the
place des Vosges very well.
    Also at no. 21 the owners of Les Deux Orphelines collect
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century art populaire (country
handicrafts) mainly in wood: marvelous ox yokes, wooden
shoes, religious statues, and metal objects such as candlesticks,
sconces, and planters. The prices are reasonable, and the mer-
chandise is amusing.
     Next door is Max Spira, a jumble of old and new twenties-
style bric-a-brac and furniture. They are open at night.
    At no. 23, notice the heavy wooden door decorated with
thick wooden plaques attached with metal bolts. There are sev-
eral doors of this kind in the place, and each one has its own
pattern. Inside the courtyard is a small garden and a vaulted
brick entry. This was the Hétel de Marie-Charlotte de Balzac
d’Entragues. Not only her name was impressive; her career was
as well. She lived here with her mother, who had been the mis-
tress of Charles IX. Her sister, Henriette d’Entragues, had been
the mistress of Henri IV. (Decidedly, these ladies did not bring
good luck to their lovers.) Marie-Charlotte was the mistress of

138
                                               Place des Vosges

the maréchal de Bassompierre and gave birth to his son, Louis,
in 1610. Their relationship was very stormy, and Marie-
Charlotte kept pressing the maréchal to marry her. He refused,
reneging on his written promise. So Marie-Charlotte consoled
herself with a series of lovers of equal distinction or equal
means, among them the archbishop of Paris, Jean-Francois de
Gondi, and the financier Le Plessis-Guénégaud. We are told
that there is a room in the house that still has painted beams
dating from her residency, but we have never been inside.
    At no. 25 is the charming Guirlande de Julie. The restau-
rant’s lofty goal is to “make dining an intermission from the ab-
surd, an instant stolen from daily drudgery.” The reality is that
the interior is decorated in a soothing bower of green and pink
and the food is excellent, beautifully presented and served,
bounteous, refined, and, with all that, not too expensive. The
restaurant’s name is from the history of the place. The Guir-
lande de Julie was a small book of madrigals, each surrounded
by a different flower, that the Duc de Montausier offered to his
wife on May 22, 1641. The restaurant, like Coconnas, also in
the place, is owned by the colorful Claude Terrail, impresario of
the famous Tour d’Argent restaurant. Closed Mondays.
     The courtyard and house on the right side of no. 25 are
lovely. The ground-floor window just past the doorway is a large
hemisphere of glass usually associated with a shop-front win-
dow. This building, however, is occupied as a private home.
Formerly there was a trellis with plants rather than curtains,
which permitted a glimpse of the living room. Under the fres-
coed ceiling, a huge stone fireplace on the right wall could hold
three men standing upright.
     Press the button marked porte and enter the courtyard.
This is a private home, so please be quiet and look only. Pause
for a moment to look around and note the nicely done modern
glass door in the rear to the right; the mascaron has been lost,
but the stairs and their fine railing are still there. This whole
right wing is owned by one family, and in the past we have seen
their pets—free-flying birds and assorted animals (including
chinchillas)—and their very large plants. The left side of the
building is much more conventional. In the back of the court-
yard, there is a little house redone and filled with bookshelves;

                                                              139
Pariswalks

perhaps used as someone’s study. The entrance at the back is
modern, but the old mascaron is still intact above the door.
    You have now gone halfway around the square and are
standing in front of the Pavillon de la Reine, which is opposite
Henri’s pavilion, where we started. This one is exactly the same
except for the sun emblem of the Médicis on the fagade and the
very long iron balcony. The small street here, the rue de Béarn,
was the exit route for all the parades that passed through the
place Royale.
   The H6tel Pavillon de la Reine, no. 28, would please a
queen more than the Pavillon de la Reine, the central north
pavilion of the place. The hotel is set back from the street, be-
hind a classical French garden. It looks as if it has always been
there, although this spot was once an extremely unattractive
garage. The hotel has all the comforts and luxuries of new ho-
tels, and is close to all the new goings-on in the Marais, yet is
quiet and private. A simple double room costs €335, a duplex
double or a suite, €600. The clientele is largely European.
     No. 26 was the hétel of the first précieuse (a high-society
woman with a ruelle, or salon, attended by her admirers and
lovers) of the place des Vosges, Charlotte de Vieux-Pont. Today
the building itself is not very interesting, but the many galleries
that occupy the ground floor are.
   _ No. 24 has a fine wooden door, but the courtyard beyond is
undistinguished. This hétel, Hétel du Maréchal de Geran, does
not have as illustrious a history as some of the others, but it did
have one famous, or notorious, resident, the wife of the maréchal
of France, Duc de Boufflers. She was fourteen years old when she
was married and she quickly became known for her beauty, caus-
tic wit, and number of lovers. This verse was written about her:

      Quant Boufflers parut d cour,
      On crut voir le mére d’amour,
      Chacun s’empressait a lui plaire
      Et chacun l’avait a son tour.

      When Boufflers appeared at court,
      You would have thought you were looking at Venus;


140
                                               Place des Vosges

   Everyone tried to please her
   And everyone had her in turn.

    We are now at the end of one side of the place, at the cor-
ner where the rue du Pas de la Mule joins the square. Origi-
nally there was a house here, and the street joined the square
through the arcades of the house. The marks of the house
are reportedly visible on the side of the wall of no. 22, but
we have never found them. The house was torn down in 1823,
making the northern side of the place des Vosges a too-well-
traveled route for cars headed toward the Bastille and the new
Opéra.
    Walk east out of the place, to no. 6 rue du Pas de la Mule.
This is one of the most fascinating shops in Paris. It was called
the Boucherie (butcher’s shop), but it now sells musical instru-
ments. Note above the doorway the metal hooks from which
meat was once hung. The tiled walls are original.
    M. Bissonet comes from a long line of butchers, and this
shop was his until his passion for musical instruments gradually
won out. He began by hanging violins and trumpets alongside
his sausages, but eventually the meat vanished, and now the
shop is crammed from floor to ceiling with instruments. His
cold-storage room has become a library of books on the topic,
and his workrooms are now his office and a workshop to restore
the instruments to their original playing condition. He showed
us a silver-etched guitar, a porcelain trumpet, and a tuba made
of Venetian glass. He also played for us a Breton bombardon, a
flutelike instrument that is only twelve inches long and less
than one inch wide but makes an enormous sound. He drew
quite a crowd. The store also had a player piano that made the
sounds of twenty-nine flutes, a mandolin, and violins in addi-
tion to the piano; it was built for a merry-go-round in 1920. M.
Bissonet is so agreeable that he might just play an instrument in
the shop for you.
    Return now to the place des Vosges to continue the walk.
On the corner, at no. 22, is Café Hugo. Along with typical café
fare, the café offers free wireless Internet. We had some trouble
using their slow connection, but it is a nice place to sit and



                                                              Lad
Pariswalks




An arcade in the place des Vosges



watch the crowds. In winter, eat in the restored seventeenth-
century building; in summer, sit outdoors under the arcades.
    The enlargement and renovation of the restaurant about fif-
teen years ago cost the owner 3 million francs (approximately
$500,000). The rule is that the city pays a little more than 24
percent of renovations and the state pays 36 percent. The rest
is paid by.the owner. In this case, the owner got tired of wait-
ing and did the work on his own. He is very proud of his
restaurant, and justifiably so. He was wise to finish his renova-
tions when he did, because the mairie (city hall) officials of the
fourth arrondissement have just decided not to pay for the
cleaning of three of the last pavilions in the place.
    Press the button above the keypad at no. 20 to enter the
courtyard, and face the front wall (facing the place). The wall is


ices
                                               Place des Vosges

in the midst of repairs that were halted twenty-five years ago.
An architect known for prefabricated constructions lived here
and wanted to restore the facade. He had wanted to finish a
nineteenth-century addition: a glassed-in hall on the first floor
and a covered passageway on the second floor. Originally the
apartments in these buildings had been built without halls;
each room opened on to the following. Halls were added later,
by taking space from the original rooms, which were usually
large enough for the purpose. In this building, though, these
halls were built on to the outside of the building.
     The architect’s plan here was to build a new facade in the
original seventeenth-century style that would encompass the
hallways and incorporate them into the building. He began
construction with hollow bricks, but when the authorities
found out, they objected, saying that the original did not have
bricks at all but rather plaster painted to resemble bricks. The
decision? The building must remain in status quo, that is, the
ugly glass balcony and the partially completed work would have
to remain as they were.
    Years ago, residents assured us that the work would be done
within a year, once the architect had died, but construction is
still not finished. Of course, the Monuments Historiques as-
sures the authenticity and quality of the work it endorses, so
perhaps it’s better that unauthorized restorations are stopped.
But is a building better in indefinite limbo?
     The walls here do serve a purpose, however, in their pre-
sent condition: they give us a good opportunity to see how
these buildings were constructed. Look at the window frames
on the right and left of this wall as well as at the corners. You
can see how the large stones were used as a frame, which was
then filled in with small stones and rubble and covered with
plaster. This is essentially the same colombage technique used
in the sixteenth century, except that here stone replaces the
timber framing.
    LOccitane, now a well-known chain, at no. 20, sells fine
natural bath products. The mural, the brick floor, and the deco-
rations are reminiscent of Provence. Each year the shop sells the
new lavender harvest like a fine vintage.


                                                              ere
Pariswalks

   No. 18 was the Hétel de Marguerite de Béthune, the
Duchesse de Rohan and the daughter of Sully, Henri IV’s first
minister. Married at the age of nine, in 1604, she later had
innumerable lovers, many of them residents of the place
Royale. Of her nine children, only one daughter survived her.
Today the building has little to offer from the seventeenth cen-
tury other than a frieze in the Greek key pattern on its facade,
which can be seen from the street. A glance at the windows of
the apartment on the second floor, with their pans clos, hints at
what riches may lie inside. The courtyard, which is now
locked, has been restored only in the entryway. The walls have
been lined with wooden cupboards on the right and with pillars
on the left. It is all new and somewhat attractive. The rest of the
courtyard has not been touched, but take a look at the bronze
statue of the gypsy, in the stairwell on the left. She has lost the
lantern from her left hand and one earring. The concierge
proudly told us that Victor Hugo put the statue there, but we
have not found mention of that anywhere else. We do know for
a fact, though, that the gypsy was stolen some years ago. A
woman resident called the police and got immediate results.
The statue was found minutes later at the traffic light on a
nearby corner. Her head was sticking out of the back of a
pickup truck. She is now firmly attached to her red marble
base, which is firmly attached to the floor
    No. 16 was owned in the seventeenth century by a royal
counselor named Francois le Roux, who had the dubious dis-
tinction of marrying “une petit garce qui se donnait pour un quart
d’écu” (a little bitch who gave herself for a quarter of an écu).
That was slightly less than a livre, but in those days a livre was a
day’s wages for a manual worker, so Mme le Roux was not so
cheap after all. Anyway, she had a lot of amateur competition in
this area, as we have seen. Today the courtyard needs restora-
tion, but take a look at its wrought-iron railing, on the left, and
the mascarons over the portal and entry.
    A most pleasant place for lunch or afternoon tea is Nec-
tarine. Lunch is mainly salads and vegetable pies, while a
changing array of luscious cakes and tarts will tempt you either
for dessert or as an afternoon re-energizer with a cup of tea. A


144
                                                Place des Vosges

dense chocolate cake is always appropriate; in the summer try
their ice creams.
    Short-lived art galleries have now been taken over by an
appraisal office that will tell you the worth of your own valu-
ables for free in the hope that you will sell to them. By appoint-
ment only.
    The Hotel de l’Abbé de la Riviére, no. 14, is now one of
the best restored in the place. The six arcades have been re-
done in real brick and the wrought-iron balconies have been
cleaned of rust. Notice the balcony and the campanile on the
roof, which was added at a later date. Step back from the
building to look at the roofline and see the arched back of the
facade of the building’s entrance on the rue des Tournelles.
Today this is a synagogue, and the half of the building that
faces the place des Vosges is used by the Ashkenazic commu-
nity (the eastern European Jews who are mostly Yiddish-
speaking); the half on the rue des Tournelles belongs to the
Sephardic community Jlews who settled in Spain and Portu-
gal; now most are from North Africa). The doors on the place
are sometimes locked, but you can always enter on Friday
evenings and Saturday mornings, when services are being
held.
    The walls are wood-paneled; the stairs are carpeted with
Oriental rugs; plants sit in the entry. The interior resembles a
Victorian home. Indeed, this half once was. The chief rabbi of
France lived here with his wife and five children. There is an art
gallery on the third floor, exhibiting Jewish artists. Visitors are
welcome.
    The Sephardic synagogue on the other side of the building,
entry on rue des Tournelles, serves the growing Oriental Jewish
community. It has a large Moorish sanctuary; the stucco pillars
are painted with words and designs; and the ceiling, high above
the sanctuary, is rounded in a long arch.
    No. 14 takes its name from one of its seventeenth-century
owners, the Abbé de la Riviére, favorite of the Duc d’Orléans,
tutor of the duke’s children, and himself promoted to duke and
bishop of Langres. This son of a tailor, a veritable model of so-
cial advancement through the church, never did realize his


                                                               145
Pariswalks


dearest ambition, however—to be made a cardinal. The best
painters of the era, Le Brun and Mignard, created a fabulous in-
terior for la Riviére’s hétel. The decorated ceilings have been pre-
served in the Musée Carnavalet.
      When la Riviére died, a poet composed the following verse:

      Ci-git un trés grand personnage
      Qui fut un illustre lignage
      Qui posséda mille vertus
      Qui ne trompa jamais, fut toujours trés sage.
      Je n’en dirai pas plus,
      C’est trop mentir pour cent écus.

      Here lies a very great person
      Who had an illustrious lineage
      Who possessed a thousand virtues
      Who never deceived, was always well behaved.
      I won't say more,
      That’s too much lying for a hundred écus.

    The hétel was later used as a neighborhood city hall. That
role is commemorated by a plaque that is barely legible. Later
the building was used as a school.
    Next door to the synagogue, there is a public nursery
school for children aged two to six.
    No. 8, as the plaque tells us, was the home of the poet
Théophile Gautier, who lent his name to the technical high
school next door.
    The Musée Victor Hugo, at no. 6, was Hugo’s residence
from 1832 to 1848. Before Hugo’s time it was the hdtel of the
Princesse de Guéménée, Anne de Montbazon. She was the
most famous précieuse of the place. She was married at twelve to
her cousin, the prince, and like other premature wives of the
day, she never settled into monogamy. Anne was mistress of the
coadjutor of Retz; of the financier d’Emery; of the Comte de
Montmorency-Bouteville, beheaded in 1627 for his famous
duel; of the duke Henri II of Montmorency, beheaded in 1632;
of the Comte de Soissons, who died tragically in 1641; and of
the counselor of Parliament Auguste de Thou, beheaded in

146
                                                 Place des Vosges

1642. She did not bring luck to her lovers, but she herself lived
to be eighty-one.
     The princess is representative of Moliére’s liberated pré-
cieuses. These women established a literary style and a new
standard for excellence of the French language. They were also
sexually liberated, conducting their many affairs with the
grudging consent      of their husbands.     They seem     to have
thrived on this, marrying at puberty and living to a ripe
old age.
    Marion Delorme may also have lived here, in a small pavil-
ion at the back, but most historians feel that it was unlikely
that the two famous women could peaceably have shared the
same house, if only because of the traffic jam that would have
resulted. Marion was a match for Anne in every way, in num-
ber of lovers and in the brilliance of her salon. She began her
career as courtesan to Jacques Vallée, sieur Desbarreaux, a no-
torious “epicurean” (read: hedonist) and, unforgivable at the
time, an avowed atheist. Next came the Marquis de Cing-
Mars, a handsome, stylish courtier who made the mistake of
plotting intrigue against Richelieu and lost his head. (The
marquis may have died young, but his place in history and lit-
erature is assured as the protagonist of Alfred de Vigny’s novel
Cingq-Mars.)
     After the execution of Cinq-Mars, Marion is said to have
gone on to a long series of lovers, including George Villiers, the
first Duke of Buckingham. (You may remember him from The
Three Musketeers.) Also Louis Il de Bourbon, Prince de Condé
(called “the great Condé”), prince of the blood and the last of
the great feudal barons. He was eight years younger than she
and a great success with the ladies. Yet this great wencher had
his own wife confined for her alleged unfaithfulness (which
even the malicious gossips of the day refused to credit) and
wrote his last letter to the king to ask that she never be released.
Nice fellow. Last but not least, Marion is said to have gotten
Cardinal Richelieu himself into her bed. Ironically, it was Riche-
lieu’s niece who was Condeé’s unfortunate wife, so everything
was neatly kept in the family.
    Unlike the other great courtesans of her day, Marion died
early, in 1650, but as with other legendary figures, there were

                                                                ae
Pariswalks

those who refused to believe she was gone. Some said she lived
on to 1706, when she would have been ninety-three, or even
1741, when she would have been one hundred and twenty-
eight. In a sense, she does live on. Victor Hugo wrote a drama
called Marion Delorme, and G. Bottesini wrote an opera of the
same name.
    The property at no. 6 was large, stretching back to no. 17
rue des Tournelles, with a discreet rear alley for quick exits, a
feature that Hugo often used when visiting his mistresses.
    Hugo lived here in a rented apartment one floor up, until
his disagreements with Louis Napoléon required him to flee
into political exile on the isle of Guernsey. Today the museum is
on the first, second, and third floors of the building. Start at the
top with the history of Hugo’s life, move down to his drawings
and mementos on the second, and then visit a re-creation of his
apartment on the first. Each room is dedicated to a period in his
life. The museum has restored Hugo’s bedroom with his Louis
XIII deathbed and his death mask. Don’t miss the romantic and
striking Chinese-style dining room that he built himself in his
second home in Guernsey. The wall with its bright red chimney
and lavish plate collection reveals in how many ways Hugo was
remarkable.
     Be sure to look out on to the place before you leave to get a
good view of the whole square above the trees. The museum is
open from 10 A.M. to 6 pM. daily, except Mondays and holidays.
Since the museum is free of charge, it is very easy to go inside
and take a quick tour of the house.
     On this last side of the square there are several galleries,
which change often. Stop in those that appeal to you.
     Restaurant Coconnas is at no. 2 place des Vosges, although
its front door opens on to the rue de Birague, around the cor-
ner. This restaurant is owned by Claude Terrail, who also owns
the Tour d’Argent, and it is no accident that both places pro-
vided locales for the movie Who Is Killing the Great Chefs of Eu-
rope? This restaurant is casual and moderately priced. The
specialty is poule-au-pot. The menu no doubt commemorates
Henri IV’s promise of a “chicken in every pot.” The restaurant
is open daily.


148
                                                Place des Vosges

    You have now completely circled the place des Vosges. The
area is so rich, now the richest in history and monuments in all
Paris, that we have ended this walk here. But if you still have the
strength, the walk continues in Walk 5, right outside the place.
