Walk 3: Saint-Germain-des-Prés

Saint-Germain-des-Prés



   In my last letter, I told you that the guillotine
   is taking care of some dozens of rebels every
   day, and that about the same number are
   shot. Now I want to inform you that several
   hundreds are to be shot every day so that we
   will soon be rid of those scoundrels who seem
   to defy the Republic even at the moment of
   their execution . . .
            —From a loyal republican to his section
Starting Point: Place Saint-Germain-des-Prés, 6th arrondisse-
    ment
Métro: Saint-Germain-des-Prés
Buses: 39, 63, 86, 95


As you take in the busy and curious scene of Saint-Germain-
des-Prés, wander over to the hollyhock-filled garden on the side
of the church at the corner of rue de |’Abbaye and the place
Saint-Germain. We suggest you begin this walk by taking a seat
in the garden and reading a bit about the illustrious abbey and
the bloody events of the French Revolution that took place on
and around this spot.
    In Roman and Merovingian times, up to the early eighth
century, this area consisted of open fields (prés) stretching west-
ward away from Paris, and there was a temple to the Egyptian
goddess Isis on the site where the church of Saint-Germain now
stands. The modern suburb of Issy-les-Moulineaux took its
name from this ancient temple.
    In 542, Childebert, son of the first Christian king, Clovis,
went on a crusade in Spain to punish the Visigoths, who,
Pariswalks

though Christian, were believed guilty of heresy. The inhabi-
tants did not defend themselves in any way, and Childebert laid
siege to their key city, Saragossa. Despairing of their fate, the
Visigoths paraded around the walls of the city in hair shirts,
carrying sacred gold relics and the alleged tunic of Saint Vin-
cent. The men     chanted psalms; the women,          with hair un-
kempt, sobbed hysterically, as if in mourning. Childebert was
fascinated by this procession, and when he saw the relics the
Visigoths carried, he offered to lift his siege in exchange for
these treasures, He returned triumphantly to Paris with the sa-
cred tunic and the objects of gold. There is evidence, however,
that the Bishop Germain (later Saint Germain) of Paris, as well
as the chronicler of this tale, Gregory of Tours, considered
Childebert a fool to have settled for so little. They felt his father,
Clovis, would have done better.
    In any event, the bishop took the opportunity to get Childe-
bert to build a church to house the sainted relics on the loca-
tion of the former temple of Isis. There, a magnificent basilica
with marble columns and gilded rafters was built in two years.
The outside was covered with gilded copper and gold mosaic
radiant in the sunshine. The church was called Saint-Germain-
le-Doré (Saint Germain the golden).
  - Three hundred years later, Norsemen, drawn by the glitter
of what looked like pure gold, descended on Paris and ran-
sacked the church four times in forty years, between 845 and
885. They were disappointed each time, for the true gold relics
that Childebert had brought back from Spain, along with the
tunic of Saint Vincent, lay safely somewhere in the countryside.
In the meantime, the devastated church was left a ruin for more
than a century. Then, in the beginning of the eleventh century,
it was rebuilt. The central bell tower dates from this reconstruc-
tion and today is the oldest church structure in Paris.
     What decided the fate of this area for many centuries was
the establishment of an abbey, with rights to the land and its
revenue over an enormous area stretching from the Seine all the
way to what are now the suburbs of Paris. The abbey also re-
ceived exclusive jurisdiction in all religious and legal matters
within its territory. The fortified walls that enclosed the abbey
proper formed a square between the present boulevard Saint-

72
                                      Saint-Germain-des-Prés

Germain and rues Jacob, Saint-Benoit, and de l’Echaudé. The
size and riches of the abbey of Saint-Germain rivaled those of
the city of Paris.
    The bishop’s abbey was his palace, his clerics were his
court, and the peasants who lived outside the walls (bakers,
butchers, prison guards) were his servitors. This imitation of
courtly life did not go unnoticed by the king, who kept a close
watch on the rival power just outside his city walls.
    The most interesting tales come to us from the thirteenth
century and concern the perennial conflict between the monks
and the students of the nearby Latin Quarter. The students
used to come to talk and sport on the fields that stretched along
the Seine north of the abbey. They made noise, trespassed on
areas the clerics would have closed to them, and troubled the
peace of the local residents—as students are usually accused of
doing. In return, the residents of the abbey harassed the stu-
dents at every opportunity. From time to time this hostility
broke into violent conflict.
   The worst of these confrontations took place in 1278, when
the Abbé Gerard built some houses along a path that the stu-
dents customarily used in going from the Latin Quarter to the
playing fields. The students saw this as a provocative impedi-
ment to their passage and proceeded to dismantle these struc-
tures. The abbé rang the tocsin, summoning monks, vassals,
and serfs to defend the rights of the abbey. Chroniclers tell us
that an armed company fell on the students with swords, pikes,
and clubs, shouting, “Kill! Kill!” The students took a terrific
beating. Two were killed, one blinded, several badly wounded.
Prisoners were paraded bareheaded through the marketplace
and thrust into the abbey’s dungeons, on the site of the present
H6tel Madison, at no. 143 boulevard Saint-Germain.
     However great the provocation offered by students, the
abbé was felt to have overreacted. The students appealed to the
papal legate and the king and, surprisingly, got a quick and
sympathetic response: perhaps this was because both the
church and the crown had come to feel that the abbey was too
rich, powerful, and arrogant for anyone’s good. The leader of
the abbey forces was exiled; the chapter was compelled to build
and endow two new churches in memory of the slain students;

                                                              ne
Pariswalks


the parents of the victims were granted substantial indemnities;
and the students were confirmed in their legal use of their
sporting meadow, the Pré aux Clercs, so called because the
term clerc denoted all men of instruction, whether or not they
were members of the clergy. The students were overjoyed at this
victory, and in the following years continued to exercise what-
ever rights of destruction they felt appropriate.
     Three centuries later, Henri II, plagued by student upris-
ings, decided to dampen their ardor and sent Parliament orders
to pursue persons guilty of acts of violence. Parliament’s action
culminated on October 6, 1557, with the burning at the stake
of a student named Croquoison, who received the bleak mercy
of being strangled before being burned on the Pré aux Clercs.
This seems to have been the last major incident in the student-
monk war, although their mutual animosity produced incidents
well into the eighteenth century.
     In the spring of that same year, 1557, the people of the
quartier, as well as those ‘who came streaming in from all over
Paris, had been treated to a more dramatic execution at the
stake. Two Huguenots who had been captured at a secret reli-
gious meeting two weeks earlier and had refused under torture
to abjure their faith were brought into the square that is now
place Saint-Germain, in front of the church, and asked one last
time to renounce their heresy in order that they might be stran-
gled before being burned. If not, their lying venomous tongues
were to be ripped from their mouths. They refused. After the
executioner had done the terrible deed (to the roaring approval
of the crowd), the heretics were bound and hoisted onto the
stakes, which were placed high above the wood in such a man-
ner that the lower halves of the bodies would be reduced to
ashes while the top halves were still intact.
     Less gruesome stories are told about the fairgrounds, an
area that stretched from the boulevard Saint-Germain to the
Luxembourg Gardens and which were a central feature of the
abbey’s power. Every year for a month after Easter, a great fair
was held. This was one of the great medieval fairs, drawing



                      The bell tower of the church of Saint-Germain-des-Prés

tt
                    RES
                    ae iit

    a           7   &
#e      7       ¥   e:
&ee             i
RG

=           ‘
Pariswalks

people from Spain, England, Burgundy, Flanders, and the Holy
Roman Empire, as well as from all over France. Here were hun-
dreds of stalls selling every kind of product and service available
then; troupes of performers, dancing bears, and minstrels; the
most impressive swirl of colors, aromas, and noises a com-
moner would ever find. This fair served as a gathering point for
students as well as courtesans and men of state. The rest of the
year the area was far from deserted. There was always some ac-
tivity, and it seems to have been the place to find whomever it
was you sought in Paris. In addition to attracting courtiers, mer-
chants, and students, the fairgrounds were frequented by a
group of Italian ruffians, called braves, ironically, since they al-
ways hung out in groups of five or six. The braves were available,
at the right price, for carrying out whatever vengeance one
might seek, as the following story illustrates.
     In the court of Henri III there was a nobleman whose mis-
tress dumped him rather rudely. Having given her large sums of
money in happier days, he wished to collect his “loans.” His
former lady, believing that, in love, money loaned is money
given, refused to comply and sought vengeance. One night, the
nobleman was returning home after a walk through the Saint-
Germain fairgrounds. On the champ crotté (the dunged field of
the cattle market), which was understandably solitary, a band of
braves jumped him and held him by the nose, which the leader
began to cut off with a knife. The victim’s screams aborted the
full operation, and the nobleman was left watching his as-
sailants flee as his nose dangled by a thread. The nose was sewn
back on but, in the testimony of a contemporary, slightly off
center. The story had unpleasant results for some of the actors;
one does not lightly cut off a nobleman’s nose. One brave was
hanged, and the lady and her friends had to buy their way out
of trouble, no doubt with the hapless victim’s money.
     Henri III, too, appreciated the promenade, where he would
stroll in the company of his mignons (literally “cuties,” the name
given to his favorite young men, with their curly hair, powdered
faces, and makeup). The king and his entourage rapidly became
the butt of student jokes. Returning one day from Chartres, the
king had several students imprisoned for following his suite
with long pieces of curled paper and shouting out loud in the

76
                                         Saint-Germain-des-Prés

middle of the fair, “A Ia fraise on connait le veau” (You can tell the
calf by its birthmark—a French proverb that meant, in this con-
text, “You can tell the gay by his curls”).
     The monastery reached the end of its twelve-hundred-year
history when the forces of the French Revolution moved in and
took over, replacing intermittent violence with the organized vi-
olence of the Terror. The revolutionaries filled the abbey’s jail
until it was overflowing with prisoners (aristocrats, clergy, and
common people), and then set up tribunals to thin out the
crowd. These tribunals made use of “guest houses,” which
stood on the corner of the rue de l’Abbaye and rue Bonaparte,
just outside the entrance to this garden. These houses had extra
rooms called chambres a donner (rooms that could be given to
guests of the abbey). These rooms, which once provided shelter
and comfort, were turned into tribunals of condemnation—
swift and deadly. The stories about the trials held there are hard
to believe.
     One concerns Mlle de Sombreuil, a carefully brought up
young lady who rarely left her house unaccompanied. One day,
however, she left alone, on a terrible mission. Her father, a pris-
oner, was scheduled for one of the infamous swift trials in
which no one was ever found innocent. When she appeared at
the tribunal, she begged for her father’s life. The guards found
the situation amusing and offered to make a deal. If she would
drink the still-steaming blood of the latest victim, they would
spare her father. She did, and her father lived, for a few days.
    During September 2 and 3, 1792, these tribunals carried
out the ostensibly judicial massacre of more than two hundred
victims. Each defendant was dressed in his best clothes, be-
cause he had been told when arrested that he was being sent
away. The questioning that followed was strictly pro forma.
The defendant was found guilty regardless. After this mock
trial, the prisoners were led out of the tribunal into the court-
yard of the abbey and were there hacked and stabbed to death
by two rows of hired citizens, in many cases local residents.
    On September 3 alone, 168 men and women,               including
several of Louis XVI’s ministers, his father confessor, and surely
many “irrelevant” people, were executed in this fashion because
Judge Maillard (nicknamed “the Slugger”) insisted on having

                                                                   et
Pariswalks

them killed at once. The executioners, however, were soon to
rue their zealous slaughter when they learned that as a prize for
the day’s work they could claim the victims’ clothes. The
clothes were so badly cut up that they were worth little. The
massacre continued with the slaughter of the king’s personal
Swiss guard. Late in the afternoon, another judge came onto
the scene and, drinking to the nation, shouted to the execu-
tioners (whose arms still dripped with blood): “People, you
slaughter your enemies, you do your duty!” On September 4
the slaughter was followed by a long auction of personal effects
while the pile of corpses lay in this garden, alongside the
church.
    In all, the number of citizens killed in Paris during the
month of September 1792 is estimated at 1,614. Many victims
were burmed at the door of the prison, and even at the door of
the church, but the largest number were massacred in front of
the tribunal, at the corner of the rue Bonaparte and boulevard
Saint-Germain.
     After the Revolution, Paris was irrevocably changed, includ-
ing the role of the church. The church of Saint-Germain was re-
consecrated, but simply, as the parish church it is today, and
the abbey was relegated to serving, as it still does, the social
needs of its parishioners. The neighborhood today is an intel-
lectual center of Paris in which the church of Saint-Germain-
des-Prés simply happens to be found.
     Now it is time to look at the garden itself, the square
Laurent-Prache. This quiet spot, in the midst of a confusion of
cars and people, is a flowered and shady retreat in summer and
a startlingly bare sculpture garden in winter. Many of the pieces
are Gothic remains from a medieval chapel. You will find a gar-
goyle whose spout was in the shape of a dog’s head. Unfortu-
nately, it was broken off and stolen by a “lover” of Gothic
architecture.
    The first piece of sculpture before you as you enter the gar-
den is most unexpected; it is the strange and powerful bronze
head of a woman, dedicated to Guillaume Apollinaire, sculpted
by his loyal friend Pablo Picasso. The bust sits on a four-foot-
high white stone pedestal; it is dated 1959, although Apolli-
naire died years before, in 1918, at the age of thirty-eight.

78
                                       Saint-Germain-des-Prés

Picasso and Apollinaire, the artist and poet, were favorites of the
arty café world and were courted by all the would-be artists and
hangers-on who spent their days drinking and talking together.
    One of these admirers, an employee of the Louvre Museum,
wishing to show his appreciation and respect for the two, pre-
sented each of them with a statuette. Picasso and Apollinaire
thanked him, put the objects away, and thought no more about
them. Several months later the guards at the museum, shocked
out of their negligence by an important theft, realized that a va-
riety of other objects were missing as well. It wasn’t long before
suspicion fell on the guard, who led them directly to his friends,
pleading that he had simply given Picasso and Apollinaire the
statues as gifts. Because he was not a French citizen, Picasso
was let off with a few sharp words; but the case was different for
Apollinaire. The officials not only entangled him in the ubiqui-
 tous French web of paperwork and procedures but also ques-
 tioned him so harshly that the poet was driven to ask why in
 the world they didn’t accuse him of stealing the Mona Lisa. That
 did it. The Mona Lisa had just been stolen, and Guillaume
Apollinaire was put in prison.
     The situation might have been merely ludicrous, but Apolli-
naire’s patriotism turned it into tragedy. He was born in Rome of
Polish parents named Kostrowitzki, but he fell in love with
France with an intensity that led him to change his name and
nationality and to fight valiantly in the First World War for his
new country. To be accused of stealing the nation’s treasures and
imprisoned was too great a blow. He died soon after his release
from prison, a disappointed and unhappy man. It is, therefore,
particularly suitable that tribute was finally paid him with the
placing of this statue here, among medieval remnants and arch-
ways; amid the treasures of the France that was so dear to him.
     These treasures are fragments from the thirteenth-century
chapel of the Virgin, which stood within the walls of the abbey,
diagonally down the street, at the present no. 6 bis rue de
PAbbaye. The chapel, begun in 1245, took ten years to build
and was the work of Pierre de Montreuil. The remains that you
see on the two walls of the garden, pieced together stone by
stone, make clear how delicate this masterpiece of thirteenth-
century flamboyant Gothic must have been.

                                                                19
Pariswalks

    The chapel was partly destroyed in 1794, when the refec-
tory and library next to it exploded and burned. It was com-
pletely dismantled in 1800, when the street was cut through.
Additional remains of the chapel decorate the garden of the
Musée National du Moyen Age.
    If you have not been in the church yet, you may wish to go
now, or you may enter later, when the walk ends back here. Pass
through Saint-Germain’s moder clear-glass doors, which keep
concert music in and street noise out. This is one of the few
churches that has kept its original interior painting. The vault-
ing is sky blue sprinkled with stars. Each gilt pillar is decorated
differently. Today we are accustomed to plain stone, but me-
dieval churches were very colorful. For example, originally the
entire facade of Notre-Dame and the interior were brightly
painted and gilded.
     The entrance to the garden Laurent-Prache was actually the
site of the Revolutionary tribunal. It was here that the incredibly
bloody hacking to death of 168 persons took place. This street
was cut through in 1800, and shortly after was given the white-
washing name of rue de la Paix (street of peace), but finally took
the name of its earlier history, rue de l’Abbaye. The place de la
Concorde, on the Right Bank (see Walk 7), the site of most of
the guillotine murders and crowd madness of the French Revo-
lution, has somehow managed to keep its name, despite its vio-
lent past.



                     Rue de l’Abbaye

Until 1997, no. 18 rue de l’Abbaye was the site of the well-
known bookstore Librairie Le Divan, owned by Gallimard, one
of the most distinguished publishing houses in Paris. This cor-
ner spot, stuffed with books on tables and shelves, was an in-
troduction to all the publishing houses and bookstores dotting
the streets behind: Seuil, Hachette, Gallimard. The city, which
owns the property, increased the rent so much that Gallimard
made the momentous decision to move—to the far reaches of
the fifteenth arrondissement.
    Why was the rent suddenly so high? Who could afford it?

80
                                       Saint-Germain-des-Prés

Christian Dior And who moved into the famous American
Drugstore? Armani. And who bought half of Arthus Bertrand?
Louis Vuitton. What happened was a takeover by the big names
from the Right Bank’s rue Saint-Honoré. Now nearly every store
on the Right Bank has a branch somewhere on the Left, and the
concept of chain stores has taken over Paris.
    M. Brenner of Galerie La Hune, which you will soon visit,
says these big names are bringing the showcases of high luxury
here, more for advertising than actual sales. M. Brenner and the
group he represents felt that this intrusion would take over and
destroy the soul and spirit of Saint-Germain, and that the
oldies—Hemingway, Natalie Clifford Bamey, Camus, Sartre—
would have put up a fight. The group wanted everyone to sign
their petitions. They wanted to preserve their bookstores, gal-
leries, and artisans. They wanted to save the neighborhood’s
soul.
    Saint-Germain is the heart of Parisian culture, the soul of
learning, and the meeting place of intellectuals. The books sold
at Le Divan were the source of debate and discussion that ani-
mated the cafés on the boulevard. Concerned members of the
neighborhood started the organization SOS Saint-Germain-des-
Prés, Save Our Souls, with headquarters at La Hune. Their peti-
tion read, “The undersigned ask the public officials and
legislators to do everything they can to maintain the cultural af-
fairs that mark Saint-Germain as the genius of the place.”
     A meeting was held April 22, 1997, at the Café de Flore to
inaugurate the organization and make their case known. Juliette
Greco, a longtime resident and famous actress and singer, with
the help of actors Jean-Paul Belmondo and Catherine Deneuve
and singer Charles Aznavour, pleaded their case with the minis-
ter of culture, Philippe Douste-Blazy. Despite their efforts, today
many publishers have moved out and fabric stores have taken
over galleries.
    Before you enter La Hune, take a look at no. 16, the spot
where the refectory of the abbey once stood. Unfortunately, the
door is usually locked, but try it anyway. The refectory was built
by Pierre de Montreuil in 1239. Nearly five hundred years later,
in 1714, a library was built over the refectory. During the Revo-
lution the refectory served as a magazine for gunpowder, which

                                                                 81
Pariswalks

exploded on the night of August 19, 1794. The refectory col-
lapsed and fire broke out, completely destroying it and the li-
brary above. Fortunately, most of the manuscripts were saved,
including the original Pensées by Blaise Pascal, written on little
bits of paper.
     It was thought that no trace of the refectory remained. But a
few years ago the government was in the midst of putting up
moderately priced housing on this spot when the workers un-
covered the marvelous former outside wall of the refectory. Its
two and a half flamboyant windows, tall and graceful and in-
tact, had been covered by plaster and totally forgotten for al-
most two hundred years.
     The wall is preserved on the right-hand side of the entrance
hall to the apartments. Some of the stones below are also part of
the old wall. The monks’ cells in the cellar are now filled in with
brick walls and serve as storage rooms for the tenants. Niches
for holy statues dot the walls.
     Now visit La Hune (literally, crow’s nest), at no. 14, a fine
and refined gallery whose exhibitions and vernissages (openings)
are always wonderful. Notice the bronze door handle in the
shape of a man’s face. When you leave the gallery, look at the
back of the man’s head on the handle. The artist is Igor Mitoraj.
     Past La Hune, enter no. 14 and walk to the back of the
courtyard. To the right you will find a neat, small white stucco
house. We saw it years ago when the place was in ruins and
overgrown with bushes. To see into no. 12, look through the
door. The building was once a small rectangular cloister, built in
the thirteenth century, plainer than the larger one across the
street. The bays have been filled in and rebuilt, but the shape
remains the same. If you look all around, you will see the per-
fect symmetry of the four sides. _
     Inside no. 13 are the remains of the abbey’s larger cloister
(built in the thirteenth century, restored in the seventeenth), in
which the priests could stroll. Remember that the rue de |’Ab-
baye did not exist at that time and these cloisters were in fields
surrounding the church. Note the three floors built above the
arches of the cloister. Curtain-like vines drape the walls—green
in summer, red in the fall.
     Nos. 11, 9, 7, and 5 have recently been restored. Rubelli,

82
The front and back of the doorknob of La Hune at no. 14 rue de l’Abbaye


at no. 11, shows decorator fabrics in an ultramodern setting.
Between nos. 9 and 7 is a parish office whose garden offers a
fine view of the church. At no. 7 a hook for a pulley is attached
to the gabled top window and there is a side entrance to the
church.
    Look into the glass door of no. 8, a grandstanding apartment
house (built in 1963), to see a variously marbled, tiled, and
flowered entry. Notice the spectacular wooden sculpture shaped
like a series of abstract totem poles. In the courtyard is a carefully
tended (and that is unusual) walled garden with a pool.
     Nos. 1-5 are the remains of the palace built in 1586 for

                                                                          83
Pariswalks

Cardinal Charles I of Bourbon, the abbot at Saint-Germain. The
unusual style is marked by a sharply slanted slate roof and open
pediment and particularly by the use of both brick and stone
for the facade. The few remaining examples of this style are the
houses on the place des Vosges (see Walk 4) built under Henri
IV, and the apartment houses that form the prow of the Ile de la
Cité, facing the famous statue of Henri IV. Brick is, in general,
rarely used in Paris. When you spot some turn-of-the-century
brick apartment houses here and there, you will probably agree
that stone suits Paris better.
     Until recently these buildings were hidden by a temporary
wall that also hid a gallery, a garage, and a social services center.
Now the Institut Catholique owns two-thirds, and one-third is
still the social services office for this parish. The institute is
closed on the weekends, but on weekdays you can enter the
door with names and doorbells, at no. 5, to see the restored
stone staircase and, through the metal grille, the lovely garden.
The main staircase at no. 3 originally served as the grand en-
trance to the abbey from the rue de Furstenberg, behind you.
     No. 8, Flamant, is a home interiors and furniture store,
which also has an entrance on the place Furstenberg. If you go
in the entrance on the rue de l’Abbaye, you can see the remains
of an old pillar that once stood in the chapel of the Virgin. The
chapel was first damaged when the neighboring refectory ex-
ploded in 1792, and the opening of the rue de l’Abbaye, in
1800, completed the destruction, leaving only this pillar. The
store sells beautiful décor in a shabby-chic style and has a small
restaurant that serves sandwiches and salads. The wares are
lovely, but the staff less so.
     No. 6 bis is another of the many decorating shops in this
area. These wallpaper and fabric specialists often collaborate
with their neighbor Manuel Canovas, at no. 6. Canovas was
the first to move here. He also has showrooms at nos. 7 and 5
place Furstenberg. Note the Art Nouveau floral motif of the
building.
     For a light bite, pack a vegetarian lunch at the very busy
Guenmai, at no. 2. This was once a Greek restaurant, Au Vieux
Paris, opened by M. Nico on December 6, 1941, during the
German occupation. When meat supplies were limited, M.

84
                                                   Saint-Germain-des-Prés




A stone pillar from the thirteenth-century chapel of the Virgin



Nico would call his best customers and serve them the meat he
had concealed beneath puréed potatoes. The building has been
scaffolded and unused for years, which is surprising in this cov-
eted neighborhood.



                        Rue de Furstenberg

Retrace your steps to the rue de Furstenberg. When Egon de
Furstenberg was abbot of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, in the last
decades of the seventeenth century, he opened a new entrance
to the palace, one that led into the rue du Colombier (street of
doves), now the rue Jacob. This entrance descended from the
grand staircase of the abbey into the rue de Furstenberg.
    The square in the middle of this short street, with its four
pawlonia empress trees and old-fashioned light globes, is a pic-
turesque spot. Benches were removed when it became too
much of a hangout. Although the trees are named after Anna
Pavlova, daughter of Czar Paul I of Russia, they are Chinese
(some sources say Japanese) in origin. The trees are admired in
the spring for their perfumed mauve blossoms and large leaves.

                                                                       85
Pariswalks

The three smaller ones are recent replacements. Symmetrical
houses were built next to each other on either side of the
square; nos. 6 and 8, still standing, and recognizable by their
low doorways and brick-and-stone painted facades, were sta-
bles of the abbey.
     This is the spot filmmakers choose in Paris for romance. Re-
member that Martin Scorsese filmed the final scene in The Age
of Innocence in this square. In the film, Newland Archer sits on a
bench looking at, but never going up to, the apartment of Mme
Olenska, to finally join the woman he loves. Edith Wharton did
not put Newland in the place Furstenberg, but in the more for-
mal setting of the place des Invalides, which was perhaps more
fitting for his controlled rather than romantic response.
     Walk through the stable archway of no. 6, across the court-
yard to the center door, to the Musée National Eugéne
Delacroix, home of the painter for the last six years of his life,
1857 to 1863. This is an exciting small museum, with changing
exhibitions,   fine drawings,   and   small   sketches   of Eugéne
Delacroix’s completed masterpieces. Through the museum
windows, look to see a small cream-colored building with a
pebbled garden. This was the infirmary of the abbey, where the
invalids were kept, more as protection for the healthy outside
than to help the sick within.
     After the museum, go outside and downstairs to Delacroix’s
atelier. It is a beautiful room with a huge skylight, high ceilings,
and oak floors. It was here that Delacroix created his last works,
which were exhibited at the Salon of 1859.
     In the street once more, walking left toward the rue Jacob,
you will notice at the point where the street narrows a sculpted
stone torch on the pillar of no. 4. This is the remains of the dec-
oration of the Court of Honor, a place where ceremonies were
performed when the palace on the rue de |’Abbaye was Fursten-
berg’s private domicile. The house was sold to the government
in 1797 and taken down. Only this pillar, an entry, remains.
    Directly across the street is an ultra-chic Canovas retail store
of items made with superb fabrics available at reduced prices.
    As you head out to the rue Jacob walk to your right, down
the small, picturesque rue Cardinale. The street once lay within
the boundaries of the Abbaye Saint-Germain and was named for

86
A stone torch on the pillar of no. 4 place Furstenberg



 the abbot, Guillaume de Furstenberg. It was originally the
abbey’s open-air tennis court but became a street in 1701. The
house at the elbow of the street, no. 3, has an attractive terrace
with wrought-iron grillwork and a sagging roof that evoke a pic-
ture of this city’s lost past. A few steps to the right of this house,
at no. 5, is Cipango, selling beautiful, creative jewelry made
only from natural stones. Half the store is an atelier where the
jewelry is made. Open from 11 A.M. to 6 PM. daily.

                                                                   87
Pariswalks

    There are interesting shops on your way to the rue Jacob:
choice seventeenth- and eighteenth-century antiques at Yveline
and, at no. 1, Aux Armes de Furstenberg, a fine antiques shop,
almost an institution,    specializing in scientific instruments,
globes, and military objects. One more decorating shop, at no.
1, has replaced a serious bookshop. Spot the exposed stone and
beams inside.
    We are going to turn right on Jacob; visit the rue de Seine,
packed with galleries and sights to see; and then retum to visit
the rue Jacob.
     In front of you and across the street, no. 6 houses a curious
shop, the Huilerie Artisinale, the kind that defies the chain
stores. The Huilerie resembles a perfume store, with its many
bottles of different oils. You can sniff and taste. The young peo-
ple here are members of a family that has been pressing oils in
Burgundy since 1878. They sell to fine restaurants and to you.
     At the corner, look to where rue de Seine and rue Jacob
meet. This Japanese-type garden, with stones, fountain, and
grasses, is lovely amid all the buildings and stores. There is of
ten a bird perched on the highest stone.



                         Rue   de Seine

Turn right onto the rue de Seine. The rue de Seine is lined with
galleries, some of which are constantly changing. We cannot
describe them all in detail, so if you are an art aficionado be
sure to allow plenty of time to explore.
     The H6tel de Seine, no. 52, in this central location, is a
good choice to stay. It is up-to-date, with telephones, color TV,
individual safes, and reasonable prices.
    No. 54 is an important, recently restored building, twelve
windows wide. Note the stone pillars on the second floor, the
mansard roof, and the tiny balcony.
     Cosi, at no. 54, sells a good, quick, inexpensive lunch of
brick oven—baked bread with scads of toppings. This Cosi is the
original one and has spawned the popular chain in the United
States. Open every day from lunch to midnight.
    At the corner, at no. 56, look up at the gable (pignon) roof

88
                                       Saint-Germain-des-Prés

on this 1744 building. Odd, because these pointed roofs facing
the street were outlawed in the early 1500s. The rain gathered
between the rooflines, instead of falling on the street below,
causing serious water damage. There are only about thirty of
these left in Paris.
    In front of you is the wonderful Buci food market, one of
the best in Paris. Find the old street name incised in stone at
the corner of 75 rue de Seine, RUE DE SEINE and RUE DE BUSSY
16. The 16 refers to the sectioning of Paris before the city was
divided into its twenty arrondissements.
    Return to the right side of the rue de Seine. On this street,
nos. 73, 71, 65, and 63 are “old houses.” Train your eyes to
recognize differences from the other buildings.
    The ironwork at no. 73 is classified. The Galerie de Buci
has exceptional paintings and sculpture.
    At no. 69, you will find Fish a la Boissonnerie, which is
owned by an American, who explained that the name of the
restaurant is a play on the expression “drink like a fish.” You can
see that the restaurant was once a seafood store (poissonnerie)
and that the owner has added tiles to the mosaic above the
door to change the name to “boissonnerie.” His partner owns
Cosi, directly across the street.
    No. 63, once the home of poet Adam Mickiewicz, the na-
tional poet of Poland, is beautifully restored with lovely
wrought-iron balconies. No. 57, with its four mascarons, three
women on the second floor and a man on the third, is typical of
eighteenth-century decoration. The three-windows-wide bal-
conied facade is classified.
    Jacqueline Subra, at no. 51, collects quality estate jewelry
and antiques. If you go through the first courtyard, through a
building, and to the second courtyard, you will find a small gar-
den with bushes and flowers set out in a pattern—a rarity in Paris.
     At the back of the courtyard of no. 49 is a charming shop
called, appropriately, Au Fond de la Cour. Here you will find a
tremendous collection of colorful majolica, serving dishes of all
kinds (we have never seen so many variations of an asparagus
plate), and furniture designed for greenhouses.
     Now we come to a watering place with some of the old
artistic spirit of the neighborhood. Sit outside a 1900s café at

                                                                89
Pariswalks




Fish a la Boissonnerie restaurant




La Palette, no. 43, a lively hangout for actors, artists, and cin-
ema people. It is off the beaten track of the boulevard, the café
food is good, and the service is informal. Walk past the tables
on the rue Jacques Calot to find an amazing statue by Arman
that is almost symbolic of the café and the neighborhood. The
statue of a woman is sliced in vertical layers to show her many
talents. Walk all around her and find all the signs of artistic cre-
ation: a pile of books, a painter’s palette, brushes, a violin, and
more.
     A remnant of the French Revolution sits directly across the
street, at no. 34. The building is a temple d’amitié (temple of
friendship). These temples were built during the Revolution to
replace churches. The words a l’amitié (to friendship) are in-
scribed on it. This neighborhood was rich in such Revolution-
ary clubs, but very few remain. At our last visit, the building
was under construction.
     At the corner (and officially at no. 40 rue de l’Echaudé) is
an ornate apartment building dating from 1910. It is interesting
to compare the curves and lush decorations on this facade with
the more sober seventeenth- and eighteenth-century buildings
in the neighborhood.

90
                                       Saint-Germain-des-Prés

     Keep going on the rue de l’Echaudé. At no. 6, Pixie & Co.
sells expensive toys, figurines, and other interesting playthings.
The store next door specializes in Le Petit Prince.



                          Rue Jacob

From the rue de |’Echaudé, turn right onto the rue Jacob to
visit this famous street. Streets in Paris are often named after fa-
mous people, important places, or interesting signs, but rarely
do they get the name of a Biblical patriarch like Jacob. The
name was given in memory of a vow taken by Marguerite de
Valois, whose colorful life has left its mark on the history of this
area and is worth recalling in some detail.
     Marguerite, known as “chére Margot,” was the daughter of
Henri II and Catherine de Médicis. She was the sister of two
kings and the wife of Henri de Navarre, later Henri IV In addi-
tion to having this noble background, she was beautiful and
learned. Her memoirs are among the best written by nobility,
but when the French refer to “chére Margot” with a knowing
smile, they are thinking less of what she wrote than what she
left out.
    As one historian put it, “She knew love at eleven,” and
thanks to this early start, she was able to collect a long list of
lovers in the course of her career. She had, naturally, good
teachers: her brother Henri III and his flamboyant mignons, as
well as her cousin and husband, Henri, who is recorded as hav-
ing had fifty-six mistresses.
    Margot was married in 1572 at the age of nineteen to the
Protestant Henri de Navarre (second in line for the throne) very
much against her Catholic convictions and the will of the Pope.
This mattered little compared with the determination of her
brother Charles IX.
    It took more than marriage to slow Margot down. She had
her establishment; her husband had his. All went well until one
day, in 1583, when Margot’s brother Henri, now Henni III, de-
nounced his sister’s debauchery before the entire court. The ac-
tual cause of his anger was that Margot had openly parodied
him and his court of homosexuals.

                                                                 91
esenting all the arts
                                       Saint-Germain-des-Prés

    This denunciation made it harder for Henri de Navarre to
put up with Margot’s scandalous behavior, and finally, in 1587,
under social pressure, he put her away in the Chateau d’Usson,
in Auvergne, where she managed to seduce her jailer. She made
the best of her exile—eighteen years of being served by a
severely restricted court—writing memoirs and adding to her list
of conquests. Nevertheless, she missed Paris and swore to raise
an altar to Jacob if ever she was allowed to return. Jacob had also
suffered exile, had worked and waited fourteen years for Rachel,
and had finally been able to go back home, where he had given
thanks to God for his safe return by building an altar.
    The happy day came in 1605. By this time Henri de
Navarre, now Henri IV, had long since divorced Margot and
married Marie de Médicis. The king installed Margot in the
chateau of the archbishops (an ironic touch) of Sens, located on
the Right Bank of the Seine at the entrance to the Marais quar-
ter. (See Walk 6 for the Hétel de Sens.)
    Margot was then fifty-two, fat, and bald, but as insatiable as
ever. Her weight was so great she ordered the doorways
widened. Her hair was so thin she snipped locks from the heads
of her blond valets to use for her wigs. Jean Duché, in his His-
toire de France Racontée a Juliette, claims that Margot wore
around her ample waist amulets containing pieces of the hearts
of her dead lovers.
     The Hotel de Sens became a place of revelry. Margot’s lover
of the moment was the twenty-year-old Count of Vermond, but
finding him perhaps too old, Margot brought in the eighteen-
year-old son of a carpenter from Usson. Vermond couldn’t
stand this. He lay in wait for his rival and shot him in the head
right in front of Margot, who was returning from her religious
devotion in a nearby church. Margot was enraged. She had Ver-
mond pursued and arrested, and when he was brought before
her, she cried out, “Kill the wretch. Here, here are my garters.
Strangle him!” They cut off his head instead, while Margot
looked on.
    But all this blood and gore depressed her, and two days later
she decided to leave the Hotel de Sens and inhabit a house she
was then building on the Pré aux Clercs, at what is now nos.
2-10 rue de Seine. She remembered her vow and built the

                                                                03
Pariswalks

convent of Petits Augustins (now no. 14 rue Bonaparte) in the
back of the garden of her chateau. There she installed fourteen
Augustinian friars, who took turns every two hours singing
praises to Jacob with words and music written by Margot. Five
years later she chased them out, claiming they sang badly. The
name of the street is all that remains of Margot’s celebrated ges-
ture of thanksgiving.
    This street is what we call one of the hidden streets of Paris.
The unknowing eye sees shop after shop below five-story apart-
ment buildings that show little decoration and little difference
from one to the other. In fact, there are gardens, courtyards,
staircases, even ceilings to discover on the rue Jacob.
     The building at no. 5 is the spot where one of the towers of
the surrounding walls of the abbey stood. It was twenty feet in
diameter and stood next to the dovecote (hence the old name
of the street, rue du Colombier) of the abbey.
     Enter the courtyard of no. 12 and go through the archway.
At the back you'll find a small garden and a shop selling jewels
and pashminas. Note the stone steps of the staircase, the old
railing, and the rafters. No. 12 also has an antiques shop that
has replaced an old bookshop that was once the meeting place
for lovers of Paris. The Huysmans Society met here every Satur-
day from three to six. Joris-Karl Huysmans was the famous
nineteenth-century writer who described Paris in a manner so
poetic, so unbelievably full of love that first editions of his
books today are collectors’ treasures and are sold at auction for
very high prices. Huysmans could write about the smells of
Paris trash in a way that would make you mourn the passing of
the open garbage truck.
     No. 7 dates from 1640 and was once called the Hétel Saint-
Paul. Racine lived here with his uncle in 1656, when he was
seventeen years old. Pierre Frey, another big decorating name,
has moved in, replacing an art gallery.
     Richard   Wagner   lived   at no.   14   for six months,   in
1841-1842, in poverty but on the verge of his first operatic
success with The Flying Dutchman.
    A new building for this street, no. 18, built in 1928, is a
nice example of Art Deco architecture, not often found here. In-
side is Gaggio, which sells Venetian goods. The store is filled

94
                                        Saint-Germain-des-Prés

with lush velvet fabrics, hand dyed and printed with wooden
stamps. There are elegant jackets, slinky dresses cut on the bias,
fabrics for furniture and drapes, and home accessories such as
chandeliers made from Murano glass. The shop can custom-
make anything for you, including Fortuny silk lamps. The fur-
trimmed capes are so fabulous they made the youngest,
unmarried member of this team want to plan a winter wedding
just so she could have a reason to wear a cape.
    In the seventeenth century, nos. 9, 11, and 13, built next
to the old abbey wall, were all one house, belonging to a mem-
ber of Parliament, M. Chabenat de la Malmaison. Later, the
building was the H6tel de la Gabelle, the main office for the col-
lection of the salt tax. No. 9 is now an expensive art gallery.
    The antique dealer who owned part of no. 11 never
appraised—or even found—what was certainly the most valu-
able treasure his store had ever seen. A later owner who reno-
vated the space uncovered fabulous painted beams in the
ceiling. There are hundreds of rafters in Paris but none like
these remarkably well preserved and painted ones. They date
from the end of the fifteenth century; the painting, however,
was done later. Various trades of the City of Paris are pictured in
the medallions in the center. The entire ceiling had been hidden
 (and preserved) by plaster. Very skillful restoration has saved
most of it. Imagine the beauty of this room when it was two
floors high and the fireplace on the side wall was huge enough
to reach this high. The last time we were here the building was
in transition. If there is a business here, go in and ask to see the
first floor (our American second floor).
     When you reach the entry to nos. 11 and 13, stand back
and take a look. The tall, rounded doorways are topped by the
typical eighteenth-century mask decorations called mascarons.
These two must have been done either at different times or by
different people. One of the nicest pieces of iron sculpture, a
flamboyant S projecting tridents, to ensure privacy, is attached
to the wall above the two doorways.
     If you can enter no. 11 (push the release button and the
door might unlatch), turn left just before you reach the court-
yard, go up a few steps, and you will find an imposing wide
stone staircase. What is truly impressive about it is that the

                                                                 95
Pariswalks




Mascaron at no. 11 rue Jacob




stone banisters and railing were cut by hand—a tremendous
task, in comparison with the already difficult one of turning a
banister in wood. This Louis XIII style is often used for wooden
staircases, as is the case on the upper floors of this building. In
summer this wide stairwell is a cool, quiet spot; in winter, when
it gets dark early, turn the minuterie light on until you have seen
it all. Please be discreet and polite if you meet residents.
     Hotel Millisime, no. 15, decorated in warm Provengal fab-
rics and colors, is one of several charming, not overly expensive
hotels in this neighborhood. They serve breakfast in their beau-

96
                                       Saint-Germain-des-Prés




Mascaron at no. 13 rue Jacob




tifully restored vaulted cellars. These hotels are always popular,
and you must book far in advance for the spring and summer.
     Much has been said and written about no. 20, but today lit-
tle can be seen. A small temple of friendship, like the one on
rue de Seine, is hidden in the courtyard behind an iron door. If
you try to look in, the concierge will peer out from behind her
curtain and call a huge dog, who will bark loud and long,
though he is safely behind a high wall. The garden and the
temple were owned by Michel Debré, former right-hand man to
de Gaulle and then to Pompidou.

                                                               97
Pariswalks

    Natalie Clifford Barney, an ardently Francophile expat, lived
here. In her youth she was called “the Amazon” or “the Sappho
of 1900.” She was beautiful, intelligent, and at the forefront of a
literary movement that championed women’s independence. In
her premiére étage apartment she received a procession of the
greatest writers and artists of the twentieth century: Heming-
way, Joyce, T.S. Eliot, Colette, Rilke, Apollinaire, Anatole France,
Max Jacob, Anna de Noailles, and many others. She was a leg-
end to the people, a lesbian in her personal life, and catholic
in her hospitality. She once hosted a boat trip around Greece
for fifty friends. She did as much for the artistic life of the
quarter as did the well-known cafés on the boulevard Saint-
Germain.
    As you leave the courtyard notice the classified wrought-
iron banisters and gate and the consoles of phoenixes in the en-
try hall.
    Nos. 17 and 26 are two bookshops that indicate the range
of specialized bookshops in Paris. One is agricultural and horti-
cultural; the other, specializing in maritime books and overseas
editions, shows maps and prints in the window. Look also at
the old houses above the shops.
    Within the crevices of no. 19, down hallways, through
doors, past the old offices of the publishing house Editions du
Seuil, there is a private house and garden with a view of the
back of the Delacroix museum. Prudhomme, an active pam-
phleteer against the ancien régime, lived back here. He was an
editor of the Revue de Paris, a Revolutionary journal, and it was
in the quiet of this garden that he wrote the incendiary articles
that led to numerous arrests of citizens during the Terror.
     No. 21, the Hétel des Maronniers, with its courtyard of
chestnut trees that can be seen in winter through glass walls, is
one of the many attractive medium-priced hotels on this street.
     At no. 25, the Hétel des Deux Continents is another fa-
vorite of the rue Jacob. For high season reserve two months in
advance.
     No. 28 is a shop selling rare stones and minerals. Claude
Boullé specializes in stone slices that look like seascapes or the
countryside. The stones, which come from Tuscany, are inex-
pensive and full of wonder.

98
                                         Saint-Germain-des-Prés

    Twenty years ago the Editions du Seuil, an important
French publishing house, took over the lovely private home and
front garden of no. 27. Ingres, the champion of classical paint-
ing, lived here more than one hundred fifty years ago.
    No. 29 replaces a traditional hotel with a whole new look
for this Saint-Germain neighborhood. La Villa is a trendy,
Memphis-decorated hotel. It is rated as a four-star hotel (more
luxurious than most in this area), and the furniture and colors
have all been carefully chosen to make a high-fashion state-
ment. Try their bar and popular jazz club at night.
   Across the street, on the corner to the right (technically, 21
rue Bonaparte), was Mme Castaing. She bought the most curi-
ous and interesting colonial empire objects, mainly from the
nineteenth century. She was also an eccentric who would, for
example, buy a dress at Chanel and improve on it by removing
the sleeves. After her death her old shop became an outpost of
the restaurant Ladurée. Ironically, the décor is Asian colonial,
with hand-painted walls and tented ceilings, a style often repre-
sented by Mme Castaing. Do not skip stopping in for their fa-
mous macarons, two meringue cookies sandwiching a rich
ganache filling. They come in all different flavors, from the typ-
ical chocolat and café to the seasonal and more whimsical, such
as bitter orange or summertime’s strawberry-poppy. The atmos-
phere here is much more pleasant than that at the original
Ladurée, near the place de la Madeleine (see Walk 7).



                       Rue    Bonaparte

Despite too many cars in the road and too many people on the
sidewalks, the rue Bonaparte is still a favorite of visitors and Pa-
risians. The shops are rich with the art of today and yesterday;
nobility of all ranks lived on this street; and although the color-
ful history of the street is less obvious, it is nevertheless there to
see and imagine.
     Seven hundred years ago there was no street here at all, sim-
ply open fields that belonged to the abbey. You will recall the
stories of the university students battling violently with the
priests of the abbey over the use of these lands. These conflicts

                                                                    99
Pariswalks

were settled only in 1368, when the monks built a wall and
moat around themselves for privacy and safekeeping. At that
time they also dug a canal, sixty-five feet wide and twenty-five
feet deep, which ran from the Seine down the present rue Bona-
parte to the corner where you are now standing, at rue Jacob
and rue Bonaparte.
      Here is where this arm of the river, la Petite Seine, emptied
its waters into the moat of the abbey. Boats sailed up and down,
bringing in and taking away goods. But the canal’s most impor-
tant function was to provide a natural division between the field
frequented by the students, which was a small piece of land
that covered the area between what are now the rues Jacob and
Visconti up to the rue Bonaparte (called the Petit Pré aux
Clercs), and the larger field on the other side of the canal fa-
vored by the priests (called the Grand Pré aux Clercs).
    For almost two hundred years the little Seine characterized
the quartier, and when it was eventually filled in, in 1540, it
gave its name to the paved road that took its place, rue de la Pe-
tite Seine.
      In 1606, when the famous Margot received a gift from her
ex-husband, Henri IV, of a piece of land on the rue de Seine, she
built the beautiful chateau whose walled gardens and walks cut
through the rue de la Petite Seine, closing it off from the river it-
self. But Margot was generous with her new domain and al-
lowed her meadows and gardens and shaded walks to go on
giving pleasure to the simple folk of the neighborhood.
      Marie de Médicis, who was Margot’s successor as wife to
Henri IV and whose money no doubt paid for Margot’s chateau,
was jealous of the latter’s reputation for generosity and her pop-
ularity with the people. And so Marie tried to outdo Margot by
building the Cours de la Reine (the queen’s way), a wide and
beautiful road on the Right Bank of the Seine, parallel to the pre-
sent Champs-Elysées.      These   two ladies, Marie    and Margot,
spent more time outfoxing each other than Henri spent thinking
about either of them; his constant love was Gabrielle d’Estrées.
    Margot’s gardens and the convent of Petits Augustins,
which she had built farther up the street, lasted until 1628,
thirteen years after her death. At that time her property was di-


100
                                         Saint-Germain-des-Prés

vided among many, and the street was once again opened, this
time named the rue des Petits Augustins. Look across the street
to see this old name cut in stone on the corner.
    The name Bonaparte was not given until the year 1852.
Why is there no rue Napoléon in Paris? Was he too formidable
a hero? Perhaps the idea of the republican Bonaparte is more ac-
ceptable.
    And now for the street, to find what is new and what re-
mains of the old. Your route will turn right at the corner of
Bonaparte and Jacob, continue up the right side to the top, and
then cross to the other side and back down the street to return
to the place Saint-Germain.
     The door to the courtyard of no. 21, on the left, gives you
an idea of the grand houses that surrounded the abbey in the
sixteenth century. The garden of Queen Margot’s palace on the
rue de Seine extended all the way to the other side of this
street, just a few yards up from here. The grand house before
you now was built in 1760, around the courtyard of an earlier
one, for Prévost de Saint Cyr, and was lived in during the period
of French constitutional history known as the Consulate
(1799-1804) by the Princess de Rohan-Rochefort, who was se-
cretly married to the Duke of Enghien. After the Revolution
these houses changed their tenants and their appearance, as the
neighborhood tumed popular. Today it is once again a street of
high rents, coveted apartments, and very special shops and gal-
leries. It is also one of the most heavily trafficked streets in Paris.
     This large courtyard is picturesque, with its thick ivy, its or-
namental ironwork on the balcony windows, and the large iron
hook for a pulley on the dormer, or mansard, above to the left.
     If you wish to buy a fancy gown, visit Vicky Tiel in the
courtyard. Elizabeth Taylor has been a customer here and is an
old friend. It was through Vicky’s husband, who was Richard
Burton’s makeup artist, that the initial contact was made.
     We were told that D’Artagnan’s stables were here, but then
again we were also told that about the rue Saint-Gilles, on the
other side of town.
     Continue up the street to the corner of rue Visconti. The
facade, the door, and the courtyard of no. 19 are classified.



                                                                   101
Pariswalks


    You are now at the intersection of the rue Bonaparte and the
rue des Beaux-Arts. If you wish to take the time to see a beauti-
fully appointed hotel, called simply CHétel, walk a few steps
down to the right, to no. 13 rue des Beaux-Arts. Wander in
under the atrium and walk to the back of the reception rooms,
where there are bowers of plants and perhaps still a parrot flying
free. Oscar Wilde is memorialized; he had a room here, as did
Jorge Luis Borges.
     Return to the rue Bonaparte, where art galleries abound and
the twentieth century seems to be king. No. 5 sells Deco and
Nouveau objets of high quality. Most of these galleries don’t
open until 11 or 11:30 4.M., and then close at 1 pM. for an hour,
for lunch. No. 5, like no. 21, is typical of the eighteenth cen-
tury, presenting an impressive wall and entry on the street and
apartments that look down on the beautiful courtyard. Note the
plaque on the outside wall: HERE, FORMERLY 5, RUE DES PETITS AU-
GUSTINS, WAS BORN EDOUARD MANET, 1832-1885.
     If you have walked to the end of the street, you’ve reached
the quai Malaquais; to the right is the Institut de France, home
of the French Academy, where the renowned dictionary writers
and protectors of the purity of the French language work. Elec-
tion to the Académie Francaise is open to only forty “immor-
tals,” who choose their own colleagues. The ceremony of
admission calls for an omate dress uniform complete with
sword. These swords are much too expensive for most acade-
micians to buy themselves, so friends usually contribute to the
cause. Later you can visit Arthus Bertrand, which makes these
swords. Across the quai there is a romantic footbridge over the
Seine to the Louvre.
    The little low house across the street, at no. 4 rue Bona-
parte, with dormer windows and with a hook and wheel for
loading above one of them, was built in 1620. Cross the street
to look up at it. This site was originally a hospital run by the
Brothers of Charity, until Queen Margot forced them out in or-
der to build her neighborhood estate. There is a huge art supply
store named Paris Art, serving the Ecole des Beaux-Arts (school
of fine arts), down the street. Look at their painted signs and
note the large gap between the words Paris and Art. In that gap
                                        Saint-Germain-des-Prés

used to be the word American; it was painted over in the recent
upsurge of anti-American sentiment.
    There are two modem art galleries at no. 6. Look up at the
roof garden on top of the building and at the small corner room
that leads into it. This building was redesigned and restored in
the eighteenth century.
    At no. 8, Félix Marcilhac has collected some beautiful
pieces of Art Deco and Art Nouveau. They are few but ex-
tremely fine.
    Librairie E. Rossignol, also at no. 8, is an antiques book-
shop that has been passed from father to son since 1906. They
publish a yearly catalogue and maintain special-interest files in
order to notify customers of relevant acquisitions.
   At no.    10, La Porte Etroite has exactly that, a narrow
door—also the title of a book by André Gide. This bookshop
was probably a hallway at some point in its history.
    At no.   12, now closed, M. Roux-Devillas once spent his
days surrounded by memories of the past. He specialized in old
books, old documents (autographs), and old scientific instru-
ments. The collection ranged from sundials and eighteenth-
century dental tools to treaties signed by kings and other rare
documents. One home inventory of the wife of a French lieu-
tenant general in Martinique in 1791 divided her possessions
into three sections: furnishings, silver, and slaves. All the slaves
were identified and described in the same way: name, job, age,
and price. There was Jurangon who took care of the boats,
thirty-two years old, and worth 3,300 francs; Caroline, no du-
ties, five years old, worth 500 francs; and Lucille, who was too
old and incapacitated to do or be worth anything at all, but was
listed simply to note her existence, “laissée pour memoire.” Doc-
uments of this kind formed the basis of historical research on
slavery today.
     The Ecole des Beaux-Arts is at no. 14. This site is a mini-
stage for the history of Paris. The first record of inhabitants
dates from 1603, when Marie de Médicis, Henri IV’s Italian
wife, brought five priests from Florence and built a charity
hospital for them here. These priests were also surgeons and
pharmacists. Clearly Marie de Médicis felt she needed more


                                                                103
Pariswalks

than serving ladies to accompany her to her new country, so
she established, in effect, for her use as well as for that of others,
an Italian hospital and an Italian pharmacy. The Brothers of
Charity Hospital moved three years later to the comer of the rue
des Saints-Péres and the rue Jacob, where it became a large and
important hospital, lasting until 1937, when it was taken down.
    After the removal of the original hospital, the eccentric Mar-
got built her promised altar to Jacob here. The convent re-
mained until the Revolution, at which time it was forced to
close down. It was left abandoned, but not for long.
    During the French Revolution it was the “sacred” duty of
each citizen to remove every symbol of religion and royalty he
could find. (See Walk 2 for the altering of street signs.) A young
painter and critic, Alexandre Lenoir, was quick to see the threat
to all the art treasures and manuscripts in Paris. After eloquent
and anguished pleading, he received permission to take or buy
all the treasures he could find, to store the books and manu-
scripts in two other convents, and to store the art treasures in
this one. Thus followed frenzied years of snatching books from
fire, saving statues of precious metal from the mint, and rescu-
ing kings from their coffins at Saint-Denis. Lenoir survived the
Revolution only to be killed when he was pierced by a bayonet
as he threw himself upon Richelieu’s tomb in the church of the
Sorbonne to save it from a mob in 1839.
     He was unable to save the row of statues under the first bal-
cony of Notre-Dame (the one that the beggars in The Hunchback
of Notre-Dame climb to save Esmeralda from the hands of the
hunchback). These statues—meant to represent the kings of
the Bible but done in the anachronistic style of Merovingian
kings—were thought by the mob to be kings of France and
were pulled down. They were presumed lost until a few years
ago, when they were found buried in the basement of an apart-
ment house in the seventeenth arrondissement. They are now
in the Musée National du Moyen Age. But Lenoir got whatever
he could, however he could, and gathered it in—until this old
convent became an amazing storehouse. When the Terror was
over, Lenoir could stand back and look at the most eloquent
creations of eighteen centuries of French art. He was inspired to


104
                                       Saint-Germain-des-Prés

make this cave of Ali Baba into a museum of French monu-
ments. In 1795 that became a reality. Chroniclers describe the
display of treasures as the most beautiful and impressive ever
gathered in one place. It lasted through various French
governments—the Directory, the Consulate, and the Empire.
Napoléon, in his zeal to preserve the glory of France, showered
gifts and privileges on it. Perhaps that is the real reason for the
present name of the street. But Louis XVIII made the regrettable
decision (for Paris anyway) to close the museum and disperse
its contents. He allowed each locality to reclaim its old art trea-
sures. The monastery here was then turned into the Ecole des
Beaux-Arts, familiarly called just Beaux-Arts.
     Enter the courtyard, if you can. On the right, high in a
niche, should be a statue of Alexandre Lenoir. He was missing
on our last visit, but we hope he was gone only for cleaning and
restoration. The classified and odd remains of doors and pieces
of sculpture that decorate the courtyard have been taken from
chateaux. The classical wing at the back, just cleaned, was put
up in 1858 and was the original building of the school. Go
through the main door to see the neoclassical frescoes, the lec-
ture rooms, and the students’ work in progress.
     When you are back in the courtyard, facing the street, enter
the middle of the wing to your left and go into the delightful
Cour du Marier (court of the mulberry tree), which was a clois-
ter of the convent. The pedestals in each cloister bay are capped
by pieces of Roman sculpture (mostly legless and armless)
made by students who won the Grand Prix de Rome. This cov-
eted prize allowed the winner to go to Rome to study the an-
tique and Renaissance masters in the Villa Medici. The prize is
still being given today.
     The students at Beaux-Arts were among the most disruptive
in the student revolt of 1968; they destroyed and damaged a
good deal of the school. At that time, the school granted all
sorts of student demands, including one to separate the facul-
ties for painting, architecture, sculpture, and so on, in order to
improve the level of teaching, which the students felt was too
general. The administration, cleverly, has continued this divi-
sion to such a degree that it has weakened the communal


                                                               105
Pariswalks

power of the students. Classes are held all over Paris, painters
never see sculptors, and even the famous costume ball of the
Beaux-Arts has not been held since the uprising.
    Once, when we were sitting on a stone ledge in the big
courtyard on the quai Malaquais, wondering where the spirit of
art students had gone, we were suddenly doused with cold wa-
ter from a balcony above. Amid gales of laughter, we were told
how lucky we were it hadn’t been ink or paint.
    Return to the rue Bonaparte, to no. 20. This building is one
that marks this area as Henri IV’s. Of all his women, Gabrielle
d’Estrées was the one he loved the most. In the back of this
courtyard is a house in which their son, César de Vendéme,
once abbot of Saint-Germain, lived. He was born illegitimate in
1594, recognized the following year, and would have been king
had Louis XIII not been born.
    If it is unlocked, go into the courtyard of no. 28 to look at
the elegant open staircase with its fountain and thick, flowering
vines.
     This next section of rue Bonaparte (between rue Jacob and
rue de l’Abbaye) seems to belong to Nobilis, an important inte-
rior decorating firm. They occupy nos. 29, 31, 38, and 40. At no.
29 they sell finished goods made from their own fabrics, includ-
ing very nice traveling bags and lap rugs. Very chic and expensive.
     At no. 25, Simrane sells high-quality, very attractive cotton
cloths, napkins, and place mats made in India but in French
style. Note the rare books at no. 27.
     The H6tel Saint-Germain-des-Prés, at no. 36, has one of
the most charming lobbies in Paris. The back wall is a sheet of
glass sandwiching a beautiful display of flowers growing in a
hothouse against the stone wall of the building. The building is
eighteenth-century, and although the décor reflects this, every
room provides all the modern amenities at reasonable prices.
August Comte lived here between 1818 and 1822.
     Fabrice (one of a chain), at no. 33, specializes in jewelry
and accessories that are always unique and avant-garde.
     To the right is the small rue Guillaume Apollinaire, named
for the artist whose statue sits across the street, in the garden of
the church. The restaurant Le Bonaparte is a pleasant spot
when the cars are not too close.

106
                                        Saint-Germain-des-Prés

    At the end of the street is the famous restaurant Le Petit
Zinc, which has moved here from the Buci market. The interior
is an authentic Art Nouveau setting. The decorations were
brought here from other buildings, but the tiles, wrought-iron
railings, bar, and furniture seem to have been made for the
room. Moderately priced.
     Continue on the rue Bonaparte, on the opposite side of the
street from the church of Saint-Germain, to the very proper and
dignified Arthus Bertrand, which is now cut to one-half its size
by the coming of Louis Vuitton, the very expensive leather-
goods store enthusiastically patronized by Japanese tourists.
    Enter Arthus Bertrand, a one-hundred-and-fifty-year-old
firm that specializes in museum reproductions of jewelry and
honorary medals. (They reproduce the Louvre’s artifacts, but in
sterling silver or eighteen-carat gold.) This is a serious shop: the
merchandise is exhibited in cases, and you must sit at the table
and have trays brought to you for inspection as the salesewoman
consults a separate price list. The shop engages one hundred
and eighty employees to make their jewelry. Arthus Bertrand is
especially famous for military medals and decorations. They
supply 80 percent of the medals awarded in African nations and
the individually designed academician’s swords for the Institut
de France. The latter range in price from $10,000 to $20,000.
Claire Chretien told us how much she personally enjoys de-
signing the swords for the academicians.
    Notice the Wallace fountain in front of no. 24 (see Walk 1).
    You now come to a wide pavement once used in the sum-
mer months for late-night plays, pantomimes, and acts by
sword-swallowers, fire-eaters, and chain-breakers. A stage was
set up here, and crowds gathered to watch, as in medieval
times. The hat was passed for contributions. As another part of
the “refinement” of the area, Les Deux Magots has extended
the restaurant into this spot, behind a row of hedges. The
square is now quiet in the evening.
    Take a table at the famous café Les Deux Magots, or its ri-
val, the Café de Flore. You are now in the heart of what was,
and to some extent still is, the artistic and literary center of
Paris. Before the First World War, Picasso and Apollinaire were
already installed at the Flore, in the back, although they were

                                                                107
Anytime at Les Deux Magots
                                         Saint-Germain-des-Prés

also habitués of the even more popular cafés of Montparnasse:
the Dome, the Rotonde, and the Closerie des Lilas. How many
cafés can one frequent?
    The “lost generation” of expatriates after the First World
War, some of whom drank themselves into oblivion, frequented
both Saint-Germain and Montparnasse. One distinction be-
tween the two areas seems to have been that writers favored
Saint-Germain-des-Prés; artists, Montparnasse. Reread Heming-
way’s A Moveable Feast and The Sun Also Rises for the feel of
those days gone by.
    Les Deux Magots was the birthplace of surrealism, the Café
de Flore the home of the existentialists. Simone de Beauvoir
and Jean-Paul Sartre had their regular table at the latter, drawing
young intellectuals like a magnet. Albert Camus came, but not
often, because Sartre was supposedly jealous of Camus; at any
rate the two did not get on.
    Today café life is still fascinating. The talk is at once familiar
and tantalizing. It is about ex-husbands and weekend houses or
business deals conceming art, films, and books. Most of the
publishing houses have offices in this quarter, and a constant
stream of intellectuals will be around for lunch or a drink.
Tourists come to look at everyone else; the French come to be
looked at. It is still true that many of these people know one an-
other, and the neighborhood keeps the character of a small
town.
    These cafés got their odd names the same way so many
other places and streets in Paris did. A small statue of Flora
(goddess of flowers and mother of spring) used to stand at the
door of the Café de Flore. Visit the interesting room on the sec-
ond floor of the Flore decorated, as the French say, “in the En-
glish style.”
     Les Deux Magots was the name of a novelty shop that
planned to move to this spot from the rue de Buci in 1873, but
before that could happen, a bar opened, used their name, and
has been here ever since. The deux magots are the two wooden
statues inside the café on the central pillar, of Chinese digni-
taries (most often portrayed in porcelain), which were to be the
standard of the novelty shop.
    In 1984 the Deux Magots was sold at auction. M. Mathivat,

                                                                  109
Pariswalks

who has operated the café for decades and is still there, bought
it. “I bought it for sentimental reasons,” he said. “Don't worry.
It will always remain what it has been. I don’t want to start a
fast-food joint.” The auction was carried out in the Chambre
des Notaires tradition. After the bidding was finished, the auc-
tioneer lit two candles. As they burned, those with a possible
change of heart had the opportunity to come in with a higher
bid. Under the law M. Mathivat was not the true owner until
ten days later. A bid of 10 percent more than his could still have
been accepted.
     Before his death, our late friend Georges Perec (author of La
Vie: mode d’emploi) had ceased to come to Saint-Germain, as
have others like him. But the small cafés off the beaten path are
still frequented. Cafés play an important role in people’s lives,
so they are often the subject of literature. They are also the
places where literature is made.
      Behind the Flore, on rue Saint-Benoit, are several restau-
rants that have outside tables in the warm weather. No. 26,
Boutique du Café Flore, offers fun houseware souvenirs im-
printed with the Flore logo.
    Le Drugstore, which was across the street from the Flore
and the Deux Magots at 149 boulevard Saint-Germain, was
an American institution that famously became popular
overnight. The French loved the hamburgers, which they ate
with a knife and fork, and they hung out there until closing
time, at two in the morning. Armani has now moved in.
    In an effort to placate the SOS movement and to keep the
genius of the area, Armani has paid for the new windows in the
church of Saint-Germain-des-Prés. Their clothes prices are still
prohibitive, but their café fits into the general ambience of the
neighborhood.
    Across the boulevard Saint-Germain visit Arts et Bijoux,
no. 147, an old-timer in the neighborhood. In addition to ele-
gant estate jewelry, there are sculptures of rabbits, cats, and
other animals by Marc Poncini, a well-known animalier and the
son of the owners. These are objects you want to take home
with you.
    There are two famous restaurants nearby. Brasserie Lipp, at
no. 151 boulevard Saint-Germain, is a restaurant that has done

110
                                       Saint-Germain-des-Prés

what we would have considered the impossible. The French, as
you know, consider themselves the arbiters of fine taste, and
the cuisine they would be least expected to copy would be
German. The namesake of the restaurant, Lippmann, was an
Alsatian who was desperately unhappy about the separation of
his homeland from France. Alsatian food and drink are, how-
ever, typically German—frankfurters and sauerkraut, along with
light and dark beer. The amazing fact is that this dish caught on;
it appears today on almost every Parisian menu. Choucroute al-
sacienne is sold fresh in every charcuterie, in cans in every gro-
cery, and it is now the raison d’étre of countless restaurants in
Paris, including Bofinger, described in Walk 6.
    In the early 1900s, Lipp was the after-theater place to dine,
as the Plaza Athenée was fifty years later. The lovely ladies
shown in engravings, picking up their long dresses as they step
from horse-drawn hacks, were no doubt going to dine at Lipp.
By 1924 the area had become so much the quarter of editors
(two steps to Grasset, four to Gallimard, and six to Hachette)
and their prize-winning writers that Lipp was forced to enlarge,
not like the Deux Magots—which could extend its stomach
onto the pavement—but by tuming and twisting into the re-
cesses behind the restaurant. In the 1960s, Lipp was the eating
place for politicians as well as writers. Francois Mitterrand, then
president of France, used to dine here.
    Vagenende, no. 142, is a joy to behold. Here is 1900 in all
its fantasy and variety. You will see many a floral door on the
boulevard Saint-Germain, but they are a product of the 1970s.
This restaurant and the even more fantastic restaurant of the
Gare de Lyon (which was shown in the films Travels with My
Aunt and Murder on the Orient Express) are the real thing, built
when Art Nouveau was at its height.
    Although you have walked and talked and looked for a good
two hours, these few streets are only a sample of what the
neighborhood has to offer. If you have more energy and a need
to shop, wend your way through the streets on the south side of
boulevard Saint-Germain, in a triangle between the place Saint-
Sulpice and the Bon Marché department store, on the rue de
Sévres—youll find plenty to delight you.
