Walk 5: Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

Rue des Francs-
         Bourgeois


Now the backbone of the Marais, it prides it-
self on the sumptuous homes endowed by
prestigious institutions.
            —Jacques Chirac, in his dedication to
                      the rue des Francs-Bourgeois
PLACE   DES
 VOSGES       |
Starting Point: No. 5 rue des Francs-Bourgeois, 3rd and 4th
    arrondissements
Métro: Saint-Paul
Bus: 29



The rue des Francs-Bourgeois with its sumptuous homes that
Chirac is praising today stand on a street named for its poverty.
In the fourteenth century an almshouse was built here. The
poor, too destitute to pay taxes, were called “free citizens,”
hence, francs-bourgeois.
     The rue des Francs-Bourgeois marks the different periods in
the city’s long history. Now a central Paris street, it once stood
just outside the limits of the city, against Philippe Auguste’s
huge and heavy walls that encircled Paris. The street entered the
city limits under the later and wider wall Charles V built around
Paris in the fourteenth century.
     In the renaissance of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies, the aristocracy installed itself along the length of this
east-west axis, parallel to the Seine, between the place Royale,
Pariswalks

now the place des Vosges (see Walk 4), and the Palais de
Soubise, at the end of the street.
     This new heart of the city drew the great lords and powerful fi-
nanciers to what had been free swampy lands. The neatly bound
parcels suited the time’s architectural fashion of placing the hétel
behind grand double coach doors (porte cochéres) and between the
courtyard and the garden. Chic houses in Paris are identified as en-
tre cours et jardins (between the courtyard and the garden). This
arrangement allowed for a grand, easy entrance for the horse and
carriage, view of the house, and privacy in the garden behind.
     The rich competed in luxury and creativity in the construc-
tion of these great houses. Among the products of the pomp
and circumstance of the society that flourished between the
fourteenth and seventeenth centuries, you will see the sumptu-
ous hétels of Soubise, Carnavalet, Lamoignon, Albret, and oth-
ers. Many are now important museums. Similar residences, less
well known, have now recently come into their own, thanks to
intelligent restoration.
      The street was first called the rue des Poulies, named after a
pulley, or wheel, on a loom—for the street was a street of
weavers. A generation ago it was still a street of fabrics.
    When we first researched this walk, the street had potential
but was still dark and, for the most part, seemed uninteresting.
Today it is historically restored and booming. The very narrow
sidewalks are crowded with shoppers and museum-goers, still
mostly French. We are going to give you a description of the
great houses and museums, and a limited rundown of the shops
because there are so many and they change so often. You will be
going back and forth across the street. Be careful crossing.
      This shopping street is jam-packed on Sundays. It claimed
the right to keep open on Sundays because the rue des Rosiers
is open on Sundays, but closed on Saturdays, the Jewish Sab-
bath. The argument was that if Rosiers could be open Sundays,
why not Francs-Bourgeois? Legally, a store can be open on Sun-
days if the owner is working but not the employees. This ruling
was hardly taken seriously, and eventually the shop owners re-
ceived legal permission to be open. Because much of Paris is
still closed on Sundays, this neighborhood is teeming.


R54
                                      Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

    In the last edition of this book, the trend was American
Western, followed by shoe stores, which are now losing ground
to ready-to-wear. Who knows what the trend will be when you
walk here today? Styles change often in Paris, though there are a
few old standbys.
     Hier et Demain, at no. 4, has been here for twenty-four
years, specializing in thirties Art Deco furniture, objects, and
materials, and recently in American jewelry from the fifties,
Bakelite, and renovated chandeliers. A find for a collector. It is
considered the dinosaur of this ever-changing street. Opens at
1 pM., Tuesdays through Fridays.
    Et Vous, next door, sells elegant and expensive dresses and
suits.
    No. 5, Bijoux a Monic, the other oldie on the street, is an
Ali Baba’s cave of costume jewelry. They have drawers and
drawers of it. If you lose an earring, you can always get a re-
placement. They say Americans particularly buy the garnet jew-
elry from Czechoslovakia.
    No. 7 is an interesting French restaurant, Un Piano sur le
Trottoir (a piano on the sidewalk). The name has a double
meaning: the word piano is slang for the stove in a restaurant.
Piano music, vocal performances, and group singing are offered
every Thursday through Sunday night. Check the hours.
    Origins, also at no. 7, allows you to buy the American
brand of cosmetics at twice the price. LObjet, at no. 9, sells
bibelots and estate jewelry.
    Enter the ivy-covered courtyard of no. 8 to visit two won-
derful shops that share a single space. The right side, which
houses Imex, was originally the factory for the coats and jackets
they specialize in. The left side of the store is LEntrée des
Fournisseurs,   an exquisite ribbon     and button,   tassels and
thread store—now a rarity in Paris. On the street, the final store
in this building, Autour du Monde, sells home furnishings.
One of the few remaining American-style stores, it gives off an
overwhelming odor of potpourri.
    Enter the courtyard of no. 13, 2 Mille et 1 Nuits, to finda
collection of decorating exotica. The place glitters.
    Archetype, at no. 17, specializes in architectural drawings.


                                                               ilps,
Pariswalks

Across the street, Anne Fontaine’s collection of white blouses,
at no. 12, is part of the white blouse craze that has hit Paris.
Also at no. 12, look at Cécile et Jeanne’s creative jewelry. The
work has been chosen by the National Museum stores for sale
at museums and the Opéra.
      La Charrue et les Etoiles, at no. 19, is full of miniature fig-
ures, especially animals and Viennese bronzes. Bring home a
souvenir, perhaps one of the small diorama scenes of Paris peo-
pled with lead figures.
     Up at the comer is the French version of Banana Republic,
called Autour du Monde.



                       Rue de Sévigné

And now we come to one of the great houses of Paris, the
Musée Carnavalet. Turn right onto the rue de Sévigné. The en-
trance is on the left, at 23-rue de Sévigné.
    As a result of the elaborate celebrations of the bicentennial
of the Revolution, in 1989, the museum was changed from a
storehouse for the cognoscenti to an educational institution
for the general public. Twenty million dollars were spent on
this successful renovation, much of it from American philan-
thropy.
     Mme de Sévigné lived here for twenty years, at the end of
the seventeenth century. She is most famous for the letters she
wrote to her beloved daughter, who had married and moved to
Provence. The letters preserve a way of life full of gossip and
stories. Mme de Sévigné’s life was the epitome of luxury. It is
said that for one of her parties, doors had to be knocked down
to allow her servants to carry pyramids of food twenty platters
high into her dining room. Guests had to pass notes to one an-
other because they couldn’t see around the food.
     In the courtyard, look at the bas-reliefs of the four seasons.
Compare the central sculpture, Winter, by Jean Goujon in
1550, with Diane on the right, sculpted by Van Obstal one hun-
dred years later. Compare them to similar sculptures in the
courtyard of the Hétel de Sully (Walk 6). Note the devilish mas-
carons (mask decorations) above the side windows. The statue

156
                                      Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

of Louis XIV was sculpted by Antoine Coysevox, who created
the magnificent horses at the place de la Concorde (Walk 7). In
time-honored and foolish custom, Louis chose Roman garb and
then crowned it with his curly French wig.
    Enter the museum through the bookstore. The first room
holds a collection of amusing and historical rebus and shop
signs. When your customer can’t read, you have to show what
you're selling. One of the rebuses for an exterminator shows
three rats, which is the symbol for the phrase mort aux rats
(death to rats). Talks about these rebuses are given for chil-
dren.
    The exhibition continues throughout the museum, show-
ing interesting aspects of French daily life. Enter first the origi-
nal building of the museum, Mme de Sévigné’s immense and
beloved home. The collection exhibits prehistoric, Merovin-
gian, Carolingian, and medieval pieces that have been in storage
for years, as well as the entire collection from the years preced-
ing the Revolution.
    The museum doubled in size by incorporating the hétel be-
hind it, Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau. Le Peletier houses the his-
tory of Paris from the Revolution to the twentieth century.
      To enter these rooms, dedicated to the Revolution and the
Belle Epoque, take the staircase in front of you and follow the
long hallway to Le Peletier.
      The Revolution is displayed in eleven rooms decorated in
the style of the day. The exhibits combine paintings and docu-
ments with politically relevant porcelain, a model guillotine,
and even a model of the Bastille made from the stones of the
original.
     After the passion and seriousness of the Revolution and the
Paris Commune, the Belle Epoque period is like a glass of cham-
pagne. With as much of the original furnishings as possible, the
Camavalet has reproduced several rooms from that period.
      Proust’s cork-lined bedroom, very dreary (unlike his social
life), is here, as well as a private dining room from the Café de
Paris, decorated in mauve with Art Nouveau furniture by the
master Louis Majorelle. The jewels that adorned the grandes
horizontales, as the demi-mondaines of that time were called (see
Maxim’s in Walk 7), were purchased by their wealthy, ardent

                                                                Ovi
Pariswalks

admirers at the famous jewelry store Fouquet, in all its
Alphonse Mucha, Art Nouveau glory.
     The final room from the twentieth century was a great
discovery to us. We entered and immediately realized we had
been in this room before. We were in M. and Mme Maurice de
Wendel’s Art Deco salon, with its sumptuous and theatrical
decor. It was originally in their splendid hétel on the quai de
New York. The designer was José Maria Sert, the preeminent in-
terior decorator of the period, who completed the salon in
1924. Panels of metal (the Wendel fortune came from iron and
steel) painted in crimson and white gold depict the Queen of
Sheba’s journey across the desert to visit King Solomon. The
queen is accompanied by an enormous          retinue. Her accou-
trements include fireworks, a menagerie, and even palm trees to
be planted every evening to provide her with an oasis wherever
she might be.
    Open 10-6 daily, except Mondays. Entry is free for the per-
manent exhibitions so you have no excuse for not visiting this
fascinating museum.    Free entry attracted 600,000 visitors in
2003, however, a lack of funding means         that there are not
enough guards to keep all the sections of the museum open at
all times.
     Continue down the rue de Sévigné. You may see a group of
high school students fill the street from the Lycée Charlemagne.
Push through the crowd of students all dressed in black and
smoking, or cross the street.
      The owner of the funny American-style store Lyons Co., at
no. 38, scours the United States for collectibles from the fifties,
sixties, and seventies. You can be sure the cookie jar or poster
you buy is not a reproduction.
     Note the open courtyards of nos. 46 and 52. The mother-
and-children fountain sculpture at no. 48 was part of a larger
display with water coming from a fountain flanked by two
poplars.
     The street ahead is Parc-Royal, a street of elegant houses and
courtyards. No. 4, in front of you, dates from 1620 and flaunts
the famous fake pink brick of the place des Vosges (Walk 4).
     Take a seat in one of the loveliest small parks, the square
Léopold Achille, and watch society in action on weekends or

158
                                               Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

after school. Here you'll find a mix of Parisian-dressed kids and
their chic parents with families from all over the world. The
young boys play at kung fu, turning and kicking and yelling,
while the girls go up and down the slides. Nothing new. Seen
scrawled on the slide: MORT AUX BOURGEOIS and UNE SEULE
SOLUTION—LA REVOLUTION. Nothing new.




 Bust of the Patron of Commerce in the square Léopold Achille, taken from the old city
 hall

                                                                                 159
Pariswalks

      A little farther down, adults sit and sun themselves and read
facing a statue of a woman standing among greenery. The statue
was originally at the Hétel de Ville, Paris’s city hall, which was
burned to the ground in 1870, during the Commune.
     Look out through the park’s gate at the rue du Parc-Royal.
No. 8 (the German Historical Institute) also imitates red brick.
Nos. 10 and 12 house an inventory and archives of historic
Paris. In 1960, no. 10, the Hétel de Vigny, was saved from de-
struction by sheer luck. An old gentleman who lived there told
his guest, who was an engineer, that his father had said there
were painted rafters hidden under the plaster. The following
weekend, the engineer returned and uncovered the décor we
admire today Gf you can get in). Not only did the old gentle-
man alert André Malraux, then minister of culture, to this find,
but he, a puppeteer, put on marionette shows in the courtyard
to gather support to save the building. The hétel was saved, and
this inspired Malraux to create the Association pour la Sauve-
garde et la Mise en Valeur du Paris Historique (the organization
to protect and value historic Paris; see Walk 6), one of seventy-
seven restoration organizations now active in France. Malraux is
also responsible for the crucial decision to have every Paris
building cleaned every eleven years. That is how Paris became,
once again, the city of light.
   ~ Leave the park at the far end and turn up the rue Payenne
to the square Georges-Cain, where it is more shady and quiet.
There is a circular parterre of grass, also with a statue of a
woman. The graceful seventeenth-century figure, Flore et Son
Char, by Maillol, poses in the center, holding a scarf.
     The wall in the rear is the back of the Hotel Le Peletier.
     The building between the parks was the original orangerie
(greenhouse for raising oranges) of the Musée Carnavalet and is
now the stone museum of the City of Paris. Notice the collec-
tion of impressive remains of sculpture on the side wall oppo-
site and the rocks on the ground near the gate. The tree with
the biggest leaves, a fig tree, stands in the northeast corner.
      Enter the courtyard of the Swedish Cultural Center, no. 11,
in the perfectly restored Hétel de Marle, across the street on
the rue Payenne. Free exhibits and an interesting gift shop.
Open Tuesdays through Fridays, 10-1 and 2-5.

160
                                      Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

    Tum left onto the rue du Parc-Royal and walk to the place
de Thorigny, on your right. There is a friendly circle of benches
here, in front of a café.
    To your left, find the small, splendid seventeenth-century
home of Libéral Bruant. It was until recently a superb museum
of the most intricate and fascinating keys and locks. The collec-
tion belongs to a private person and at the moment is not being
shown.
     The fagade of the building is classical. Note the four circular
bays with Roman personages between them, and the triangular
pediment with two fat-winged angels surrounded by horns of
plenty. The wall to the left is fake, built for symmetry. This is a
common practice. Look for this technique as you visit other
hétels.
     Directly across the street, the rue de Thorigny leads to the
Musée National Picasso, which was the Hétel Aubert de
Fontenay. Pierre Aubert de Fontenay built this grand house in
 1656. He was collector of the tax on salt, a tax mightily re-
sented by the populace, who derisively called his hétel the Hétel
Salé (salt house). Fontenay’s joy in the mansion, however, was
short-lived. He was allied with the disgraced Fouquet of Vaux-
le-Vicomte, and both were relieved of their property and their
freedom by Louis XIV. (Visit Vaux-le-Vicomte, a perfect day trip
just outside of Paris, for the whole story.)
     Two monumental sphinxes flank the entry of this pleasing
semicircular courtyard. Note the two pediments, one heavily
sculpted with allegorical figures, under the mansard roof. The
house has gone through many changes and uses. As a result,
none of the original interior remains except for the main stair-
case, with its sculpture of Roman emperors and its intricate
wrought-iron banister. With its bare elegance, the seventeenth-
century wrought-iron chandelier could have been designed to-
day. Take in the whole splendid scene. Note the modern
touches of open spaces in the walls to allow visitors to peer into
different parts of the museum. The house has now been com-
pletely renovated. There is a small room of photos that show
what the hétel was like before restoration.
    The museum houses a collection of works given by Pi-
casso’s heirs as a means of paying off their inheritance taxes.

                                                                161
Pariswalks

Also in the museum are more than two hundred paintings,
sculptures, collages, and Picasso’s own collection of Braque,
Rousseau, Mir6é, and Renoir. The works are displayed chrono-
logically, beginning with the Blue and Rose Periods, followed by
cubism, a classical period, an eclectic period, much sculpture,
and some ceramics. The collection completes a circle with a
self-portrait done in 1901 and another painted in 1971. Closed
Tuesdays; open 9:30-5:30 from October through March, and
9:30-6 from April through September; €5.50; free on Sundays.
     Return to the place de Thorigny and walk down the rue
Elzévir on the way back to Franc-Bourgeois. On the left, at no.
10, find the peaceful back garden of the Hétel de Marle, on the
rue Payenne. This is a favorite spot for fashion photos and tele-
vision scenes. The trees are often festooned.
    Eighteenth-century decorative art is the mark of the Musée
Cognacq-Jay, at no. 8. Cognacq and Jay, serious collectors,
made their fortune as founders of the department store La
Samaritaine. Here are works by Boucher, Chardin, and Frago-
nard; pastels by de la Tour; and porcelain of Saxe. Cognacq-
Jay was visited mainly by cognoscenti of the eighteenth
century. Today it is bustling with elementary school children
who come to hear some of their favorite fairy tales—“Beauty
and the Beast” and “The Bluebird,” by Mme Delaunay and
Mme de Beaumont. The storyteller enriches the imagination of
the children and leads them to discover and relate to the mu-
seum’s artworks. They observe the daily life of the eighteenth-
century child, the games, the clothes, the activities. Drawing
classes imitate the art of the century. The museum has become
the place to go for families. Open Tuesdays through Sundays,
10-5740.
    The Compagnie du Sénégal Afrique de l'Ouest, at no. 3,
represents artisan and artistic work from Senegal. They offer a
variety of objects and materials. An artist in residence often
gives courses to children. Look across the street at no. 4,
Lutherie Ancienne—Moderne, to see craftsmen at work mak-
ing and repairing violins.
    Continue down the street, to Franc-Bourgeois. Camille, on
the comer, is a busy and happy neighborhood café that serves
typical French food.

162
                                     Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

    Look to the right, across the street, at no. 35-37, the Mai-
son de l'Europe, now a center for international meetings. This
was the Hétel de Coulanges, built in the mid-seventeenth cen-
tury. It was nearly torn down in the 1960s, but a media cam-
paign saved it. Enter the courtyard to see the arcaded facade,
the mascarons—each one different—and the wrought-iron stair-
case on the right.
     Directly across the street is the Hétel de Sandreville, at no.
26. It has a seventeenth-century Louis XVI facade with wide
fluted Doric pillars and a frieze of garlands. The heavily sculpted
door is in disrepair. A wrought-iron key plate has been stolen
from this door, but the courtyard has recently been magnifi-
cently restored. The white stone walls now gleam.
     Two doors to the left is no. 30, the Hétel d’Alméras.
Pierre Alméras was a counselor and secretary to Henri IV. For
his hétel he copied the brick-and-stone combination of the
place des Vosges. Push the door button and stand at the grille
to see a beautiful courtyard, recently restored. The stones
glow. Henry IV’s bust looks down from the third story, and if
the light is right, you will see the beams in the ceilings of the
apartments. The superb door and pediment are characteristic
of the seventeenth century. The pediment is decorated with
garlands of flowers. Two rams’ heads rest on wide pillars flank-
ing the door. Another missing key plate. Happens often. If the
door isn’t open, look through the windows of the gallery to
your right.
    Turn back to Camille and walk right, to no. 31, the Hotel
d’Albret, which has recently been restored by the city as offices
for the organization, the Center for Cultural Affairs of the City
of Paris. Originally built at the end of the fifteenth century for
the connétable (supreme commander of the royal army) de
Montmorency, it has been reworked repeatedly over the cen-
turies. Today it is a striking combination of preservation of the
past and twentieth-century design. Examine the facade, with its
open-mouthed lions on top of pillars and a man wearing a lion
cap. Enter the courtyard. On the right side were the stables; to-
day there is a Louis XIII staircase that ends in stone on the top
floor. The cellars have been restored for receptions. The left
wing is called “the boat” because of the freestanding staircase

                                                              163
                                                   Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

that looks-as if it came from an ocean liner. Space was lost in
this wing because the building started tipping and needed sup-
port when a staircase was removed from the entry.
     No. 29 bis still has industries in the courtyard.
     The Paris Musée, at no. 29, reproduces objects from the
national museums. Jean Chatel sells good men’s clothes in an
Art Nouveau setting, the historical remains of a bakery. Note
the walls and the ceilings.
     At no. 20 is La Chaise Longue, selling reproductions of
kitchen things used in the 1930s through the 1950s. Find more
Art Nouveau panels on what was once a bakery, on the comer of
rue Pavée. Bakers and fishmongers were famous for Art Nouveau
ceilings and walls. They saw its beauty in its time. These painted
tiles are always classified as historical decorations.
     The Hétel de Lamoignon is on the comer of the rue Pavée,
one of the first paved streets of Paris. Before reaching the corner,
look at the lovely garden that is part of the Hétel de Lamoignon.
The hétel was originally built in 1555 by Robert de Beauvais,
counselor to the king and comprtroller-general of the city of Paris.
He died in 1568, and the property was purchased by Diane de
France, Duchesse d’Angouléme. She was the natural daughter of
Henri II. It seems her mother, who was Italian, had refused the
king’s advances. Not deterred, he had her house bummed down
in order to kidnap her. Diane was legitimized and became one of
the important women of her time, “wise in counsel, beautiful,
and the finest woman on horseback.”
    Notice the square-windowed turret at the corner. A few
other such turrets can still be found, one at the Hétel de Sens
(Walk 6). They are the last survivors of what was once a popu-
lar design that allowed householders to see what was happen-
ing in every direction. The initials S. C. carved into the stone on
the base of the turret supports mark the limits of the property
owned by the Culture of Saint Catherine, then the largest reli-
gious settlement on the Right Bank.
    In the circular pediment of the entrance wall are statues of
two children. One, Truth, holds a mirror; the other, Prudence, a


Entrance to the Hotel d’Albret, now the
Center for Cultural Affairs of the City of Paris

                                                                         165
Pariswalks

serpent. Today, the hétel has been completely restored and en-
larged. The right wing, built as recently as 1968, and in perfect
harmony with the original section, houses the library of the City
of Paris. Go into the courtyard, turn right, and go up a few steps
and then left into the reading room. Sit down, rest, and admire
this beautiful room—its proportions, windows, and view, and
the painted beams, with Diane in the middle of a back beam.
There is always an interesting exhibition here. When you have
finished browsing, take a look at the mausoleum in the court-
yard to your left.
      Continue down the rue Pavée, to the bookstore of the li-
brary. It displays historical exhibitions and carries a fine selec-
tion of books on Paris and its history.
    At 7 bis rue Pavée, find a curious bookstore, a long alley
that was once a hostelry. Toward the back, the original large
paving stones have not been covered over. This is the most
eclectic bookstore you can find. Worth a browse.
      At the corner of the rue des Rosiers, at no. 3, turn left to
the tea shop called Le Loir dans la Théiére (the dormouse in
the teapot). The first owner named it, and the mural to the right
is the French version of Alice and her friends. This is a popular
place for tea and cake or Sunday brunch in tatty armchairs.
     Return to Pavée and turn left to no. 10. This is the syna-
gogue built in 1913 by the famous Art Nouveau architect of the
métro, Hector Guimard. The building is concave, which makes
it look taller. The design recalls the shape of the tablets of the
Ten Commandments.
     Return to the rue des Rosiers and turn left.
     The rue des Rosiers was the historic home and first stop for
Jewish immigrants and refugees. When Philippe Auguste
banned Jews in the thirteenth century, they left the area around
Notre-Dame and planted themselves just outside the city walls,
on the rue des Rosiers. The area was covered with wild roses,
giving the street its name.
    The neighborhood continued to play the same role for
French Jews as the Lower East Side once did for Jews in New
York. When they were forced to leave Easter Europe because
of pogroms at the end of the nineteenth century, the Ashke-


166
                                     Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

nazic Jews came here. When Jews fled the Nazis, they again
came here. This is also the street the Nazis and the Vichy
French invaded and from which they dragged seventy-five thou-
sand Jews away to concentration camps, to Drancy and, worse,
to Auschwitz. A later wave of immigrants, Sephardic Jews this
time, arrived as a result of the French exodus from Algeria. You
will see signs of this history as you walk the streets.
     The neighborhood presently suffers additional stress be-
cause of the frequently ignored anti-Semitic acts and violence
by Muslims against Jews in France. In light of recent anti-
Semitic events, increasing numbers     of French Jews are immi-
grating to Israel. They still remember what happened in the
1940s.
    In addition, there is a constant drama here that unfolds be-
tween the cars that cram and jam and inch forward through a
flood of pedestrians who pointedly ignore the automobiles.
There is also a fierce battle between the City of Paris and the
storekeepers. The city wants to widen the street. The Jewish
storekeepers say it will take at least a year, and that people will
change their shopping habits and never return.
   As it is, the Jewish aspect of the street is threatened by the
influx of high fashion. The coming of high fashion on the rue
des Rosiers was a kind of public announcement that the Marais
and its beautifully renovated buildings had arrived. Twenty
years ago, the real estate here was some of the least valuable in
Paris. Today, it is some of the most valuable.
     Across the street, at no. 4, there was a hammam (Turkish
bath). The most chic, slimmest ladies came from all over Paris
to keep fit and beautiful, the better to buy the clothes sold
across the street. The bath was first bought by the owners of the
Chevignon stores, who dismantled the exquisite tiled walls and
pool. The entire neighborhood moumed the loss of this estab-
lishment. Since then three failed stores have opened here; the
latest attempt is a furniture store.
     Note the plaque on the wall: IN MEMORY OF PERSONNEL AND
THE STUDENTS OF THIS SCHOOL WHO WERE ARRESTED IN ’43 AND 44
BY THE POLICE OF VICHY AND THE GESTAPO AND DEPORTED AND EX-
TERMINATED IN AUSCHWITZ BECAUSE THEY WERE JEWS.
Pariswalks

    The owner of a tiny kosher grocery a few doors down was
not willing to sell out to fashion when we spoke to him years
ago. Today, he’s ready.
      LEclaireur, at no. 3 ter, is one of the high-fashion stores
that sell ultramodern clothes and objets.
    The corner of rue des Rosiers and rue Ferdinand-Duval,
the center of the Jewish quarter, is marked by the restaurant
Goldenberg, which serves all the typical Eastern European
Jewish dishes. This was the scene of a terrorist attack by Pales-
tinian sympathizers in which four people, including the Arab
cook, were killed in the summer of 1982. A sign on your left
as you enter reads in part: ON NE CEDE PAS AU TERRORISME (We
don’t give in to terrorism). The food at the take-out counter
will give you an idea of the quality and variety of Polish Jewish
food. Try the blintzes and a cup of tea for a light bite if it’s
lunchtime.
     This corner is a meeting place of the neighborhood. Sun-
days, when everyone is out socializing, there is no walking up
and down the street, as in a passeo (pedestrian walkway). People
just stand and talk. Pity the poor unknowing soul who starts
down this street in a car. To add to the confusion, the street is
lined with barricades to ward off terrorists. These barricades ex-
ist all over Paris, wherever there is a school or a possible site for
a terrorist attack. This much of the ghetto is here to stay.
     From Goldenberg’s on down, the street is still Jewish. It is
dotted with butchers and bakers and Sephardic fast-food
schwarma and falafel places—especially LAs du Fellafel, gener-
ally considered the best source for an inexpensive meal in Paris.
     At no. 26, Bibliophane carries a large and wide selection of
Judaica.
      Two Finkelsztajn shops, the bakery in particular, are worth a
visit. Finkelsztajn, at no. 27, sells only dairy food, the finest
breads, cakes, and appetizers. The delicious dark rye bread slices
easily and stays fresh indefinitely; not so with a baguette. The
specialty of the house is a unique eggplant dip that is smooth
and silky, topped with sesame seeds. High quality but very high
prices. Try something anyway. The other shop is at no. 19.
      Korcarz, up the street at no. 29, is an excellent kosher bak-



168
                                                  Rue des Francs-Bourgeois




                                                                                   :|
                                                                              — cesta
                                                  egrclalizgs       lee cee
                                                                       saul   sail
                                                    SALEES
                                                     farama

                                              _— gehakte leber
                                              |   gannardabergine




Excellent traditional Jewish food at no. 27 rue des Rosiers



ery and restaurant. Stop in for a meal or for tea and cake. The
busy bakery offers a rich selection of cakes and breads and
bagels. Return and turn to the right, up the rue des Hospital-
iers, to the school on the right. This spot holds many stories.
Originally a meat market stood here—hence the heads of bulls
on the walls (originally the decorations on two fountains, no


                                                                                169
Pariswalks                                          *




A plaque commemorating the deportation ofJewish children during World War II



longer here). Then it was a Jewish public school—boys on the
right, girls on the left. Read the startling plaques on the walls to
relive the horror of the Nazi occupation:

      ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIVE JEWISH CHILDREN OF THIS SCHOOL

      WERE DEPORTED TO GERMANY        DURING WORLD      WAR II AND WERE

      EXTERMINATED IN THE NAZI CAMPS. LEST WE FORGET.



    The second plaque is an acknowledgment from former stu-
dents:

      TO JEAN MIGNARET, TEACHER AND DIRECTOR OF THIS SCHOOL
      FROM 1920 TO 1944, WHO BY HIS COURAGE AND AT PERIL OF HIS
      LIFE SAVED TENS OF JEWISH CHILDREN FROM DEPORTATION.

    Recently, similar plaques have been put up on all the public
schools in this area to remind us of all the children who were
taken by the Nazis with the help of the Vichy government.
    Today the right side of the building is a school for special-
needs students and the left is a regular (co-ed) public school.
Continue up the street to the rue des Francs-Bourgeois.



170
                                     Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

             Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

Directly in front of you is the Swedish Cultural Center, at no.
38. The seventeenth-century houses lean toward each other
and almost meet at the top. The old-fashioned pharmacy next
door, at no. 36, is worth entering. Note the back wall of blue
medicine bottles, the etched lady in the mirror, the clock in the
wall, and the old-style scale.
    A l’Image du Grenier sur |’Eau (picture of the hayloft on
the water—a street name near the Seine), at no. 45, across the
street, is a one-of-a-kind postcard store. Here two brothers have
assembled postcards from the last quarter of the nineteenth
century to 1945 in hundreds of drawers classified by every pos-
sible subject. The cards range in price from $1 to $100. If you
can bear to mail them, they make a great change from the typical
tourist cards you have already sent home.
     Cross again, heading left, to an excellent knitting store,
Anny Blatt, at no. 40, famous for its wools. The Villa Marais,
next door, is a mixture of modem and antique gifts and furni-
ture. They have opened a small créperie on the top floor with
dining on a charming rooftop terrace in good weather. Continue
up the street, to the corner of Francs-Bourgeois and Vieille-du-
Temple. You will immediately notice the flamboyant Gothic
tower at no. 54. This is a reconstruction from the manor house
of Hérouét, Louis XII’s treasurer, which was destroyed by the
last German bombing of Paris, in August 1944, the only building
hit in Paris during the war. For years the crumbling building was
supported by heavy railroad-type buttresses extending out into
the street. Restoring this house became a serious issue. Oddly
enough, many said that it had no historic value, was extremely
ugly, and was a disturbance to the city and its aesthetic sense.
Fortunately, someone found a statute that led the city to classify
the building as a historic monument—and this lovely round
tower with its flamboyant tracery is still here.
     If you are walking on a Saturday or Sunday between 2 and
5:30, do continue up the rue Vieille du Temple (visit a tea place
and new galleries on the way), to no. 87, LHotel de Rohan.
Enter the courtyard and turn right into the next courtyard. The


                                                              Lia
Pariswalks




The collector’s postcard shop at no. 45 rue des Franc-Bourgeois


Rohans were one of the most important noble families, whose
members lived all over the Marais. On the wall to your right you
will see the famous and fabulous horses of Apollo, riding out of
the stone they were sculpted from. The more you look at these
horses, the more detail you see. They were done in 1738 by
Robert Le Lorrain.
     Return to the rue Vieille du Temple, retrace your steps, and

ee
                                      Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

cross rue des Francs-Bourgeois. On the left, see if there is an ex-
hibition of food or books or art or antiques in the flag-bedecked
former covered food market.
    Across the street, at no. 53, is Ordning & Reda, a Swedish
stationery store. They have wonderful notebooks, pens, and
pencils—all arranged by color. To your right try the very pleas-
ant and reasonable restaurant Au Gamin de Paris, at no. 51.
Come here on the early side (before 8 pM. and before the
lines—people wait in the street) for an excellent bistro-style
dinner. They have two superb desserts—a chocolate cake (a
passion for some members of our family) and a tarte Tatin—
sitting in the front window.
     Continue down the street to a grand house, no. 47, the Hé-
tel Amelot-de-Bisseuil. It is also known as the Hétel des Am-
bassadeurs de Hollande. Its remarkably ugly door is
reproduced everywhere. Two large and evil Medusa heads stick
their tongues out at you. Peace and War are figured in the pedi-
ment. The door to the first courtyard is always open. Note the
four sundials on the left wall.
     The house has a long history, six centuries, but one that is
particularly interesting to Americans. It was here that Beaumar-
chais wrote the comedy on which the libretto for Mozart’s The
Marriage of Figaro was based. Beaumarchais also created a busi-
ness here called Rodriguez-Hortalez et Cie, which was a front
for the exportation of arms to the American colonies in their
fight against the English. Beginning with the Revolution, the hé-
tel was left abandoned. Paneling and gold decorations were re-
moved and a dome was covered up. Industry moved in,
continuing the destruction. The hdtel was divided into stores
and small factories; false floors and ceilings were put in place;
woodwork disappeared, as well as paintings on ceilings and
friezes; buildings, porches, and barracks in the courtyard hid all
the wall decorations. Much has been restored, beginning only
as recently as 1926. Painted ceilings and the dome have been
recuperated.
     Farther up on the left of this interesting street is a popular
café, Le Petit Fer 4 Cheval (small horseshoe). The street is full
of surprises—many interesting shops and cafés, most of which
overflow nightly with an international gay clientele. But we are

                                                               Ny,
Pariswalks

heading back to Francs-Bourgeois to finish up near the Centre
Pompidou.
     Walk left down Francs-Bourgeois to one of the most archi-
tecturally interesting restaurants in Paris, at no. 53 bis, on the
left. Le Dome du Marais was originally the chapel for the reli-
gious order of the Blancs-Manteaux and then was used as the
auction room of the municipal pawnshop. The combination
restaurant and music room is behind a very small courtyard
with tables. It is a large, round spectacular room encircled by a
high carved balcony. The ceiling is a colored glass dome
(hence the name). The young and hard-working chef offers a
superb meal at a moderate price. If you are cigarette-smoked
out of small, cozy restaurants, this high-ceilinged place is the
answer. Be sure to visit the clever and pretty WC at the balcony
level. The restaurant now has musical evenings with varied of
ferings.
     Enter no. 55, the courtyard of the Crédit Municipal, the
government-run pawnshop, known as mont-de-piété, or collo-
quially known as ma tante (my aunt). The wall surrounding
Paris, begun by Philippe Auguste in about 1190 (see the plaque
on the wall), cut across this yard and occupied the space traced
on the ground. If you are on the entry side, you would have
been outside the boundaries of twelfth-century Paris.
   Walk through the far door on the left to see if there is a
showing or auction going on. They specialize in jewelry and sil-
ver, as well as paintings, rugs, and objets. It’s fun to watch, and
if you can count fast enough in French, you might bid. Add a
15 percent fee.
     Walk right through the second courtyard or look into it to
see a large tower at the corner of the building. The base is a sec-
tion of Philippe Auguste’s wall, and the building opposite is
decorated with mascarons of women, lions, and a satyr. Today
the building is Munigarde, a storage and security facility for
works of art. Turn right toward the street to see a doorway, the
remains of a house that once stood there, and an antique col-
umn. If you cannot enter this second courtyard, return to the
street, walk left, and stand across the street, facing the end of
the Crédit Municipal building. There, behind the iron door, you


EL:
                                       Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

can see the tower of the wall. Many, including us, think it is un-
just to close off these historic sites, especially since taxes pay for
part of their upkeep, but security is the excuse offered and ac-
cepted.
    You are now standing next to the largest and most elegant
palace in Paris of the old regime, the Palais de Soubise, con-
nected to the Palais de Rohan, both visitable. Until recently,
Soubise was the home of the National Archives of Paris.
    The Prince de Soubise, who once lived at 13 place des
Vosges, found much wider scope here, as can be seen from this
most grand colonnaded courtyard and the large gardens behind
and to the side. In order to keep the colonnade level while ris-
ing on a hill, the architect cleverly increased each of the pedi-
ments under the fifty-six double columns, just enough to
compensate for the incline. Imagine the pageantry of the horses
delivering nobility to the palace. Four pillars hold up the pedi-
ment, and sculptures decorate the windows.
     The beautiful rooms, by designer-architect Boffrand in the
rococo style, give onto the interior garden. The sun fills these
rooms, painted in gold and pale pastels with white sculpted
ceilings and panels covered with scenes such as Venus at Her
Toilette and The Education of Love. The palace is closed Tuesdays.
Hours are 1:45-5:45 PM.
    The oldest construction in the complex is the medieval gate
with its two round towers and escutcheons on the walls on the
rue des Archives, about a hundred yards to your right around
the corner. This is all that the Prince de Soubise left from the
fourteenth-century fortress that was originally built by Olivier
de Clisson. But this remnant is a great boon, especially for the
residents who have the pleasure of seeing a piece of the Middle
Ages illuminated at night.
    The strongly Catholic Guise family bought the palace in
1553, and enlarged it considerably. It was here that the St.
Bartholomew’s Massacre, the slaughter of the Protestants dur-
ing the religious wars (1572), was planned.
    The national archives themselves have now moved to an
electronically wp-to-date building on the rue des Quatre Fils,
around the corner. Among the archives are a letter from Jeanne


                                                                  lee
Pariswalks

d’Arc and Napoléon’s will. The palace is now used for
receptions—a kind of republican return to royalist elegance.
    The shop on the corner sells mementos of French history—
medals, seals, facsimiles, and the like. They make wonderful
gifts.



                      Rue      Rambuteau

At the comer     of the rue des Archives,    the rue des Francs-
Bourgeois changes its name to the rue Rambuteau. This is a
typical market street, with its competing bakeries and charcuter-
ies, some now Asian. After one block, turn right onto the rue
du Temple, and go a few doors down to the new Musée d’Art
et Histoire du Judaisme. It is housed in one of the grandest
palaces in the Marais, the Hétel de Saint-Aignan, at no. 71. In-
side, in contrast to this grandeur, is a typical wooden Jewish .
house from a ghetto (shtetl). There are elaborately illustrated
wedding contracts, silver artifacts, and art by Modigliani and
Chagall.
    A historically and artistically significant statue has finally
found a home in the courtyard of the museum. The statue of
Captain Dreyfus by Tim, a serious cartoonist, tells the cap-
tain’s story metaphorically. Dreyfus’s large uniformed body
is covered in some sort of mud encrustation, and he holds a
broken sword, a symbol of his fraudulent disgrace. In 1894,
Captain Alfred Dreyfus of the French army was accused of
spying for Germany, and thus of being a traitor. France was di-
vided between anti-Semites (the army, in particular) and Drey-
fus’s republican supporters. Zola was one of the important
champions who successfully defended the Jewish Dreyfus.
The French recognize the Dreyfus Affair as a blot on their es-
cutcheon.
     Look around this splendid courtyard and spot another of
those false walls on the left.
      Return   to Rambuteau,    turn   right, and   cross   the rue
Beaubourg. Enter the pedestrian zone that comprises the Cen-
tre Pompidou, commonly known as Beaubourg, and the
Fontaine Igor Stravinsky.

176
                                       Rue des Francs-Bourgeois

    A huge “hardware” store, Leroy Merlin, is at no. 52 rue
Rambuteau. Like paper goods in France, hardware has its own
style and is a lot of fun. If this is your thing, be sure to visit the
basement of the BHV mentioned in Walk 6.
    Directly across the street is the entrance to the Centre Pom-
pidou. Six hundred and eighty-one designs were submitted for
the Centre Pompidou, and much to their surprise, two young
architects, Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers, from Genoa and
London, respectively, were chosen. The fact that their French
was limited made it easier for them to disregard the heated and
constant criticism surrounding the building’s construction.
When the center finally went up, with all its color-coded en-
trails of ducts and pipes (water, gas, air, and electricity) on the
outside, most Parisians were horrified. The architects defended
these radical innovations, claiming to have saved interior
space, now free of metallic structures, pipes, heat, and water
ducts.
    Twenty years later, the center required drastic restoration,
and reaction to it is still sharply divided. It is, however, the most
visited attraction in the city, surpassing the Eiffel Tower, which
was also once maligned. When you consider the metal Lego ef-
fect of the Eiffel Tower, the ultramoder glass pyramid planted
in the classical Louvre courtyard, the glass walls of the New
Grand Library that let the sun shine on the books and the
readers researching belowground, the huge stone hulk of the
Bastille-Opéra that fills an entire street, and the towering Arch
of the Defense, you must credit the French with courage.
    The museum houses many free exhibit areas, the largest
open-stack library in the city (a separate and long line forms on
the Beaubourg side for users), special exhibitions, a bookstore,
and the rich Museum of Modem Art with works from 1914 to
the present.
     There is a fee to climb up the caterpillar escalator to see
Paris spread out all around you. This will also give you a
bird’s-eye view of the musicians, magicians, and fire-eaters
(cracheurs de feu) in the plaza below.
     Free entry to most of the museum was inspired by the idea
of making it a people’s museum. It succeeded. But there are
drawbacks. The museum is a hangout for the down-and-out

                                                                  Lie
Pariswalks

and for the avant-garde of pop culture. The inhabitants are not
happy with the noise, crowds, and late hours, but the place is
always lively and fascinating.
    Walk up the hill of the plaza to the street. La Librairie Ga-
lerie has an immense collection of posters and postcards. Con-
tinue straight to the left, to the rue Saint-Martin. Enjoy a crépe
from the vendor at the intersection. The goodies on the street
are a jewelry shop, a pen and paper store, a Quimper pottery
shop, and a working bakery making croissants and more. Eat
them fresh and hot, just out of the oven. If you don’t indulge
when in Paris, you’re making a mistake.
     To find the Fontaine Igor Stravinsky, turn left off Saint-
Martin before the church of Saint-Médard. Kids love this spot.
The brightly colored sculptures are by Nikki Saint-Phalle, and
the intricate and mechanical metal automatons by Jean Tinguely
were inspired by Stravinsky’s music and are an expression of the
New Realist movement. They bob happily in the large rectangu-
lar fountain. Find the different elements in the fountain: the key
to the sun, the nightingale, the serpent, the firebird, the spiral,
the heart, life, the elephant, death, ragtime, and love. A con-
ductor starts the players on their water dance. Playing children
surround the fountain in the daytime; the restaurants are filled
at night. Try the outdoor tables at the red-painted Brisemiche
for a two-course, reasonably priced menu.
     For reasons of space we have not detailed all the streets in
this area, but that does not mean that you should skip them.
