Walk 7: Les Grandes Trois: Concorde, Madeleine, Vendôme

 bes orandes                   Trois:
Concorde,        Madeleine,
      Vendome



       Lélégance, c’est moi.
             -—Coco Chanel
Starting Point: Southeast corner of the place de la Concorde
    and the rue de Rivoli, Tuileries side of the street, 8th and lst
    arrondissements
Métro: Concorde or to Madeleine on the newest métro line (14),
    which is totally automatic. (Sit in the very front and look
    out the windows as you travel through the tunnel.)
Buses: 24, 42, 52, 76, 84, 94



This walk stretches from the place de la Concorde to the place
Vendéme and the rue du Marché Saint-Honoré, and back to the
rue de Rivoli. It will take you past some of the most chic jewelry
shops, clothing stores, and hotels in Paris. We recommend that
you dress conservatively and a little more formally than you
might for the other neighborhoods in the book if you want to
be welcome in the more elegant shops and hotels on this walk.
    This neighborhood, like the Marais, began as an uninhab-
ited marsh. As the water receded, the land was gradually culti-
vated, providing fresh vegetables and fruit to the fledgling city
huddled around the islands in the Seine.
Pariswalks

    In the seventeenth century, as the wealthy moved west
from the Marais they came here, near the Palais du Louvre and
Marie de Medicis’ Tuileries. Richelieu also built his Palais Cardi-
nale nearby, leaving it to Louis XIII on his deathbed in 1642.
The property was renamed the Palais Royale, although the king
never lived there. Having royalty nearby was a sure draw for the
upper class and while, in the nineteenth century, the wealthiest
moved farther west, to the far reaches of the eighth and six-
teenth arrondissements, this neighborhood remained the heart
of Paris for the well-to-do visitor.
    Today we are starting at the place de la Concorde, the
largest square or place in Europe (84,000 square meters) and
considered one of the most beautiful. While it is a major inter-
section heavily traveled day and night, it is also a must-see
sight, making it worth your time to explore and brave the cars.
The square is a favorite spot for photographs—we saw two
brides posing, in addition to the usual tourists. Early morning,
when there is a special natural light, or at night are the best
times to see and photograph this busy place.
     On your way from the rue de Rivoli into the actual square,
pause for a moment and look left, at the end of the wall, and
note the commemorative plaques that describe the events of
August 25, 1944: ten soldiers dead in the battle for the libera-
tion of Paris. At this date every year, wreaths and flowers cover
the street. Lest we forget.
    At this southeastern comer of the place there is a very wide
sidewalk where you can take a seat on a pillar between a lam-
padaire (light post) and a pavillon (small house). Read the his-
tory and figure out the general plan of the square. Then take to
the crosswalks with the light and go up to the sights.
     The general plan is easy to discern. The octagon is 360 me-
ters long by 210 meters wide. An obelisk stands in the middle
surrounded by two fountains. Statues of seated women, repre-
senting French cities, are placed at each corner. The Marly
horses on the west side mark the entrance to the Champs-
Elysées. Twenty lamplights surround the entire square. And,
unfortunately, cars pass every which way in a constant need to
cross Paris.
      The place was inaugurated in 1763 with a statue of Louis XV

228
          Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,    Madeleine,     Vendédme




Place de la Concorde



by Bouchardon, to honor the king’s recovery from the pox,
which, they say, he got from his loose living. He was depicted in
the usual Roman warrior garb, with laurels on his head, and
mounted on a horse on a sculpted pedestal. (Why always Roman
garb when the French were so anxious to be rid of the Romans?)
He was once called the “well-loved” king and, in homage, the
pedestal was sculpted with four statues by Pigalle, each represent-
ing a virtue: Force, Justice, Prudence, and Peace. By the time of
the unveiling, Louis had already bankrupted the country, obvi-
ously lost all those virtues, and fallen totally out of favor. After only
a few days reigning over the place, the statue wore a sign, hanging
on his horse’s neck: OH, THE BEAUTIFUL STATUE, OH, THE BEAUTIFUL
PEDESTAL. VIRTUE LIES IN THE FOOT, VICE IS ON THE HORSE.
     The square’s early history was not felicitous. In an eerie pre-
figuring of the violence that the Revolution would bring, disas-
ter hit in 1770 at the celebration of the wedding of the dauphin

                                                                     229
Pariswalks

Louis and the archduchess of Austria, Marie Antoinette. The
square was packed with thousands of eager celebrants and the
fountains were flowing with wine when the fireworks were acci-
dentally caused by a misfired gun. The resulting explosions and
fire set off a panic, causing the overloaded bleachers to collapse.
People were trampled in the struggle to escape, and 133
corpses were collected once the chaos had ended.
     Worse was yet to come when the revolutionaries took
power, in 1792. They promptly pulled down the statue of Louis
XV and renamed the square the place de la Révolution, erecting
a new statue, a woman called Liberté. She was cheaply made of
bronze-painted plaster, part of which cracked. She wore a red
bonnet, carried a sword in her hand, and was seated on Louis’
old pedestal. She was enormous.
      After centuries of monarchies, now it was the turn of the
dispossessed to rule. A guillotine was erected in the square,
near where the obelisk now stands, facing east toward the Tui-
leries. Huge crowds arrived every day, as people always did for
hangings. But there was extra fervor for this bloody revolution.
The mobs screamed and cheered (and knitted) as the tumbrels
rolled by, delivering the aristocracy to their demise.
      During the Terror, Mme Roland, a well-known moderate revo-
lutionary, made her death memorable by eyeing the mocking
statue and declaring as she mounted the scaffold, “Liberty, Lib-
erty, what crimes have been committed in your name.” But on
January 21, 1793, no one in the crowd heard Louis XVI, last in
the line of the Capetian dynasty, say, “I am innocent,” because the
tumultuous beating of the drums purposely drowned him out.
      Several months later, in October, Marie Antoinette and more
than a thousand others’ heads rolled—including that of Robes-
pierre, the mastermind of the Reign of Terror. The blood ran so
profusely, it is said, that cattle, who know the stench of slaugh-
ter, refused to enter the square.
    After the cleanup, furious political battles raged about the
choice of a new name and a new statue for the square. Louis
Philippe, son of the beheaded king, finally chose the calmest
way out—an impersonal and foreign monument, an Egyptian
obelisk, that has, ironically, become an icon of Paris, and a
name, Harmony, that belies the history of the square.

230
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendéme

    Start by looking at the exquisite lampadaire in front of you,
one of twenty. This green bronze Corinthian column is be-
decked in gold designs, and supports round lamps on either
side and a globed one at the top.
    At this point, take the major crossing toward the obelisk,
which stands in the center of an oval, flanked by two magnifi-
cent sculpted fountains created for the monument. A gift from
Mahamet-Ali, viceroy of Egypt, the obelisk formerly stood in
front of what was once the Temple of Luxor. It is covered in hi-
eroglyphics telling of battles from the reigns of Ramses II and
III, more than three thousand years ago. Made of pink granite,
it is seventy-five feet high—Paris’s greatest phallic symbol after
the Eiffel Tower, which can be seen right behind it—and weighs
230 tons (460,000 pounds).
     The base of the obelisk tells the story of how the engineers
put it up, an event that became a huge public spectacle. Once
again, but fortunately for different reasons, a spot in the place
was as coveted as a ticket to the Super Bowl. Tickets, reserva-
tions, grandstands, drama, near catastrophe, were all part of the
great event. The obelisk had traveled for three years before sail-
ing down the Seine to Paris in 1836. The architect responsible
for the lifting of the obelisk described a sleepless night. What if
it fell, killing the workers and breaking into innumerable pieces?
One account tells of a crisis when the rope had reached its limit
and the obelisk was still not fully upright. A sailor who knew
about ropes, and that hemp shrank as it dried, called out,
“Moisten the ropes!” Wetting down the ropes would provide
the last few degrees to vertical.
    This place was planned with two spectacular architectural
views, so special that they inspired the planning of Washington,
D.C. The first is the view from east to west. Look left, through
the Tuilerie gardens, and spot the Arc de Titus. The view from
the arch goes through the obelisk in front of you, right down the
Champs-Elysées, to your right, through the Are de Triomphe,
and continues west through the city to the Arc de la Defense.
Three arches are aligned, all visible with the obelisk between
them, covering about ten miles.
    The second view is shorter and runs south to north. The As-
semblée Nationale, across the river, on the Left Bank, marks the

                                                              prey
Pariswalks

southernmost point of the vista. From there, the view travels
north through the obelisk and up the rue Royale to the Assem-
blée’s mirror image—the church of La Madeleine.
    The huge and imposing twin palaces on the corners of the
rue Royale are yet another example of the finest city planning.
They were built between 1755 and 1775 by an “angel,” Ange-
Jacques Gabriel. Observe the wide facade of many arcades,
which is topped with a row of Corinthian pillars. To the right is
the Ministry of the Navy, not open to the public. To the left is
the Hotel de Crillon, which we will soon visit. These arcades
were the setting for the chase and shootout in Hitchcock’s Cha-
rade.
    The obelisk is surrounded by fountains. The northern one,
closest to the rue de Rivoli, is an impressive scene of Nubian
mermaids and mermen, with huge, serpent-like tails. Each one
is holding a fish that spouts mighty streams of water. In the cen-
ter, crowning the entire scene, patriarchs and their ladies sit in
boats.
    A pavillon stands at each of the eight corners of the place. A
grand dame sits atop each pavillon, representing major French
cities: Lille, Strasbourg, Brest, etc.
    Continue along the crosswalks to get a close look at the
Marly horses, another wonder of the square. The trainers are
trying to control these wild horses with flying manes. They
were originally sculpted for a chateau in Marly, west of Paris,
but when Versailles eclipsed Marly and the latter was destined
to be abandoned, the horses were moved to Paris. They an-
nounce the entrance to the Champs-Elysées. The Louvre has
the originals, if you want a closer look. Continue all the way to
the right until you arrive at the Hétel de Crillon.
      The Hétel de Crillon is rich, discreet, and quiet, with its
marble floors and walls. There is a serious air to the hotel; per-
haps its history as a location for signing treaties hangs in the at-
mosphere. Louis XVI and Benjamin Franklin signed the treaty
of friendship and trade between France and the newly indepen-
dent thirteen colonies here.
    During World War I the hotel was the American political
headquarters. The sessions that led to the Treaty of Versailles of
1919 that redesigned Europe and the first agreement of the

232
        Les Grandes     Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendéme

Covenant of the League of Nations took place in the Salon des
Aigles. President Wilson stayed here in a suite during the nego-
tiations.
     The plaque to the left of the entry (facing the building) says:

                            EN CET HOTEL
                      DU 3 FEVRIER AU 11 AVRIL
                                  1919
                             FUT ELABORE
                      PAR LE PRESIDENT WILSON
                       ET LES DELEGUES ALLIES
                               LE PACTE
                                 DE LA
                        SOCIETE DES NATIONS


    During World War IL, the Nazis occupied the hotel until the
liberation of Paris, when Eisenhower made it the supreme head-
quarters for the allied expeditionary force, in 1944.
    Today ladies come and go with expensive shopping bags. The
tearoom (€9 for tea) offers its guests fresh roses, sweet cakes,
and sugars as they relax in perfect period armchairs. In the sum-
mer you can dine in the elegant courtyard walled with facades
adomed with pediments and mascarons (mask decorations).
    Another way to experience the hotel is through the flower-
arranging classes held at the renowned Ecole des Fleurs on
most weekdays. The school offers classes taught by some of the
hottest names in floral design, and Parisians and admirers from
around the world eagerly spend €300 to spend two hours with
the artistic director, Christian Tortu.
     Go left from the Hotel de Crillon to the rue Royale and
make a left, heading toward the place de la Madeleine. The rue
Royale was a path (chemin) that skirted the walls of the city. The
street had several names, reflecting the unfolding history of the
city. In the seventeenth century it was called the chemin des
Remparts (ramparts); in 1714, chemin des Fossés des Tuileries
(ditches); in 1768, rue Royale des Tuileries; in 1792, rue de la
Révolution; in 1795, rue de la Concorde; and in 1814, rue
Royale Saint-Honoré. In its final incarnation, it was a city plan-
ning project designed to match the style of the two palaces

                                                                2323
Pariswalks

built by Gabriel for the place de la Concorde. The fagades of
 the buildings were historically fixed; however, shops have al-
 tered the ground and first floors at will. Each building is six
windows wide with a porte cochére (carriage entrance) in the
middle.
     At no. 3 rue Royale, you will find yourself at Maxim’s. The
name may be familiar to you; it is a brand name found in any of
the duty-free shops in Paris, on bottles of champagne, truffles,
and mustards. But before Maxim’s became a brand and spread
internationally (there are outposts in New York, Rio, and Bei-
jing), it was the hotspot of Paris nightlife.
     Maxim’s was opened on April 23, 1893, by a waiter named
Maxime, who, in the fashion of the times, anglicized his name
by dropping the e and adding ’s. In the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, Maxim’s was the late-night scene in
Paris. The richest of Paris society, foreign royalty, and industrial
giants made themselves at home at Maxim’s tables, of which
the regulars had their own. The maitre d’hotel, Cornuché,
knew all of Paris. He knew the celebrities, the scandals, the po-
litical intrigue, and the secrets of the alcove. All these secrets
went into his little black book, a guide to the underside of Pari-
sian life. In his book, he made notes about everyone who came
to his place—friendships and enmities, where to seat people,
dangerous promiscuities, and personal tastes. For instance,
when the Baron de Rothschild came with his mistress, you
never asked him how he wanted his meat cooked or what brand
of champagne he wanted; Comuché already knew. He estab-
lished Maxim’s as the center of the social world.
    Like the Baron de Rothschild, most men came accompa-
nied by women, and also like the baron, their guests were not
their wives. Maxim’s was a place of lavish pleasure, and no re-
spectable society woman would be found inside. Instead, the
men brought courtesans, called grandes horizontales. These were
educated, witty, and beautiful women whose talents were worth
a great price. Their male patrons showered them with money
and gifts, and the women were often dripping with furs and
jewels. There were three especially well-known courtesans: La
Belle Otero, Emilienne d’Alengon, and Liane de Pougy—called
“Les Grandes Trois.” The three of them often competed for at-

234
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,    Venddme

tention, and one night, in a plan to outshine Liane de Pougy, La
Belle Otero arrived at Maxim’s wearing her entire collection of
jewelry and an evening gown cut as low as it could go. Mo-
ments later, Liane de Pougy arrived wearing a chaste white gown
and only a single diamond (she had been tipped off by a
friend)—and behind her, her maid carried her entire jewelry
collection piled on a velvet cushion.
    Maxim’s was a place of excessive indulgence. One night, in
an expansive gesture, an American named Mr. Todd threw a fist-
ful of gold coins into the air at Maxim’s and let them fall to the
ground all over the restaurant. This coin-tossing soon became a
tradition at the restaurant, and though the coins that landed on
the floor were eagerly picked up by some of the patrons, several
hundred of them were found forty years later when the ban-
quettes were removed for reupholstering.
    The interior of Maxim’s reflects its extravagant past. In
1899, Louis Marnez was commissioned to design the interior,
and along with Majorelle, Prouvé, Gallé, and Guimard—some
of the biggest names in Art Nouveau design—chose a “return
to nature” theme for the restaurant. Inside the restaurant, cop-
per foliage climbs the walls and nymphs dance in forest settings
on the murals. Chestnut leaves and their fruits are repeated in
stylized patterns throughout the restaurant. The glass ceiling
over the main dining room dates from 1893; each piece of its
frosted glass was colored with oven-baked enamel. The décor is
classified and remains in its original form. A trip inside is like a
trip to the glorious past. We visited during the afternoon, be-
tween the lunch and dinner crowds, and in the gorgeous, col-
orful interior of the restaurant, you could almost see the swanky
men and women of a century ago.
    You are fortunate to be here now that the present owner, de-
signer Pierre Cardin, has opened his museum of Art Nouveau in
October 2004. Cardin has been collecting Art Nouveau from
around the world for the past sixty years and owns one of the
finest collections in existence. He showcases his collection on
the American third and fourth floors of the building, including
the re-creation of the apartment of a courtesan and her chambre
d'amour. Guided tours are available Tuesdays through Sundays,
9:30 A.M. to 4 PM.
                                                                plete)
Pariswalks

     Today Maxim’s is still popular, though mainly with a
touristy crowd.
     You are about to walk through a neighborhood with some of
the most expensive stores in Paris, and while we have avoided
prices in the other walks because they change so often, we are
including some here to give you an idea of what luxury can
cost.
     We hope you are planning to get married or to outfit your
mansion when you go to Christofle, at no. 9. This is the ulti-
mate silver hollow ware store. A family enterprise for six genera-
tions, it began with Charles Christofle, who purchased the
patents to silver plating and began the first hollow ware factory,
in 1842. He became the supplier to Napoléon III. His nephew
was next in line and was responsible for introducing electro-
plating. In fact, the name Christofle has become synonymous
with electroplating, the way the terms Kleenex and Xerox have
become synonymous with tissues and photocopies. Later,
Christofle became the silverware supplier to the Orient-
Express, to the most elegant ocean liners, such as the Nor-
mandie, and to the Ritz Hotel. Today, Christofle supplies the
best homes with elegant, handmade tableware. One place set-
ting in silver, €103; electroplated €40; stainless steel, €17.
  _ René Lalique’s eponymous store, at no. 11, is a showcase
for the handmade crystal objects that are based on designs from
the master. A major force in the Art Nouveau movement,
Lalique began as a jeweler, achieving renown for designs that
were masterpieces of creativity and beauty. Sarah Bernhardt
wore many of his creations made especially for her. Lalique’s in-
novation was in blending precious gold and gems with com-
mon elements such as horn, ivory, enamel, and glass in designs
based on nature. Glass became an art form of its own for
Lalique, and he began making perfume bottles. Animals, vases,
and other objects joined the repertoire. Unfortunately, none of
Lalique’s jewelry is being made any longer, but a sensitively ex-
pressed animal or an elegant perfume bottle, a lily of the valley
or a firebird, might be a perfect gift.
    To complete the outfitting of your house, stop in at Bernar-
daud, also at no. 11, for the finest Limoges porcelain in the
country. The store offers modern and classic designs, as well as

236
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Venddme

your-own personalized creations. At the time of our visit, there
was a meeting of the distributors, who were seated very cozily at
tables in the middle of the store with coffee and small croissants.
     Lachaume, no. 10, has been providing fancy flowers to Pa-
risians since 1845. Marcel Proust was a patron of their orchids,
which he made famous in Du Cété de Chez Swann, the first vol-
ume of his opus, A la Recherche du Temps Perdu (Remembrance
of Things Past). This is the only interesting aspect of the west
side of the street, which is in need of repair. We wonder why
one side of the street becomes so stylish and the other not.
    You are now at the intersection of the rue du Faubourg
Saint-Honoré,   on the left, and the rue Saint-Honoré,      on the
right. The name faubourg means suburb or, literally, a “false
city,” indicating that this was the city limit. The wall that was
here was built under Louis XIII between 1632 and 1634. Before
this, the city limit had been on the rue Saint-Honoré at the level
of the Théatre Frangais, just west of the Palais Royale, as deter-
mined by the wall of Charles V, built in the late 1300s.
    The entry to the city was an imposing three-story “door”
made of cut stone to resemble a hétel particulier (townhouse). A
humpbacked bridge arching over the moat led to a drawbridge
before the entry arch.
    The whole wall was tom down in 1733 as the city ex-
panded, and the new city boundary was moved out to the level
of the Arc de Triomphe, on the Champs-Elysées. This new wall
was known as the Mur des Fermiers Généraux, and it was not a
defensive boundary, but a tax collection system. Representa-
tives of the king levied taxes on all goods entering Paris, anger-
ing everyone.
     At this point we will head to the left on the rue du
Faubourg Saint-Honoré. When the wall came down there
were few private hétels on this street, but gradually, through the
eighteenth century, the neighborhood began to rival the ele-
gance of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, on the Left Bank. The
street is still one of the most exclusive in Paris.
     We are only going one block down the street, but farther
west than today’s walk is the Palais Elysée (no. 55), the British
embassy (no. 39), and the Hotel le Bristol (no. 112); many
fashion designers also have addresses on this street. On another

                                                               Desi
Pariswalks

day, experience the pomp of Paris on a walk down the Champs-
Elysées and the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.
     Note the fairly modern architectural excesses of nos. 3 and
12 as you head toward Hermés, at no. 24. Hermés began as a
saddlemaker but made its mark in leather handbags and silk
scarves, which in the early days of the shop often had eques-
trian themes. A Kelly bag, named for Grace Kelly (priced in the
thousands of euros, depending on the leather and size), and an
Hermés scarf (€245) tossed gracefully around the neck are the
sure signs of a socially connected French woman.
      As you exit Hermés, turn left and left again, onto the rue
Boissy-d’Anglas. The street is named for the 1795 president of
the Convention (the Revolutionary assembly from 1792 to
1795). A rational thinker, he was known as the enemy of ideo-
logues, and he invented the concept of liberty for one’s con-
science.
    At no. 23, on the left, is the service entrance for Hermés.
Here is where you bring your worn saddle for repairs. There is
also a memorial plaque on this building for an American who
was a member of a World War II resistance cell: THE BELLS OF LES
HALLES, A RESISTANCE GROUP, TO THE MEMORY OF THEIR REGRETTED
COMRADE, ORVILLE J. CUNNINGHAM, AMERICAN CITIZEN, ARRESTED
THE 24TH OF SEPTEMBER, 1942, DIED THE 4TH OF DECEMBER, 1943.
    Across the street, on your right, is the entrance to the Vil-
lage Royale, aka Cité Berryer. In the mid-eighteenth century,
this was a market with butchers, bakers, fishmongers, and pro-
duce sellers. This neighborhood could use a street market now,
but instead there are chic stores, including British Haviland
China and Barbour (the classic shop for hunting clothes), and a
trendy café, Le Village. If the weather is nice, sit outside in this
peaceful spot that feels like a village street in the middle of Paris.
This rural impression is mainly due to the low three-story build-
ings, rare in Paris, with small gable windows on the top floor
and flowered balconies and old-style street lamps attached to
the facades. The interior of the café is velvety and comfortable,
resembling the Café Marly at the Louvre.
     The passage connects back to the rue Royale, where you
will exit and turn left. You are now about to enter the place de
la Madeleine.

238
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendéme

     The place as it exists today was designed in 1808 as a frame
for the church, which was completed in 1824. Its origins go
back to the sixth century, however, when the bishop of Paris
had a fiefdom west of Paris named La Ville-l’Evéque. Its chapel
was dedicated in 1238 to Sainte Madeleine. Four hundred years
later the small village had become a parish, and the old church
was inadequate for the needs of the growing faubourg. In 1660,
La Grande Mademoiselle, Louis XIV’s cousin, laid the corner-
stone for a new church.
     One hundred years later, in 1756, the neighborhood had
become so fashionable that plans were again made for a newer,
larger church. The construction of the place de la Concorde in-
spired the plan for a vista down the rue Royale with the focal
point of a magnificent church at the end. The original plan
called for a church in the form of a Latin cross capped with a
large dome. The architect, Pierre Contant d’Ivry, died before the
plans could be achieved, and the new architect, Guillaume
Couture, changed the church to the shape of a Greek cross (all
four arms of the cross are of equal length), with a Corinthian
portico and an even larger dome.
     The Revolution put an end to all the construction, and the
structure was invaded by small merchants and artisans looking
for a sheltered spot to set up shop. Plans were discussed to
transform the space into a national library, an opera, the bank of
France, and the stock market. Napoléon wanted to make it into
a Temple of Glory for those who had died at Ulm, Iéna, and
Austerlitz. Louis XVIII wanted it to be a monument to Louis
XVI and Marie Antoinette. All the plans came to naught, and in
1845 the space was dedicated simply as a parish church.
     In the end, the church ended up looking like a Greek tem-
ple surrounded by fifty-two Corinthian pillars on the outside
and three domes above the nave—no transept, no side chapels,
no bell tower, and, architecturally speaking, no resemblance to
a church. Napoleon III wanted the Assemblée Nationale, across
the river, to match this Greek temple and had a facade built to
create the vista. If you wish to visit the church, enter after you
have walked around the perimeter of the place, beginning with
the left side (when facing the church).
    Lucas Carton, at no. 9 place de la Madeleine, is a Michelin

                                                              239
Pariswalks

three-star in an authentic Art Nouveau setting. Chef Alain
Senderens took over at Lucas Carton in 1985, a place where he
had worked before as a young apprentice. Splurge on an inven-
tive, luxurious meal in a room decorated with fabulous wooden
panels by Majorelle, the noted Art Nouveau cabinetmaker (see
examples of his work in the Musée d’Orsay). Per person, lunch
will easily top $100, and dinner $300.
      Traffic in the place de la Madeleine is constant and seems to
come from all directions, so cross only with the light at the
crosswalks as you head across the boulevard Malesherbes, to-
ward Baccarat. This is only an outpost of the main store, which
is located at no. 11 place des Etats-Unis in the sixteenth ar-
rondissement. Enter here, at no. 11 place de la Madeleine, to
get a taste of the glassware and crystal jewelry made by this clas-
sic French luxury company. If you are interested, visit the main
address, where there is an elegant restaurant and a museum of
the history of crystal production.
    The shops that line the perimeter of the place are predomi-
nately luxury food stores. We can hardly imagine what your
food bill must be like if you live in this neighborhood and these
stores are your comer groceries.
      Now that you have purchased your silverware at Christofle,
your dishes at Bernardaud, and your crystal glasses at Baccarat,
Caviar Kaspia, at no. 17, will provide you with the perfect se-
duction snack—lIranian caviar and iced vodka or champagne,
Open noon to 1 A.M., Mondays through Saturdays.
      Next door, at no. 19, is the Maison de la Truffe, and next
to that is Hédiard, at no. 21. Ferdinand Hédiard started selling
exotic spices and fruits in Paris, in the mid-nineteenth century,
from a cart in the place des Victoires, showing astonished Pari-
sians pineapples and mangoes from the tropics. Today, the shop
continues the tradition by selling imported foods from the
world over, specializing in fruit products such as jams, crystal-
lized fruit, and fruit jellies.
      The reigning doyenne of the food shops in the place de la
Madeleine, however, is in the northeast comer. Fauchon, at no.
26, is the most famous food store in Paris, a city known to be
passionate about what it eats.
    Ironically, Auguste Félix Fauchon began his career em-

240
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,    Vendéme

ployed by Félix Potin, the originator of the first grocery chain
in Paris. While Félix Potins are small, utilitarian grocery
stores, Fauchon stocks luxury goods to satisfy your every gus-
tatory whim. In our early days in Paris, Fauchon was the only
place to get such then-exotic American specialties as cake
mixes, corn flakes, and cranberries for that all-important
Thanksgiving dinner.
     Today, you can shop here for chocolates, teas, fine patisseries
(cakes), wine, out-of-season fruits, and all kinds of classy gifts
to bring home. Or pick up ready-made meals and appetizers for
a feast in your hotel room.
     You will see branches of Fauchon in other parts of Paris and
their products in the supermarkets. In a city where nearly every
store was a one-of-a-kind business, chain merchandising has
become the rule. Many of the once-exclusive Right Bank shops
have found it profitable to move into the formerly bohemian
Left Bank.
    From Fauchon, cross to the side of the church to the flower
market, open every Tuesday and Friday. The arrangements are
yet another example of French artistry in daily living. In sum-
mer, these spectacular flowers are all grown in and around Paris.
    Continue toward the facade of the church of the Madeleine.
But on the way, stop at the most unlikely and fabulous discov-
ery of the walk. Just to the east of the entry is a sign for public
bathrooms, WC. Normally we would not dare go underground
to see a public bathroom, but this one is special. It was built in
1905 in the Art Nouveau style. Go downstairs and for less than
half a euro get your own stall with a floral carved wooden door.
Inside is a clean, private toilet, sink, mirror, and flowering tiled
walls. A woman in a small wooden booth monitors the bath-
rooms and will also shine your shoes, if you desire. Would that
all bathrooms in Paris were as charming!
     On the other side of the church (the left if you are facing the
front) is a discount ticket office for French theater. If you speak
French and want to see a play, the Kiosque Théatre is open
Tuesdays through Saturdays, 12:30 to 7:45 pm., and on Sun-
days, from 12:30 to 3:45 pM., offering half-price seats.
     If you wish to enter the church, do so now.
     Cross in the crosswalks to the east side of the rue Royale

                                                                Pizandl
Pariswalks

(on your left if you have your back to the church and are facing
the place de la Concorde).
    Ladurée, at no. 16 rue Royale, is the original site of a very
famous patisserie and tea salon. We actually now prefer the
newer location, at 21 rue Bonaparte (see Walk 3). This is for-
mal, old-fashioned Paris at its best. Enter this cramped space
and crowd into the line in front of the display case to purchase
macarons. For decades we have been making our obligatory pil-
grimage here for these treats. Having no relation to macaroons,
macarons are two hemispheres of ground almond meringue
sandwiching rich ganache. They come in an abundance of fla-
vors, such as dark chocolate, bitter orange, lemon, and pista-
chio. A few miniature macarons are a perfect pick-me-up as you
walk—they are delicious and rich but don’t drip on your
clothes. This past summer the special macaron was strawberry-
poppy, a delicately perfumed marvel of flavor and aroma. You
can also perch on a small chair and enjoy a cup of tea with your
pastry. This could be a good opportunity to read up on the
place Vendéme, coming up, where there are no benches and we
have a lot of information for you.
       Turn left into the rue Saint-Honoré. As in the Marais, the first
residents were the religious orders. In the early seventeenth cen-
tury there were six different convents and monasteries on what is
now the rue Saint-Honoré:         the Jacobins, the Capucines, and
Filles de la Conception on the north; the Feuillants, Capucins,
and Couvent de l’Assomption on the south. At that time, the city
limits on the rue Saint-Honoré extended to where you are now.
     The wealthy began heading west in the early eighteenth
century. The Marais to the east was losing its appeal, one reason
being that the air was fresher to the west. Prevailing winds
brought the foul odors of garbage and waste eastward. Gradu-
ally, the wealthy flocked to this westward portion of what is
now the first arrondissement. The place Vendéme was the heart
of the development, luring the most elegant shops and hotels to
the neighborhood. It remains so today. We will cover only a
short distance of the rue Saint-Honoré today, but the street
stretches all the way to Les Halles by way of the Palais Royale, a
neighborhood worth visiting.
     Enter the courtyard of no. 414 to see a re-creation of Gothic

Bote
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,    Vendéme

architecture. It was built by A. Walwein, architect, and A.
Cruchet, sculptor, in 1903. It is interesting to note that this was
done at the same time as the flowing, extravagant Art Nouveau
style of Maxim’s. While the Victorians had a fondness for
Gothic revival style, with its caryatids and chubby angels, Art
Nouveau and its successor, Art Deco, had a far more lasting im-
pact. The building is a storehouse for antiquities. These doors
are never opened, and all the activity happens at the back, on
the street behind the building.
    Au Nain Bleu (at the blue dwarf), at no. 408, is the French
equivalent of what F A. O. Schwartz used to be. Started in
1836, it moved to its present location in 1910. The criteria for
the store are elegance and refinement—not common among
toy stores.
     In 1943 disaster struck the store. A Gestapo agent came in
to ask if the store sold flags. A foolish shopgirl offered a French
flag, angering the German. She was taken away and interro-
gated. The Germans returned two days later and rounded up
the other shopgirls and the store’s director. They were taken to
the prison in Fresnes. The salesgirls were held for twelve days,
but the director was deported to a prison camp in Germany. He
was liberated at the end of the war.
     Alison remembers mooning over the luscious stuffed ani-
mals as a child, but Sonia never bought her one. Alison, in turn,
never bought one for Rebecca, but now Sonia shops for her
great-grandchildren. Excellence is not cheap, and the toys here
are significantly more expensive than American toys. The doll
collection in the front of the store is extraordinary. The dolls are
primarily works of art, not playthings.
    You are now at the intersection of the rue Saint-Florentin,
originally called cul-de-sac de l’Orangerie because it ended at
the orange trees of the Tuileries as commemorated in the mu-
seum by the same name.
    Across the street is Longchamps, at no. 404 rue Saint-
Honoré, a famous handbag store. Half of Paris carries the shop’s
light fabric bags with leather trim. They come in several sizes
and styles and many fold into neat packages so you can pack
them empty into your suitcase and then fill them with all the
goodies you have purchased for the trip home. The building is

                                                                DES
Pariswalks

eighteenth century with a classified wrought-iron balcony and
mascaron.
      No. 281, across the street, is also an eighteenth-century
building. In 1859, no. 265 was the home of the famous actress
Sarah Bernhardt, when she was fifteen years old. Today this new
building is the home of Max Mara, a prominent Italian clothing
store specializing in classic yet modern designs.
     No. 398 was the home of Robespierre, mastermind of the
Terror, from July 7, 1791, until his guillotining on 9 Thermidor (a
date under the French Revolutionary calendar), July 27, 1794.
      Galerie Schmit, at no. 396, is one of the most important
art galleries in Paris. It is a three-generation story, beginning
with the grandfather, who dealt with old masters but built a
catalogue of thirty thousand pieces of eighteenth-century art
sales to the present day. Today the gallery shows nineteenth-
and twentieth-century art from Ingres to Chagall and Picasso.
You are welcome to look for free or buy at the latest exhibition.
     No. 390 is yet another famous handbag store. Hervé
Chapelier makes beautifully colored, machine-washable bags
that are immensely popular with young Japanese and American
women. Even with a weak dollar, prices here are about half of
what they are in the United States.
    The Couvent des Filles de 1Assomption was installed at
no. 263 in 1622. It was a fashionable retreat for widows, aban-
doned wives, and penitent women. The daughter of Mme de
Pompadour was raised here. She was engaged at age eleven to
the Duc de Picquigny, who married her a year later. She died at
twenty.
    The convent was disbanded during the Revolution, and
what remains of the convent’s chapel has been the parish for
Poles in Paris since 1850. Oddly enough, this elegant oval room
has no architectural religious aspect. The altar and angels have
been added. The church runs a Polish restaurant in the crypt
that is open for lunch and dinner, 12 to 3 pM. and 7 to 10 pM.
Go downstairs, to the left of the church doors, and eat tradi-
tional Polish food under the stone vaulting, surrounded by
Polish-speaking diners.
    Ironically, across the street, at no. 261, was once the fa-
mous restaurant Voisin. During the Franco-Prussian War, when

244
    :                           25 Decembre 1870
¢                              9gere Jour du Siege.
     }                            Hows -0' Ruyre:
                       PreRadio,
                           urr   Bete)’ Ane fareie, Sardines.
                          Parte DeICaricoto wuges auce Crvutons.
    ss                          Condonume do» Eliphante
     Ze                                       Enkrees:
             fel
                                              nots a
                      Goujon fruts.— Ce Chameaw                        anyfaswe       x
         12                      Re Civet de Rangouron.

         (                   Cher WOurprdiies dance Lowrede.
    §)                                         Piste:
    WY                        Cuissot de Loup, sauce CRevrenil.
    Cg                            LeChat flangqus deRats.
                                           Go Ladede Cresson.

                              La erring DMatilaunce
                                               ope rusffee
2

             hy
                                                                                      2       «
                                                                                              vf

                                    ipeo       ala BoweLaive.                         At
     yy                                    aiks-Fois ou eure .                         J
                                            Enbuemeto:                                    @
                              Gateau Denixayer Confitarco.                                        t
                                              Dedsext.:
                                                                                                  Lg
              -                    Fromage de Gruyire.
                                                                                      ~           4)


         ;           1° Service
                                              Vins
                                              se                 gme     Servic           i
                                                    8 Mae BelleFo. NY.
    i“.
    ay                 Live                                                                   &
         MN        Setnur Blancke 1861                   “Romans n 1358,
                    UL Palmer 1864.                                               4




The menu at Voisin on Christmas Day, 1870
Pariswalks

Paris was under siege, food became very scarce. Parisians ate
anything, and according to an English journalist of the period,
the price of rats rose to 80¢ and dogs or cats cost $4 a pound.
On Christmas Day 1870 (the ninety-ninth day of the siege), the
restaurant served an elaborate meal with meat obtained primar-
ily from the zoo—elephant consommé, stuffed donkey head,
kangaroo stew, roasted camel d l’anglaise, and cat accompanied
by rat. Yum.
    No. 382 was another convent. The Couvent des Filles de la
Conception was founded in 1635 by thirteen religious women.
Paul de Gondi, future cardinal of Retz, wrote about his first visit
to the convent, in 1650: “I was not ignorant of the fact that in
this ministry there were more than 24 young women, many
beautiful and coquettes, and I was at pains not to test my virtue.
I never spoke to them when their veils weren’t lowered. After six
weeks of this, I had given my chastity a marvelous luster.”
     Perhaps by the time you get to nos. 368-74, the restoration
will be complete. At the*time of our writing, however, a con-
struction fence masked most of the facade of these eighteenth-
century buildings. The peeks we could get hinted at beautiful
architecture and historically certified doorways and balconies.
Except for the facades, these four buildings to the corner are be-
ing gutted to build a shopping area, which will be called 9 cour
Vendéme. The comer building gives it the desired address.
    No. 374 was the salon of Mme Geoffrin, known as the
“minister of society” and hostess to the intellectual heavy-
weights of the late eighteenth century. These included philoso-
pher Diderot, architect Soufflot, society and later salon mistress
Mlle de Lespinasse, writer Montesquieu, writer-philosopher
Voltaire, painter Quentin Latour, one of the brothers Grimm,
and painter Boucher. Mme Geoffrin had married a wealthy but
boring man who was forty-seven years old to her fourteen. She,
however, was intelligent and generous, gathering artists on
Monday nights and writers and foreigners on Wednesday
nights. She died here at age seventy-eight. The building has
been remodeled,    and the grand staircase      that the famous
climbed to reach Mme Geoffrin’s salon no longer exists.
      Look up at the facade of no. 366, Christian Lacroix. A
lovely enseigne (sign) from a previous shop owner—a book-

246
         Les Grandes       Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendéme




Enseigne on 366 rue Saint-Honoré



seller, new and antique—still hangs over the door. The main
door is beautifully carved and topped with a mascaron and a
lovely wrought-iron balcony. On the wall are the elegant initials
CE but we don’t know their historical significance.
    In 1576, Catherine de Médicis installed a monastery of Ca-
puchin monks at what is now nos. 239-51. When the com-
munity reached one hundred and twenty monks, the building
was expanded. The church was built 1601-1610, although it
was very austere, unlike the convents of the Jacobins or Feuil-
lants. The Capuchin vows of austerity and poverty were too
much for some: two monks fled to England with two sixteen-
year-old girls. Could the young ladies have come perhaps from
the convent of the Capucines, right across the street?
    The convent closed in 1790, and its church became a book
depot until it was demolished in 1802. Nos. 247—51 went

                                                                 Distal
Pariswalks

through many changes: first it was a hippodrome; then the
Cirque Olympique in 1807; a riding school in 1817; and a de-
partment store in 1828. In 1841 it was a concert hall and bal
dansant (dance hall), where it cost 2 francs to come and dance.
In the 1880s, it became the Thermes Saint-Honoré, but bathing
was not a successful venture because there were already com-
peting baths nearby, on the Seine. The winter circus that shared
the space, however, was a hit. It had its last show in 1926.
      Across the street was the Couvent des Capucines, at nos.
360-64. In 1601, the widow of Henri III left 60,000 livres in
her will for the establishment of a convent for the Capucines.
The monastery was completed in 1606, with high walls to pro-
tect the nuns from the “lubricious” eyes on the ramparts of the
city walls. On June 18, eighty Capucines, wearing crowns of
thorns and escorted by eighty Capuchins, paraded down the
rue Saint-Honoré to their new home. The Capucines lived en-
tirely from alms, always walked barefoot, and never ate meat or
fish. Their privations must not have appealed to French
women: this convent was the only order of Capucines in
France. In 1688, Louis XIV moved them out in order to take
over the property in preparation for the construction of the
place Vendéme.
      The Hétel de Costes, at no. 239, was once the cemetery
for the Capuchins. Today it is a very trendy hotel. The entrance
is flanked by security men in black shirts and pants, but they
won't stop you from entering. Instead, the hostess for the lovely
tented restaurant in the courtyard may be the one who cuts you
short. The diners are all trés chic. We were amused to watch a
much older gentleman fawn over a young thing who couldn’t
be bothered to put down her cell phone.
    The hotel has no brochure, and we did not see a hotel
room, but the salons are decorated in “Empire bordello,” in
dark velvets and romantic intrigue. In the basement are a
sybaritic swimming pool and spa decorated like a Moroccan
palace. Book a room here just so you can indulge in a pedicure
on a chaise longue while your partner swims in the turquoise-
tiled pool.
     You are now at the corner of the rue de Castiglione and the
place Vendéme. Because there are no benches in the place

248
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Venddme

Vendéme, you might take a break at Le Castiglione, a café di-
agonally across the street, where you can read the history of the
place before walking through it. Once there, your only option
for a seat is one of the large parking stanchions that surround
the area.
    Turn right into the place. In 1686, Minister Louvois per-
suaded Louis XIV that he needed a grand square that would be
an ornament in the city, would improve circulation, and would
provide a location for academies, the royal library, and em-
bassies. Louis envisaged that this square would be anchored by
a pedestrian statue of his royal self, and he would create a new
street to open a vista between this place and the place des Vic-
toires, where his equestrian statue stands.
     But, in the end, the project was too expensive, and it was fi-
nally completed as a series of private residences with funds
from the city and six speculators who took ownership of the
buildings.
    Jules Hardouin-Mansart and Boffrand designed the square
in a smaller octagon, fittingly shaped like a perfect emerald-cut
diamond, considering that the place is now home to the most
expensive jewelry stores in Paris. The architects moved the
buildings forward twenty meters, at great expense; it cost half
as much to demolish them as it had to build them (abor must
have been cheap). This allowed for larger residences behind the
impressive facades to appeal to private investors. And yet the
square still feels vast and, while architecturally beautiful, lacks
any human dimension.
     The square’s décor is a series of arcades separated by hori-
zontally ridged stones and topped with mascarons, each one dif-
ferent. Above the ground floor is a double row of windows
divided by Corinthian pillar caps. At the angled comers and in
the middle of the long sides, the windows are divided with
Corinthian columns with triangular pediments. The windows
are fronted with wrought-iron balconies decorated with a sun
(Louis XIV was the Sun King). The whole is topped with a typi-
cal mansard roof of blue slate and mansard windows.
    The monument in the center of the square has had several
transformations. The original equestrian statue of Louis XIV
was, like everything else, destroyed during the Revolution. In

                                                               249
Pariswalks

1803, Napoléon decided that he wanted to re-create the Roman
column of Trajan. This was a monumental one-hundred-foot-tall
column of marble that was decorated with a continuous sculpted
frieze that wound itself to the top, where it was crowned by a
gilded statue of the emperor. The column was hollowed out in-
side and fitted with a spiral staircase rising to a viewing platform
at the top.
     Napoléon’s plan was completed as a forty-four-meter col-
umn of bronze with seventy-six bas-reliefs of the campaigns of
1805 mounted on the base that had once held Louis. The
bronze was obtained from 1,250 cannons captured from the
Russians and Austrians. This column was topped by a statue of
Napoléon decked out in the garb of a Roman emperor.
     In 1814, Napoléon was pulled down and recast into a new
statue, of Henry IV, for the Pont Neuf. Instead, an enormous
fleur-de-lis spent a few years atop the column only to be re-
placed in 1833 by another statue of Napoléon, this time in mil-
itary coat and tricome hat. Napoléon Ill replaced that statue
with another of Napoléon as Roman emperor.
     This one came to a spectacular end under the Commune.
The painter Courbet organized a pull-the-column-down party
on May 16, 1871. Half a dozen men sawed away at the base of
the.column and pulled on ropes attached to pulleys. Progress
was slow, and the crowd was restless. The band played “La Mar-
seillaise” until finally, late in the day, the column came crashing
down.
     Maxime Vuillaume, a chronicler of the time, described it
thus: “I will never forget that huge shadow that crossed my
eye!...A cloud of dust... All is over... The Column is
brought down, smashed, its stone entrails in the wind . . . Cae-
sar is on his back, decapitated. The head, crowned with laurel
leaves, rolled like a pumpkin all the way to the edge of the side-
walk.”
     Courbet payed dearly for his crime. He tried to convince the
judge that he did it to improve circulation in the square and
that the artistic quality of the carving was poor, “It was sculp-
ture like a child would have done. No perspective. None. The
figures are completely grotesque.” The judge didn’t buy it.
Courbet had to fund the new column at a cost of 350,000

250
         Les Grandes        Trois:    Concorde,       Madeleine,   Vendéme

francs. The debt crushed him, leaving him destitute, and prob-
ably shortened his life.
     The new column used the same molds to re-create the bas-
reliefs, and Napoléon dressed in Roman emperor attire was re-
placed on the top. There is a staircase inside the column, but
no one is permitted to climb to the top.
     Today, the place doesn’t feel Parisian. There are no cafés (in
fact, nowhere to sit at all) and the traffic is strictly controlled by
metal stanchions and underground parking. Tourists gawk, but
no one lingers.
     The place Vendéme has been described as the heart of fash-
ionable Paris because it is home to the world’s most expensive
jewelry and watch stores and to the Ritz Hotel. The number of
exclusive names adorning the shop fronts is astonishing. Stand
and read the shop awnings, from the south side moving coun-
terclockwise from six o’clock: Buccellati is at no. 4; Repossi at
no. 6; Mikimoto and Dior at no. 8; Bulgari and Patek
Philippe at no. 10; Chaumet at no. 12; Piaget, at no. 16, iron-
ically shares an address with Swatch—watches for the elite and
watches for the plebeians; Chanel jewelry at no. 18, Breguet




Buccellati’s silver animals in the window on the place Venddme

                                                                        pkoyl
Pariswalks




                                   eam?
                                    CHANEL




Chanel storefront with mascarons



and Mauboussin at no. 20; Van Cleef & Arpels at no. 22-24.
The west side of the square houses Cartier at no. 23, and Fred
at no. 7, but it is dominated by the Ritz, at no. 15-17.
   The customer list of Van Cleef & Arpels is representative of
the fashionable clientele of this neighborhood: Prince Ranier for
Grace Kelly, the shahs of Iran, Eva Peron, Sophia Loren, Liz Tay-
lor, Audrey Hepburn, Maria Callas, Marlene Dietrich, Joan
Fontaine, Gloria Swanson, Queen Noor, Lady Diana, and many
others. A company motto is that a jewel from Van Cleef &
Arpels is, above all, a promise of happiness. (Not quite true for
all of these women.)
     Window-shop and dream to your heart’s delight. If you
wish to enter any of the jewelry stores you must be buzzed in,
and security is tight. In any store other than Swatch, casual
browsing is not encouraged.
     Now tour the place counterclockwise from right to left.
     At no. 8, in the courtyard, is Stoklux, a second-hand cloth-
ing store. Live in the tradition of the place and pick up a Chanel
suit for €1,500. Frédéric Chopin briefly lived at no. 12. He

252.
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendéme

moved in in July 1849 and died there on the seventeenth of Oc-
tober of tuberculosis. His funeral was thirteen days later, at the
church of the Madeleine, and his body was buried at Pére-
Lachaise cemetery, while his heart was sent to the Church of
the Holy Cross in Warsaw, Poland.
    No. 16 was rented to one of the greatest con men of all
times, the German doctor Franz Mesmer (the origin of our word
mesmerize). In October 1778, Mesmer moved in with his fa-
mous electromagnetic basin and started offering sessions in
“animal magnetism.” Mesmer claimed that the stars produced a
fluid that had an effect on live beings that could be reproduced
by the laying-on of hands, and that he could heal illness. After a
few happy cures, he was inundated with desperate patients. He
saw fifteen patients at a time seated around a basin filled with
water, metal filings, and ground glass. A patient would grasp an
iron blade that rose out of a hole in the basin’s cover and hold
it to the afflicted part of his body. A long cord connected all the
other patients to the basin in order not to dissipate the energy.
     Mesmer would walk behind the patients, touching them
and driving illness out of them as if by enchantment. His repu-
tation spread, and he began to offer cures for the wealthy that
he personally saw to and cures for the poor administered by his
valet. A visit to Dr. Mesmer became all the rage, and society folk
asked one another if they would be meeting over the doctor’s
basin in the same way that today people arrange to meet after
work at a bar.
     Perhaps greed got the better of Mesmer, but when he tried to
use a tree instead of the basin, his success suffered. In response,
he demanded that the government offer him land and a chateau.
Instead, they offered him a salary of 30,000 livres, which he re-
fused. He sold the secrets of his cure to the Masons for 340,000
livres. This was fortunate timing because a government commis-
sion had just determined that Mesmer’s marvelous cures were
due to the patients’ imaginations. Descredited, but 340,000
livres richer, he fled to London,      where   he died in 1815,
forgotten—although his name lives on.
    In 1878, the Countess       Castiglione, known    as the crazy
woman of the place Vendéme, came to live at no. 26. At forty-
one years old, she was obsessed with her mortality and the loss

                                                                223
Pariswalks

of her beauty. She covered all her mirrors and draped the walls
in black. Her shutters were closed, and she received no one.
She had a special side entrance to her apartment built so she
could slip out under cover of darkness and wander the neigh-
borhood like a black wraith.
     No. 21, on the west side of the square, was the showroom
for designer Elsa Schiaparelli. Unlike Coco Chanel, Schiapar-
elli was born into a privileged and wealthy Italian family. Schia-
parelli distanced herself from her family as a young adult when
she married a count, William de Wendt de Kerlor, and moved
to the United States, where her husband left her for Isadora
Duncan.
     Schiaparelli’s brief marriage produced a daughter, and left
the two of them all alone in America. Legend, spread by Schia-
parelli herself, has it that she lived in poverty and survived only
on oysters and ice cream, but her daughter, nicknamed Gogo,
says that her mother loved to be dramatic about finances, and
in fact they continually réceived money from the family in Italy.
It was with this money that Schiaparelli eventually returned to
Europe, but not to Rome—this time it was to Paris.
    In Paris, Schiaparelli began her career as a designer She
opened her first shop in 1927, at 4 rue de la Paix, a street lead-
ing into the place Vendéme. Her popularity increased, and in
1935 she opened her store permanently at 21 place Vendéme
and started to compete with Chanel. In contrast to Coco
Chanel’s knowledge of the intricacies of design and sewing,
Schiaparelli knew nothing about how to construct clothing. She
was an artist who drew what she wanted and simply supervised
the manufacture. This annoyed Chanel, who called Schiaparelli
“that Italian artist who makes dresses.”
     Schiaparelli’s first design was a sweater with a trompe l’oeil
bow in the front. The idea for this design was considered shock-
ing then, and the word shocking is still used to describe Schia-
parelli’s designs and colors. Her fashion had a tremendous
sense of humor. There were hats made to look like anything
else—shoes, lamb cutlets, fabric whose pattern made it look
torn, handbags in the shape of telephones, and other designs
that played on the trends of the time and other cultures. Schia-


Zoe
       Les Grandes     Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendéme

parelli was friends with the major artists of the time and used
the genius of Cocteau and Dalf to design daring and clever
clothing.
     “Shocking” also became the name of her perfume. Her
Shocking perfume came in a bottle shaped like the torso of a
woman—a bottle designed by Dalf based on the curves of ac-
tress Mae West.
    There is still an office to represent Schiaparelli products in
the building, although, regrettably, none of her clothing is still
being made.
     The jewel of the place Vendéme is no. 15, the Hétel Ritz.
The name is so associated with luxury it has come into the ver-
nacular in common expressions, such as “ritzy” or “puttin’ on
the ritz.” Ritz crackers were invented during the Depression to
create an impression of luxury. F. Scott Fitzgerald, a fan of the
hotel, titled one of his short stories “The Diamond as Big as the
Ritz.”
     At the end of the nineteenth century, César Ritz had the
brilliant idea to start a luxury hotel at a time when the wealthy
rarely stayed in hotels; they visited at one another’s estates. His
concept was to create a princely house where the wealthy
would feel at home. He paid close attention to detail: when he
saw a horse-drawn wagon dragging a cauldron of hot water to
the Hotel le Bristol for the Prince of Wales’s bath, he knew then
that his hotel would have private bathrooms with hot and cold
water for every room. The bathrooms at the Ritz were so extra-
ordinary, Parisians came to view the marvels “like visitors to a
museum,” Mme Ritz wrote in her memoirs.
     Ritz didn’t stop at the baths. His rooms were the first to be
electrically lighted, but with the precaution of peach-colored
shades to flatter the women’s complexions. He also offered tele-
phones in every room.
    Today the Ritz is owned by Mohammed Al Fayed, who has
invested more than $250 million in renovations. There were ru-
mors that he wanted to sell the property after his son, Dodi, died
in the Paris car crash that also killed Princess Diana in 1997.
     One of Ritz’s best moves was to hire Auguste Escoffier as his
chef. “Good    food is the basis of true happiness,” Escoffier


                                                               259
Pariswalks

would often say. In our opinion, Escoffier’s version of happi-
ness is truer than Van Cleef & Arpels’, and we are not alone. In
response to the question “Would you like a jewel from Cartier?”
famed hostess Elsa Maxwell is reputed to have said, “No, I'd
prefer a party at the Ritz.”
    Today the chef at the Ritz restaurant, LEspadon (sword-
fish), is Michel Roth, winner of the Bocuse d’Or and Best
Craftsman in France, 1991. Enjoy a meal in the elegant dining
room with trompe loeil ceilings and red velvet banquettes or
on the quiet flowered terrace. In 2004, the prix fixe menus were
€68 for lunch and €160 for dinner.
     One of the most famous residents of the Ritz was Coco
Chanel, who lived here for thirty-five years. Today the name
Chanel is synonymous with wealth, style, and class, but Chanel
herself was not born into the upper class. An illegitimate and
unwanted daughter named Gabrielle, she earned the name
Coco in her career prior to fashion—as a cocotte (high-class
courtesan). It was through a wealthy lover, an English noble-
man named Boy Capel, that Chanel got her start in designing.
Capel gave her the gift of a small millinery boutique in the place
Vendéme, a place chic enough to distance Chanel from her
shabby beginnings.
   _ From the small shop, Chanel grew an empire. She opened
her studio nearby, on the rue Cambon, while still maintaining a
storefront in the place Venddme. The back entrance of the Ritz
opened to the front entrance of her studio. Chanel’s goal,
which was revolutionary at the time, was to dress the women of
Paris “simply, and in black.” Her designs—graceful and mod-
ern, austere and independent—challenged Poiret, the reigning
fashion designer at the time. In response to them, he said, “Un-
til now women were beautiful and architectural, like the prow
of a ship. Now they all resemble undernourished telephone op-
erators.”
     Chanel’s place in the fashion world allowed her access to
high society, a place where she would never have belonged on
her own. Chanel linked herself to the wealthiest members of
society and to the most influential artists, such as Salvador Dall,
all of whom influenced her designs. Coco Chanel was the epit-
ome of French fashion and style, which at the time set the tone

256
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendédme

for the rest of the world. Her role and styles remained unchal-
lenged until 1935, when Elsa Schiaparelli moved in to the place
Venddme.
    The Ritz has restored Chanel’s apartments at great expense
and effort. Sixty people worked seven days a week for two
months to re-create her personal décor. You can experience the
two-bedroom, two-bath suite for €6,600 a night.
    The Ritz has always been a draw for American authors. In
the late twenties, F Scott Fitzgerald and his wife, Zelda, enjoyed
the glamour of the hotel and introduced Ernest Hemingway to
its pleasures. Hemingway was still far too poor to pay for his
own drinks, but soon he began saving his money and betting
on horses to finance a once-a-week indulgence. After the finan-
cial success of The Sun Also Rises, he was finally able to afford a
room at the Ritz, saying “When you're in Paris, the only good
reason for not staying at the Ritz is lack of money.” Small detail.
    On June 14, 1940, German officers marched into the Ritz
with an official order of requisition, and the Nazis began a four-
year occupation of the hotel. The managing director of the Ritz
ordered his remaining staff (all those who wished to leave at the
Germans’ arrival were given permission to go) to provide ser-
vice but nothing more. In fact, a mini resistance cell was orga-
nized to send out information on the comings and goings of the
German high command—disguised as fictitious food orders
from the Ritz kitchens.
    A stay at the Ritz was the prize for high-ranking officers.
Goering stayed here. Ostensibly stationed in Paris to command
the bombing of England, Goering apparently spent most of his
time pillaging French art.
    On August 25, 1944, Hemingway “liberated” the Ritz. He
arrived in a jeep with a group of armed allied soldiers ready to
capture the Germans. Discharging their weapons at nothing
more than linen sheets drying on the rooftop during their
sweep of the hotel that turned up no one—the Germans had al-
ready left—Hemingway and the other soldiers all repaired to
the bar to celebrate their victory with martinis.
    Relive the era with a drink at the Hemingway Bar, open to
the public from 6:30 pm. to 2 A.M., Mondays through Satur-
days, or in the Vendéme and Cambon bars (jackets required).

                                                                DD t,
Pariswalks

    The basement of the Ritz houses an elegant health club and
the largest private swimming pool in Paris. While the hotel
prefers to focus on the elegance and luxury of its facilities, the
pool has received the most attention as the location where the
British-born American ambassador to France, Pamela Harriman,
died of a stroke. An elegant and colorful person in Paris society,
she was a great devotée of the pool. For you, an annual sub-
scription will cost €3,400.
    Another way to experience the Ritz tradition is to enroll in
the Ecole Ritz Escoffier. This cooking school offers a variety of
options, from amateur to professional. Most classes, including
children’s classes, are in French, so for many Americans the
most convenient is the Monday-afternoon demonstration class
offered in English for €47.
    Entering the Ritz can be daunting. You will be scrutinized
by security and doormen, and we were told that the “typical
American tourist in shorts with a camera around his neck” is
not permitted to enter. We recommend that you be well dressed
and walk with purpose if you wish to see the inside of the hotel.
Ask where the shops are. They are always willing to sell.
      At no. 13, to the left of the entry to the Ministry of Justice,
is a marble stone engraved with an official meter measure. It
was put here in 1795 under the Convention, along with fifteen
others in public places in the city, to familiarize the citizenry
with the new measure. This is one of two remaining meter mea-
sures in Paris.
     The Emir of Dubai owns the southwestern corner of the
place. He has reportedly initiated renovations that are not in
keeping with the original style of the building and yet has never
actually lived in the hétel. You can identify his property by the
blank look of the tinted windows and the empty feeling of the
building.
    Leave the place from the south side and turn left onto the
rue Saint-Honoré. Across the street, Goyard, Malletier, at no.
233, is one of those old-fashioned shops that make us wish we
led the kind of lifestyle that required its services. A custom
trunkmaker since 1853, Goyard has supplied luggage to a list of
prominent customers, including the Duchess of Windsor and
members of the British royal family, presidents of the United

258
        Les Grandes     Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendédme

States; the Grand Duke of Russia, Sarah Bernhardt, Catherine
Deneuve, John D. Rockefeller, and César Ritz.
    Goyard’s trunks are made of mahogany and covered with a
custom waterproof fabric of linen, hemp, and cotton. The only
change that has been made over time is that new dyes are being
used to create the bright colors for the contemporary trunks.
     Goyard’s forte is specialized cases, such as a trunk for thirty-
five pairs of shoes made for the Duchess of Windsor. Go up-
stairs to see the trunks made for chef Alain Ducasse. One is
designed to hold all Ducasse’s important cooking tools and his
favorite pots and pans. A second is lined with shelves to trans-
port his cookbooks. The conference table in the center of the
room is used by clients and the Goyard designers to plan the re-
quirements for personalized trunks.
     Not being very savvy, Alison asked the representative how
one could check these trunks with an airline. He politely ex-
plained that the people who ordered these masterpieces usually
traveled by private plane. The shop does sell small pieces of lug-
gage, handbags, and wallets that we average Joes can indulge in.
     At no. 231 is one of the several excellent chocolate shops in
Paris, Jean-Paul Hévin. Buy chocolate bars from different coun-
tries in Africa and South America to appreciate the different fla-
vors chocolate can have. The finest chocolate is always
bittersweet, and the higher the cocoa content, the more intense
and less sweet the flavor. Anything over 70 percent is too strong
for most Americans. You can also buy mixed chocolates in gift
boxes. Choose from the selection of poems printed on cards in
a box by the door to include with your gift. On the second floor
have a light lunch or, even better, afternoon tea featuring an in-
dulgent chocolate pastry made by Hévin, a master pdtissier (pas-
try chef).
     No. 352 is restored; its monumental door and balcony are
classified.
     Nos. 235-229 were the site of the Couvent des Feuillants.
The buildings on the rue Saint-Honoré were added in 1782 to
offer apartments for rent to raise revenues for the convent. Un-
fortunately, this was a short-lived enterprise. The Revolution
soon followed, and in 1790 the convent was closed and a Revo-
lutionary group, the Club des Feuillants, took over the property.

                                                                 259
Pariswalks

     Louis XVI and his family spent three nights here before be-
ing transferred into imprisonment in the Temple. In 1804, the
buildings were razed to make way for new streets, leaving only
this piece. Enter the courtyard of no. 229 to see the remains of
the back of the nave of the convent’s church. Today, the tower-
like structure, plastered over in white, supports the building on
the other side of the wall.
     The convent got its start in 1587 when sixty-two Bernadine
monks and their abbot settled here in a ruined house, dedicat-
ing themselves to an ascetic life. Henry III hired an architect to
build a proper convent, and it was Henry IV who placed the
first stone in 1601. That same year, Marie de Médicis came to
the still-primitive church to pray for the birth of a son. A few
months later, Louis XIII was born. Anne of Austria tried the
same technique in 1637 and gave birth to Louis XIV a year later.
      La Fontaine, famous for his moral fables, lived in a flat
above the entrance to the convent. For twenty years he was the
guest of Mme de la Sabliére, the flat’s owner. He moved in, in
1673, after the death of his first patroness, the wealthy, wid-
owed Duchesse d’Orléans.
    No. 350 has an extraordinary history. Originally it was two
houses, and in 1746 the eastern half was occupied by Charles
de Savalette, a guard of the royal treasury, while the western half
was owned by Gilbert de Noziéres, who left it to his daughter,
the wife of Savalette. In 1774, the two houses and the house
next door, at no. 348, became one under the ownership of
Charles-Pierre de Savalette de Langes, a former royal magistrate
and guard of the treasury. Very wealthy, in 1791 he loaned
seven million livres to the counts of Artois and Provence to en-
able them to emigrate and escape the Revolution. But being a
cautious man, he hedged his bets and rallied to the Revolution,
taking as a lodger Barrére, a member of the Committee of Pub-
lic Safety. This smart move saved Savalette’s head when the
Commune came after him for the royalist loan.
    Savalette died in 1798. During the Restoration, a young
woman named Jenny Savalette came to Paris complaining bit-
terly about her financial ruin as a result of the outstanding loan
her father had made to the brothers of Louis XVI. She was wel-
comed with open arms and a government pension, a political

260
        Les Grandes    Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendédme

posting to the head of the post office of Villejuif, and an apart-
ment in the Chateau de Versailles. She socialized in the highest
tanks of society for many years, until her death, in 1858, when
she left a fortune of more than 200,000 francs. Imagine the
neighbors’ shock when they came to prepare her for burial and
discovered that not only was she no relation to Savalette but
she was also a man who had conned them all for years!
    Enter the courtyard of no. 350 to see a charming statue of a
naked lady.
    Nos. 350-334 date from the late 1700s and early 1800s.
No. 334 was known as the petit Hétel de Noailles because the
Duchesse de Noailles gave it to her son in 1723. See page 268
for the Hétel de Noailles proper.
    No. 223, a splendid house eleven windows wide, decorated
with vermicelli stones, a shell above the door, and a mascaron,
was the home of Mlle George, a classical actress in the mid-
nineteenth century. She was the kept woman of the Polish
prince Boleslas Sapieha, who reportedly paid her 5,000 francs a
night. Pas mal.
     Turn left into the rue du Marché Saint-Honoré. No. 1 (up
a little from the corner) is Styl Honoré, a pen and ink store.
They are known for the inks made in special colors, such as cas-
sis and kiwi. They have a pen for every requirement. Open only
on weekdays.
    At no. 5 is WK, a second-hand store. Always shop for
second-hand clothes in a neighborhood where the women
are better dressed than you. At WK you can pick up Chanel,
YSL, Prada, Dior, and much more at prices that start around
€100.
    This short street is a rare food street in this neighborhood,
although it is not really adequate—there is no bakery to be
seen. However, across the street is LEcume, at no. 6, a serious
fish store with an oyster and raw bar in the back. The shop does
not have a restaurant license, so all the fish is uncooked, but
their sushi and oysters have a loyal following, including a men-
tion by Patricia Wells in the International Herald Tribune. A tape
of seagulls plays in the background.
    The top of the street is dotted with restaurants. But we must
warn you that the place you see opening before you is also

                                                              261
Pariswalks

packed with restaurants where you may fare better. The ones on
the street are popular local hangouts, and their customers prob-
ably find the trendy restaurants in the place too chi-chi for their
taste. Try the traditional Au Bistro, at no. 8, Le Rubis, at no.
10, or La Table du Marché, at no. 12. As proof of their adher-
ence to tradition, Le Rubis still has Turkish toilets—a ceramic
square with “footprints” for you to crouch over a hole. (In con-
trast, the ultra-sleek bathrooms of Nomad’s, at the comer in the
place, are sheathed in black stone so shiny you can watch your-
self using the toilet.)
     Enter the place du Marché Saint-Honoré. In good
weather, come here to see and/or participate in the very popular
outdoor lunch scene far from car traffic. The eastern half of the
place, on your right, is lined with restaurants, their tables
spilling onto the sidewalk, every seat claimed.
     The place was originally the Couvent des Jacobins. It was
founded by Marie de Médicis in 1613 for the Dominicans,
called “Jacobins” because they came from the rue Saint-
Jacques. Although there are no longer any traces of the convent,
it was once extensive.
      The main entrance to the convent was at the present rue du
Marché Saint-Honoré and the rue Saint-Honoré, and the monu-
mental entry portal was three arcades topped with statues. The
central arcade was large enough for carriages, the sides for
pedestrians. The courtyard was fifty meters long, the church
fifty-five, and behind that, convent buildings surrounding a vast
garden extended back past the rue Gomboust. The convent was
so extravagant, that a writer of the period sourly remarked that
Queens Marie de Médicis and Anne of Austria, and Marquis
Jean du Tillet de la Bussiére, “did the convent a lot of [financial]
good.”
    In 1792 the convent, with its sixty monks and twenty
novices, was eliminated and replaced with the Revolutionary
Club des Jacobins, with Robespierre in command. As the Revo-
lution turned on itself, a decree of 28 Floréal (eighth month of
the French Revolutionary calendar), an III (May 18, 1795) de-
clared that the establishment of the Jacobins of the rue Saint-
Honoré would be given over to a public market that would
be named the Market of the Ninth of Thermidor (the date of

262
         Les Grandes   Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Venddme

Robespierre’s execution). Completed in 1810, the market was
four very large slate-roofed sheds surrounding a fountain. The
plan was to build elegant apartments in the style of the rue de
Rivoli, but it was thought that no one would rent so far from
the center of Paris. Sober, somewhat boring buildings were built
instead. We think that high-rent apartments were impossible
not because of location but because of the neighbors. Why
would a wealthy person choose to live on top of a dirty, noisy
market  that included several butchers, with their carcasses,
stench, and attendant flies?
    Unfortunately, in 1960, the market was torn down and re-
placed with a charmless cement building providing parking, a
gas station, and a firehouse. This in tum came down in the
1990s, to be replaced with the present glass structure. The ar-
chitect, Ricardo Bofill, chose glass to reflect the buildings sur-
rounding the square. There is a small food market here on
Wednesday afternoons and Saturday mornings, until 1:30 pM.,
and an occasional antiques fair in the place.
    Before you settle in for lunch, walk all around the place to
assess your options. At no. 18, on the south side of the square,
is Le Pain Quotidien, an extremely popular breakfast and
lunch spot appreciated for its earthy breads and fresh, light
food. This is a small chain with outposts in New York City. At
no. 24 is LAbsinthe, a bistro owned by Michel Rostang and
run by his daughter, Caroline. In winter, dine in the comfort-
able, smoke-free rooms, and in summer, eat on the terrace. All
the restaurants here will serve you a good meal, ranging from
traditional French to Italian or Asian—just be sure to arrive be-
fore 1 pM. in the summer if you want a coveted outdoor table.
     In the northwest corner, at no. 33 place du Marché Saint-
Honoré, be sure to check out Philippe Model’s fabulous hat
shop. The multipaned exterior looks charmingly old-fashioned,
while the bright blue paint hints at the sense of humor found in-
side. Philippe Model is well known as the provider of hats for the
social gratin (upper crust) who attend events such as the Royal
Ascot horse races or the French equivalent, Le Prix de Diane.
     Straw hats in fabulous shapes and in all colors of the rain-
bow are topped with extravagant flowers and ribbons. Some re-
semble an entire garden poised delicately on your head. While

                                                              263
Pariswalks




Philippe Model’s hat shop



we were there, women arrived carrying their dresses to match to
a hat for their special occasions.
    Philippe Model also sells fabulous gloves with fur and em-
broidery in lush colors. Hats start at €150 for a plain straw hat
and go up into the thousands. Gloves range from €70 to €900.
The shop opens at 11] A.M.
      At no. 23, on the east side, note the round tower in the
facade. Perhaps this was a staircase.
      Cotélac, at no.       19, in the southwest comer, is a French
women’s clothing chain with four boutiques in Paris. Designer
Raphaelle Cavalli makes easy-to-wear, casual clothes with
panache. Her family comes from Lyon, the heart of the French

264
          Les Grandes         Trois:     Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendédme

        roto




            4



The courtyard of the Hotel de Noailles



textile business, and she buys her cloth there. She says, “I know
how to make fabric live, not really how to make clothes.”
     Leave the square on the rue du Marché Saint-Honoré, in the
center of the south side, and retrace your steps back to the rue
Saint-Honoré. We will be heading down to the rue de Rivoli,
but before we do, let’s make a brief detour to the left, on the
south side of the rue Saint-Honoré.
    No. 209 has an ironic history. Following the Revolution, it
was the home of Dr. Guillotin, the inventor of the guillotine. Dr.
Guillotin’s infamous creation was originally a humane effort to
make death swift and painless, and he could not have imagined
the ways in which it would be abused. We don’t know if he ever

                                                                       265
Pariswalks




An old-fashioned pharmacy



watched the tumbrels lumber down this street with their hu-
man cargos, but he could surely have heard their echoes once
he moved here.
    The decorated shop fronts at no. 211 are wonderfully
evocative of an earlier century. Originally, no. 211 was the Hé-
tel de Noailles, which was an extensive property that stretched
almost to the place des Pyramides, to the south, and the pre-
sent no, 229 rue Saint-Honoré, to the west. Originally built in
1687, the property came into the hands of Count Adrien-
Maurice de Noailles, later Duc de Ayen in 1711. He was mar-
ried to a niece of Mme de Maintenon, first the tutor of Louis
XIV’s children and then the king’s wife. Noailles was named
maréchal, ambassador, state minister, and pair de France (peer of
the realm). He was known for his intelligence and work ethic.


266
            Les Grandes   Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendédme

He made his home into a veritable museum and installed a bar-
rier in front of the entry, a privilege reserved only for the royal
family and the very highest dignitaries.
     In 1774, Noailles’s daughter married the Marquis de
LaFayette. We know him as the French hero of the American
Revolution, but few know more than that. He was orphaned at
twelve, a very wealthy eligible young man; he joined the army at
fourteen and married Noailles’s daughter in 1774, at age six-
teen. She was fifteen. When he sailed to the American colonies
in 1777 (at only nineteen years old) to fight the British, his wife
remained in Paris, in the family hdtel. Marie Antoinette paid
them an honorary visit here in 1779, upon LaFayette’s return
to Paris.
    The hétel was confiscated during the French Revolution and
used by different committees. It was finally restored to the
Noailles family under the Restoration. The huge property was
divided in 1830 and cut up by the creation of new streets in the
neighborhood.
    Today what remains is the property of the Clarion Hétel
Saint-James et Albany. The front door is on the rue de Rivoli, but
you can enter the beautiful courtyard through the porte cochére
(carriage entrance) between the lovely shop facades. The court-
yard behind the iron gate is used by the hotel as an outdoor
restaurant in the warm weather. Go in. Note the wrought-iron
balconies, mascarons, and Louis XV décor,
    At 213 rue Saint-Honoré is Colette, a busy center for mod-
ern design and trendy accessories. Young people come here to
get the latest watch or electronic must-have. The lower level has
a sleek restaurant open for lunch.
    Return to the corner and make a left onto the rue du 29Juil-
let, named for the third day of the 1830 revolution, and walk
south to the rue de Rivoli. Named for Napoléon’s success at
Rivoli in January 1797, this street is a relative newcomer for the
heart of Paris. This western half of the street was built from
1800 to 1835 with strict zoning regulations. There were to be
no artisans, no workers who used a hammer, no food sellers,
and no shopkeepers who needed to use an oven. The facades
had to be uniform with arcades and could not be decorated


                                                                 267
Pariswalks

with writing or shop signs. To encourage businesses to agree to
these strict rules, all owners were exempted from taxes for thirty
years.
     Shop signs are obviously now permitted, and many of the
stores are tourist oriented, spilling scarves, T-shirts, and post-
cards into the arcades. There are, however, a few holdovers from
the elegant 1800s, when this neighborhood was the center for
wealthy English visitors who stayed in the expensive hotels and
shopped in the British-style clothing stores and English book-
stores.
     Galignani, at no. 224, was begun in 1802 to foster friend-
ship between France and England. It was the first English book-
shop on the Continent and was a home for Englishmen to read
the papers and find English-language books. Today the excel-
lent selection includes both languages.
      Next door, Angelina, at no. 226, is another traditional spot
for the denizens of the neighborhood. Established in 1903, it
was originally called Rumpelmayer for the Austrian owner, An-
toine Rumpelmayer. But Antoine had a brother in the same
neighborhood, and when they had a falling out he renamed his
tea shop after his wife, Angelina.
    The décor of painted panels and mirrors has not changed
and, despite being a little faded, has its charm. Generations of
Parisians have come here to enjoy their rich hot chocolate and a
pastry known as a Mont Blanc, made with mounds of chestnut
cream piled high to represent the alp for which it is named.
    The winter is the shop’s busy season, when writers, design-
ers and their models, actors, and French society grandmothers
bring their grandchildren here for a treat. Coco Chanel and
Marcel Proust were frequent patrons.
    The next two addresses on the street belong to luxury ho-
tels, the Meurice, at no. 228 rue de Rivoli, and the InterConti-
nental,    with its address   around   the corner,   at 3 rue   de
Castiglione. The InterContinental has a decidedly sober and
masculine décor; however, their courtyard restaurant is a de-
light, surrounded by elegant building facades and a greenhouse
back wall. For a peek at the traditional luxury within the hotel,
dine at night at the small restaurant LArdoise, at 28 rue du


268
          Les Grandes   Trois:   Concorde,   Madeleine,   Vendéme

Mont Thabor. From their windows you will be impressed by
one of the hotel’s ornate ballrooms. The restaurant is also rea-
sonably priced and serves good food. The menu is written each
day on the slate board (ardoise).
   WH Smith is the other English bookstore in the neighbor-
hood, at no. 248, the corner of rue de Rivoli and rue Cambon.
Smith’s is part of a large worldwide chain, and while it provides
an excellent selection of books, it does not have that same old-
world bookstore atmosphere that you find at Galignani’s.
    The building was occupied during the war by the Germans,
who used it as an officer’s club for the Luftwaffe. Maybe this
was the hangout for the officers whom Goering didn’t want in
the Ritz. After the liberation, German propaganda and graffiti
were found on a door in the basement.
