Walk 1: Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre


   Shakespeare and Co. Kilometer Zero Paris.
      —Bookstamp at Shakespeare and Company
Starting Point: The corner of the Petit Pont and the quai de
    Montebello, 5th arrondissement
Métro: Saint-Michel, RER
Buses: 24, 47 on the Petit Pont; 21, 27, 38, 85, 96 at place
    Saint-Michel



Here you are in the heart of Paris, looking at Notre-Dame on the
Ile de la Cité, where the Parisii, the tribe for whom the city was
named, originally settled long before Caesar came here in 52
B.C.E. (The Romans stayed four hundred years.) At that time
there were eight or nine islands in this region of the Seine, but
as the water receded, the number was reduced to only two—
this one and, behind it, the Ile Saint-Louis.
    Walk to the large square, the place du Parvis, and look at
Notre-Dame, glowing after its recent cleaning. About twenty
feet from the portals look on the ground for a brass octagonal
marker. It says, POINT 0 DES ROUTES DE FRANCE. It is said that if
you stand on it and turn three times, your wish will come true.
This spot marks the official center of France; stone markers
along the French roadside mark the number of kilometers to
Pariswalks

this spot. This walk will not take you beyond 0 KILOMETERS PARIS,
but there is much to see.
    The Seine in prehistoric times was a wide, slow-flowing river
more than a hundred feet higher than it is today. The river me-
andered all over the area between Mont Sainte-Genevieve, to
the south (take a look about five blocks down and you will see
the hill), and Montmartre, one mile away to the north.
    Even Parisians forget that the river was once so wide, but in
1910 an extraordinary flood in the month of January reminded
them of the tributaries of the Seine still flowing underground.
The subterranean waters welled to the surface and swept
through the city. From the present course of the river to the
place de l’Opéra and from the Gare Saint-Lazare to the suburbs
of the north, the secret Seine emerged from hiding and took
possession of the city once again.
    Postcards depicting the flood show men and women rowing
around Paris at the level of street signs. A great many important
historical records were lost, including those from some of the
major libraries and banks. Deep cellars in this area are still ce-
mented in mud from the flood, and excavations regularly un-
earth buried architecture and artifacts.
    For ancient Paris, this sprawling river, whose waters were
sweet and clean enough to drink, was a boon. Because of it, the
Parisii felt safe from surprise attacks; an enemy would have to
cross large stretches of swamp to reach the island. The river was
also an excellent highway for trade, as it still is today. By Gallic
times the Seine had already dug its present channel, but the
banks to either side, especially the Right Bank, remained
swampy and uninhabitable.
    The first part of the mainland to be settled was the south, or
Left Bank, where the ground rose more sharply than on the
marshy Right Bank, called the Marais (marsh). (See Walk 4.) If
you look up the rue du Petit Pont with your back to the bridge,
you will see, about two hundred yards away and beyond what is
now the rue des Ecoles, the Collége de France on the left side
and the observatory tower of the Sorbonne on the right.
    Two thousand years ago, Roman baths stood on these sites,
for it was on this hill that the ancient residents finally got far
enough above the water line to build important structures. The

4
                                          Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

remains of the baths still exist under the Collége de France.
Other ruins close by, unearthed as recently as 1946, can be
seen in the garden of the Musée National du Moyen Age. The
area between this high-water line and the river—the area you
are visiting today—was settled much later.
    The site of the present church of Saint-Séverin, the back of
which you can see down the rue du Petit Pont on the right, was
a small, dry hillock where a hermit chose to settle in the fifth
century. Later, as the Seine continued to dig itself a deeper
channel, the area between high ground and the river filled with
houses and narrow paths.
     Even as late as the Middle Ages, the street level was thirty
feet (three stories) lower than it is today. This is why three levels
of cellar still exist in the seventeenth-century buildings you see
in the area. Until the middle of the nineteenth century the
streets and alleys of the quartier ran steeply down to the river’s
edge.
     The present ground-floor shops are on what was once the
second floor of these buildings. Notice the thirty-foot embank-
ment that rises from the Seine; where that stands, houses once
stood.
    The first bridge connecting the Ile de la Cité to the main-
land, the present Petit Pont, was built here because at this point
the island is closest to the Left Bank. A little fortress, the Petit
Chatelet, which doubled as a tollhouse, stood at the end of the
bridge on the spot where you are now. It was the custom then,
as it is today on some bridges, to pay a toll in order to pass in
and out of the city.
    Another, larger, fortress, the Grand Chatelet, stood on the
right bank of this part of the Seine, at the Pont Saint-Michel.
Both these bastions were used as prisons during the French
Revolution. With the help of underground passageways to
many points in the vicinity, prison affairs could easily be carried
on in secret.
    The Petit Pont was not only a passageway; two- and three-
story houses and shops lined either side of it, making it the
busiest street in town. In the Middle Ages the picturesque as-
pect of this bridge—really a street thrown across the river—was
enlivened by philosophers offering their intellectual wares and

                                                                   5
Pariswalks

by jugglers, singers, and dog and bear trainers. During the day it
was a paradise for cutpurses, at night for cutthroats. The bridge
was rebuilt after fire, flood, and attack more times than the
French care to count. Fire was the most common cause of its
destruction until the eighteenth century, when the bridge was
finally rebuilt in stone.
     In the Middle Ages people believed that the bodies of those
drowned in the Seine could be located by setting a votive can-
dle on a wooden disc afloat in the river and noting where it
stopped or went out. It was especially important to find
drowned bodies before the authorities did, because a huge fee
of 101 écus, the equivalent of a year’s pay for a manual laborer,
is said to have been charged for the delivery of a loved one from
the morgue at the Chatelet.
     One story about this bridge and its fires has it that a poor
old widow whose son had drowned set a candle afloat in hopes
of finding his body. The candle floated close to a straw-laden
barge, setting it on fire. The barge touched the wooden scaf-
folding of a pillar of the bridge, and from there the flames
spread to the bridge itself. In three days, the raging fire de-
stroyed the bridge and the houses on it.
     If you like, climb down the steps on the island side of the
channel near the Petit Pont, or on the Left Bank toward the Pont
au Double, and look at the Seine close up. You will be in the
company of fishermen who catch live, though small, fish; of
clochards (tramps) who find this spot slightly warmer and more
private for sleeping than the streets; and of lovers of all ages ex-
pressing varying degrees of affection.
    The quai de Montebello, the street that runs along the river-
side in front of you and is packed with cars (we say this with ab-
solute confidence after having watched the street over an entire
year at all hours of the day and night), was built by Baron
Georges Haussmann. He was the famous city planner of
Napoléon III who, in the 1850s and 1860s, built most of the
avenues and boulevards that have fortunately and unfortunately
saved Paris for the automobile.
    Cross the quai with the light (watch for turning cars). The
small strip of park before you was once covered by the Petit
Chatelet. Later, an annex of the Hétel Dieu hospital was located

6
                                        Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

here. The park was finally cleared in the early 1920s. This little
park with benches and the park of Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre, to
your left (with your back to the river), are the only pieces of
green along the Seine, the only spots in Paris as far downstream
as the Eiffel Tower that the French have allowed to lie fallow.
This pocket-size park, which once belonged to vagrants and
boule (bocce) players, has now been redesigned and discourages
lingering.



                  Place     du Petit     Pont

The street that leads out from the bridge is called the place du
Petit Pont. At the next crossing its name changes to the rue du
Petit Pont. In both places, the street is the same width. If you
look closely at the buildings on either side of the rue du Petit
Pont, you will probably be able to work out why the rue is as
wide as the place.
     The apartment houses on the left side of the street were
built in the seventeenth century. They are straight buildings
with slim, rectangular windows free of omamentation except for
iron grillwork on the windows. On the right side of the street
are nineteenth-century buildings heavy with curves, carvings,
protuberances, and balconies. They stand on ground cleared
when the street was widened and rebuilt in 1857.
    The rue du Petit Pont lasts one short block, then becomes
the rue Saint-Jacques. From prehistoric times this road, which
climbs straight up the gentle hill in front of you, was the main
road from Paris to the south.
    When the Romans first came to Lutetia, which was what
Paris was then called, they came this way. Soon after, they trans-
formed the dirt road into a paved road nine meters (twenty-nine
feet) wide. Two huge stones from this construction were found
below the road’s surface in 1926; you will see them later in the
parvis of Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre. Elephant remains have also
tumed up, which will give you an appreciation of how the Ro-
mans thought big and built big, and why we still speak with ad-
miration and awe of Roman roads.
     As early as 1230 the rue Saint-Jacques was given its present

                                                                 7
Pariswalks

name because the famous pilgrimage to the shrine of Saint
Jacques (Saint James) of Compostela traveled south along it.
The route to Santiago (Spanish for Saint James) de Compostela
followed the north Spanish coast before turning inland, and the
pilgrims were quick to gather and bring back scallop shells (co-
quilles) as proof of their voyage and their devotion. The pilgrims
displayed the shells whenever and wherever possible, and as a
result the shells have come to be acommon symbol even to this
day. Shell Oil uses its name to signify its role as a refueling stop
for us on our modern pilgrimages; we eat coquilles Saint
Jacques; and shell designs are common         as a decoration on
buildings and churches, and in wood on furniture.



                   Rue    de la Bicherie

Turn left into the rue de la Bicherie, the street facing the small
park, and pass the café, Le Petit Pont, a good place for a light
lunch and a most pleasant spot on a sunny day. A biicherie is a
storehouse for wood. It was on this street that barges loaded
with logs for heating deposited their goods. There used to be a
restaurant here called La Bicherie, which remembered its past
not only in its name but with a wood fire, which burned on a
hearth in the center of the room. Regrettably, today there is a
tourist-oriented café in this spot.
    The house next door, no. 39, is very special. The houses we
have been looking at are mostly seventeenth-century; this one
was built in the early sixteenth. It is a small two-story wooden
structure, the kind that was typical five hundred years ago and
can still be seen in towns like Riquewihr, in Alsace, or Conques,
in southern France, but that has almost vanished from most Eu-
ropean cities. The building once served as an inn and was hid-
den from sight for most of its long history. Le Petit Chatelet, as
the inn was called—after the fortress it stood behind and to
whose employees it gave meat and drink over the centuries—
was tucked away until 1909, when the ground was cleared be-
tween the rue de la Bucherie and the river. It is again a very
small, intimate restaurant with a fireplace to cook brochettes.
    The little building is architecturally interesting for several
                                                   Saint-Julien-le-Pau




George Whitman and his daughter, Sylvia, in front of their famous bookstore


reasons. Almost no wooden structures in Paris have survived;
the big enemy has been fire, as evidenced by the history of the
Petit Pont. Note the large dormer windows that jut out from the
steep roofline and the smaller windows on the attic floor above.
Step back and look at the exposed side of the building on its
right, and you will see, coming out from the exterior wall, the
ends of the framing beams used in its construction hundreds of
years ago. These are the wooden joists, half of which one some-
times sees as exposed rafters in a ceiling.
     Now look at the exposed side of the half-timbered remains
on the left of the building. There you will see one of only three
open staircases (escaliers a claire voie) left in Paris. This was the
typical staircase of the sixteenth century; it was replaced in the
seventeenth by the closed escalier a vis (corkscrew staircase).
     Immediately to the left is Shakespeare and Company. You
will get a hint of the store’s uniqueness from the amusing an-
nouncements on the notice board outside. George Whitman
and his lovely daughter, Sylvia, like to sell especially to people
who like to read. The ground floor is devoted mainly to books-
for-sale of all kinds—old and new, almost all in English. Whit-
man owns the house next door and keeps his own library and
an antiquarian bookshop there. The walls are covered with
Pariswalks

books he does not sell, including a first edition of James Joyce’s
Ulysses. This is where one gets a feeling of Whitman’s unusual
personality.
     The shop itself is a treasure trove of books and people, and
if you nose around long enough and look interested, Whitman
might invite you to tea. The front room was once a stone coutt-
yard; into it Whitman has set fragments of marble friezes, tiled
borders, and brass plaques. The narrow, one-person-at-a-time
staircase at the very back of the store leads to a maze of book-
lined rooms filled with chairs, couches, and beds. You can read
the books in these rooms, meet people, even take a nap if you
wish, and go to Whitman’s famous tea parties, on Sundays at
4 PM.
    More than a bookseller, Whitman takes in travelers, espe-
cially serious writers—a vanishing breed, he feels. If an author
notifies him ahead of time, he or she may stay in one of Whit-
man’s rooms free or in exchange for working in the shop for a
week or so, until other quarters are found.
     Shakespeare and Company has always promoted the liter-
ary avant-garde. When the publishing house of the same name
was originally founded by Sylvia Beach (the source of Whit-
man’s daughter’s name), it was the only house that would pub-
lish James Joyce’s Ulysses. Now Whitman gives young writers a
chance to be published in his review and to be heard at poetry
readings in his library, every Monday night at eight.
     Give this store some browsing time. It is generally open
from noon to midnight, or one to one. If you want a souvenir of
Paris, buy a book and get it stamped here. The inscription
around the head of William reads SHAKESPEARE AND CO. KILOME-
TER ZERO PARIS.
     Outside the shop, notice the small green fountain consist-
ing of a base and four women holding a crown from which a
stream of water flows down. In 1842, a British gentleman
named Sir Richard Wallace visited Paris and was unable to ob-
tain a glass of water from a local restaurant. On his return to En-
gland, he purchased more than one hundred of these water
fountains and had them installed all over Paris, where they be-
came a main source of drinking water. Drinking cups were sus-
pended from the hooks below the women’s feet. In love with

10
                                          Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

Paris, Wallace also offered his collection of paintings to the city,
which turned him down. It became instead the famous Wallace
collection in London.
    After World War II, most of the Wallace fountains were
stolen and modem copies were made. The original fountains
had four different women; in the copies the women all have the
same face, the same eyes and lips. Other differences are the po-
sitioning of their feet, the ruffles on the bodices of their dresses,
and the way the folds of their dresses fall. This one is not an
original, but look for other Wallace fountains as you walk
around the city.



             Rue    Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

Go around the corner to the right, into the rue Saint-Julien-le-
Pauvre. Nos. 4-8, on your right, are all owned by the same
people. The Esmeralda Hotel, no. 4, is a hotel named for Vic-
tor Hugo’s heroine in The Hunchback of Notre-Dame. The hotel
also achieved some fame in another book, Linnea in Monet’s
Garden, a children’s book written by Christina Bjork and illus-
trated by Lena Anderson. For connoisseurs of the neighbor-
hood, the details in the book’s watercolors will be impressively
authentic. The owner of the Esmeralda is, herself, a character
for a book. She came to Paris from the provinces and thought
that the city was especially beautiful from the Seine. She and
her husband went into partnership with a financial backer and,
with one decrepit boat, started the Bateaux-Mouches sight-
seeing boats on the Seine. On their first day out, their boat mal-
functioned, going only in circles. Today, however, this pleasure
boat line is a hugely successful tourist attraction—though as a
result of her divorce, the owner of the Esmeralda no longer has
any connection to the line.
     The owner never intended to run a hotel but somehow ac-
quired the building. It had only one bath and was occupied by
women who had lived there for forty years and hardly paid any
rent. She had to wait for changes in the law before she could evict
them, restore the building’s seventeenth-century details, and put
in all the necessary bathrooms. Today the small rooms are each

                                                                   11
Pariswalks

uniquely decorated with antiques and will fulfill all your dreams
of a truly “Left Bank” experience of Paris. Book well in advance.
     Notice from across the street the soft-beige stone building,
no. 10, and in particular the apartment’s elegant windows on
the French first floor (what Americans would call the second
floor), which are taller than the others. The tall, multipanel win-
dows are much more elegant than the plain French-door style
windows on the floor above. At each floor the windows are pro-
gressively smaller, denoting lower ceilings in the apartments. At
the very top, almost out of view, the tiny mansard windows
(named after their inventor, the architect Frangois Mansart) that
peep out from the sloping roof are reduced to one small pane.
The tallest windows of the ground floor mean, of course, higher
ceilings, a mark of distinction still dear to the French, especially
in old, nonstandardized apartments.
     The exterior decoration tells the same story. Thus, the iron
railings on the protruding sills of the two balconies on this first
floor are finer than those on the floor above, after which there
are no more balconies or grillwork at all. (Look at other exam-
ples of handwrought iron decoration on nineteenth-century
houses as well as those of the seventeenth century as you walk
around the city.)
   -It is clear that the first floor above the street was once the
coveted apartment, appartement noble. The ground floor, called
the rez-de-chaussée, which means “even with the road,” was re-
served for the concierge’s one or two rooms, the courtyards,
and the rubbish. The wealthy nobles and bankers stepped up
one flight; the middle-class professionals and shopkeepers
climbed two or three; the servants and workers trudged to the
top. Apartment buildings, therefore, in all but the poorest
neighborhoods, were microcosms of French society.
     The advent of the elevator, however, tumed this arrange-
ment upside down and also made possible the one-class high-
rise building. Today the servants’ rooms—often used as
workshops or extra bedrooms, sleep-in servants being hard to
come by—are located on the ground floor, alongside the
concierge; apartments cost more the higher you go, and the
prize residence is a sunlit, glass-enclosed, terraced retreat at
the top, as far as possible from the city’s noise and dirt. There

12
                               |
                      |   ‘ijn



                           }


                                   PTs




No. 10, rue Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre: Before the advent of the elevator, the best apart-
ment was on the French first floor.
Pariswalks

are relatively few of these newer apartment buildings on the
Left Bank, but the next time you visit the bourgeois neighbor-
hoods of western Paris (the seventh, eighth, and sixteenth ar-
rondissements), take a look at the imposing, prosperous
buildings with cut-stone facades and follow the lines of bal-
conies up to the elegant penthouses at the top.
     A very important person lives upstairs in the house at no.
12: the architect Claude Frémin. He is responsible for some of
the most remarkable restorations in the area. Frémin’s latest
project has been the restoration of the street: the wide brick
pavements have been returned to their original medieval width.
     The Tea Caddy, at no. 14, is one of the nicer tea shops in
Paris. A stop at this cozy shop is wonderful. Light meals (mainly
eggs in various forms), pastries made on the premises, and a
wide variety of teas are served. The Tea Caddy was founded in
1928 by Miss Kinklin, an English governess to a Rothschild off-
spring. The tea shop, which she had always dreamed of, was the
family’s retirement gift to her
     The Tea Caddy was formerly the stables of the building
next door. The entrance of no. 14 is an impressive stone gate-
way with massive wooden doors. Look above at the pediment
where Themis, the Greek goddess of justice in all its relations
to men, sits. She is represented as a dignified and commanding
prophetess holding the scales of justice and surrounded by
olive branches of peace, while a cherub holds an hourglass.
     The symbolism of this sculpture was carefully chosen in the
early seventeenth century, when this entry was added to the of-
ficial residence of Isaac de Laffémas, prefect of police of the
Chatelet under Cardinal Richelieu. The prefect was, among
other things, the king’s prosecutor, and we have cause to won-
der how wisely he used those scales. While he and his family
lived comfortably above ground, three levels of cellars below
were used as a prison. The cellars date from the fourteenth cen-
tury and were originally used to house the monks from the
church of Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre, across the street. This prison
eventually fell into disuse in the seventeenth century, but 150
years later, in 1793, the Revolution created such an overflow of
prisoners in the Petit and Grand Chatelets and everywhere else
that these cells were restored to use.

eG
                                                    Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre




                                                                       —



Themis, the Greek goddess ofjustice, at no. 14 rue Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre



     We have it on good authority that some rusty instruments
of torture remained in the lowest basement until recently.
Héléne, an excellent hairdresser whose salon was just down the
street, saw two of them when she and her husband were on the
trail of a damaged water pipe: a rack and a devilish seat with a
hole in it to allow the heat from boiling oil to cook a bound and
helpless victim—in the name of justice, of course.
     The house has been converted into apartments whose own-
ers keep the front door locked. This is unfortunate because the
interior restoration was beautifully done and is a perfect exam-
ple of how modern additions and restoration can enhance an
original fifteenth-century structure. Look over the wall at the
facade of the building. It is merely fagade. Concealed under-
neath this trompe l’oeil of plaster cut to look like stone is a
fifteenth-century half-timbered wall.
     Visit the odd church of Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre. Before you
is a truncated edifice with a lopsided pediment crowning a flat,
improvised facade, the remains of a thirteenth-century pillar,
and an iron-caged well flanking the front portal. There is much
to tell about Saint Julien himself, so you may wish to sit inside
the church (cool in summer, warm in winter) and read his story,

                                                                            Me)
Pariswalks

which supposedly took place in the first century. The story has
been told by Flaubert in his Trois Contes.
     Julien, the son of a noble family, was an avid hunter. One
day he was having excellent luck in the forest. He had killed a
doe and her fawn and was about to shoot the stag when the an-
imal turned and spoke to him. “How darest thou kill my family
and pursue me. Thou who wilt one day kill thine own father
and mother!” Julien was staggered by these words and swore a
sacred oath that he would never hunt again. To prevent the ful-
fillment of the prediction, he left his parents’ castle and went
off to serve the king.
     In the course of his duty Julien traveled to distant lands,
where he fought so valiantly that the king knighted him and re-
warded him with a castle and the hand in marriage of the widow
of a rich lord. The couple lived together very happily, except for
Julien’s irrepressible passion for the hunt. One moming his wife
encouraged him to go into the forest, saying that he had ab-
stained long enough and, besides, it could in no way affect his
parents. Julien succumbed and set out to hunt. But though he
imagined game in every thicket he could kill nothing.
     In Julien’s absence an old and travel-weary couple arrived at
his castle. His wife took them in and, as they conversed, dis-
covered that they were Julien’s parents, who had searched for
him everywhere since his unexplained departure. She wel-
comed them heartily and invited them to stay, offering them her
own bed.
     When Julien returned from the hunt, tired and frustrated,
he went straight to the bedroom to rest. Opening the door he
perceived two figures in his bed and flew into a rage. “This is
the reason  my wife encouraged me to hunt,” he said to himself,
and he drew his sword and slew the sleeping figures. At that,
his wife came to tell him the good news of his parents’ arrival.
When Julien realized what he had done, he wept bitterly.
“What will become of me, most unfortunate man? It is my dear
parents I have killed. I have fulfilled the promise of the stag on
the very day that I broke my vow never to hunt again. I will en-
joy no rest until 1 know God has accepted my repentance.”
    With these words he resolved to abandon his estate and for-
tune in order to do penance. His wife would not let him leave

16
                                                     Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre




Julien and his wife ferrying a beggar across the Seine



alone, and so the two settled on the shores of a large river, fer-
rying people across the water and offering them lodgings in the
small guest house that they built there.
    One bleak winter night, when Julien had gone to bed ex-
hausted, there was a knock at the door. A hideous stranger, half
frozen and half-dead, stood there asking first for hospitality and
then to be rowed across the river. Julien brought him into his
own bed and treated him with care. Later, as he was ferrying
him across the river, the stranger, who had looked so hideous
moments before, was suddenly transformed into a radiant an-
gel. He said, “Julien, the Lord sent me to tell thee that thy re-
pentance hath been accepted and that thy wife and thyself will
soon be able to rest in God.”
    Julien’s story is depicted in a remarkable fourteenth-century
stone relief, which is now fixed onto the facade of a modern cin-
ema around the corner, at no. 42 rue Galande, which we shall
see later.
     Not only was the large river where Julien and his wife set-
tled the Seine, but the site of their guest house later became the

                                                                         Wie
Pariswalks

junction of the two main Roman roads from Paris to the south:
the rue Saint-Jacques led to Orléans, and the rue Galande led to
Lyons and Italy. Actual proof of the existence of an oratory and
hostelry on this spot dates from the sixth century, when Bishop
Gregory of Tours visited the area, and the church of Saint-Julien
in particular. Records have been found showing that Gregory
preached a midnight mass here in 587.
    Both the hostelry and oratory were destroyed in 866 by
Norman invaders. The church was rebuilt much later, between
1170 and 1240. Much of that structure remains today, making
Saint-Julien the oldest church in Paris. Although Notre-Dame
was started a few years earlier, in 1163, it was not completed
until 1330. Parts of the church of Saint-Germain-des-Prés—the
bell tower, the bases of two towers, and part of the nave—are
older, but at the time it was built, the church was outside the
city walls, so it doesn’t count for strict antiquarians. Saint-
Julien-le-Pauvre is a poor church in comparison with the other
two. It has neither bell tower nor transept, but it does have lots
of pillars.
    What the church lacks in appearance it makes up for in col-
orful history. The original center of learning in Paris was Notre-
Dame, on the Ile de la Cité. It was Peter Abelard, the famous
and infamous theologian-philosopher, who broke with estab-
lished doctrine there at the beginning of the twelfth century
and led a massive student exodus to Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre, on
the Left Bank. Three thousand rebels went along with him,
thereby creating what became known as the Latin Quarter, that
is, the quarter of Latin-speaking clerics.
     Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre became the official seat of the newly
chartered Université de Paris and enjoyed the privilege of being
the site of the election of the rector magnificus and of a sermon
every two years restating the rights of students and teachers.
The church grew rich and built a network of underground cells
to house more than a hundred monks. In time, however, the
center of instruction shifted south, and by 1449 the monks had
been reduced to a lonely three.
    In 1524 the church was almost destroyed; the next year it
was decided that elections would never be held there again.
Students, unhappy over the election of a new rector, proceeded

18
                                          Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

to break chairs, windows, furniture, and statues, forcing the
church to close. With closure came neglect. An appraiser in
1640 noted that the rain and weather penetrated the building
“as if it were open countryside.”
     This is why the present entrance stands far back from the
original front of the church, which stood about where the street
runs now. The whole entrance hall was on the point of collapse
and had to be removed in the middle of the seventeenth cen-
tury. All that is left are the ravaged thirteenth-century pillar with
thin colonettes above, on the left side, and the twelfth-century
flowering well, on the right. Beside the well lies a huge slab of
stone that dates from the fourth century but was unearthed
only in 1926. Stones like this one formed part of the famous
Roman road that became the rue Saint-Jacques.
     After its long period of abandonment, the church and its
land were ceded in 1655 to the Hétel Dieu, the city hospital.
The hospital restored the remains of the church sufficiently for
it to serve as the hospital’s chapel as well. During the French
Revolution,   however,   more   than a hundred      years later, the
chapel, along with so many other churches, was shut down.
    Saint-Julien continued to suffer ignominy and was used al-
ternatively as a salt storehouse, as fairgrounds for wool mer-
chants, and as a flour granary. Photographs from the nineteenth
century show barrels of goods piled on the parvis, the area in
front of the entrance. Houses and stores leaned against the
church, glad to use its wall as one of their own.
    Sometime after the Hotel Dieu took over Saint-Julien and its
property, it built two wide three-story annexes on the Left Bank
facing the river, between the Petit Pont and the Pont au Double.
These massive additions blocked the view of the river and dark-
ened the streets in this area. Photographs taken from the front
of the church looking toward the Seine show a street that looks
like a dead end. The buildings were finally taken down in 1877,
when the hospital confined itself to its historic location on the
Ile de la Cité, next to Notre-Dame. The city fathers decided
then that no structure would ever again be built on this spot.
That is why we are fortunate enough today to have two green
pockets on the banks of the Seine on the quai de Montebello.
     It was not a disaster for those squat sick wards to have been

                                                                   19
Pariswalks

demolished. Hospital care in those days was to be avoided like
the plague; prayer was said to account for much of what healing
did take place. But it would have been a disaster to tear down
Saint-Julien itself. That intention seems scarcely credible, but in
fact an extension of the rue Monge (what is now the rue La-
grange) was planned that would have cut into this area and
gone right through the church and to the rue Saint-Jacques. At
the last minute, as is so often the case when it comes to saving
historical monuments, the plans were revoked, and Saint-Julien
and the small neighborhood remained intact.
    Look at the uncomplicated interior of the church. You may
be surprised to see the painted rood screen (iconostasis) with
three doors and six rows of icons in front of the altar. There is a
simple explanation for these unexpected objects. In 1889 the
unused church was given by the archdiocese of Paris to the
Eastern Catholic community, the Melchites. Their service, sung
in Greek, can be heard on Sunday mornings.
    Most striking is the tremendous number of twelfth-century
columns, especially in such a small area. The capitals, like those
in Notre-Dame, are decorated with leaf and fern patterns, ex-
cept for one on the right-hand side, nearest the screen. From
that one, four harpies—birdlike women with wings—peer
down at you, warning perhaps of the wages of sin. Storytelling
on capitals was typical of the earlier Romanesque style of archi-
tecture, used for the benefit of the illiterate masses. Notice also,
to your left, the large arabesque iron music stand that faces the
screen.
    Outside again (with your back to the church entrance), look
to your left at the back of a seventeenth-century building cov-
ered with fake timbering, nailed on forty years ago to give the
appearance of great age, as though three hundred years were
not enough. (Contrast this with the genuine article, the Petit
Chatelet on the rue de la Biicherie.)
    The blood-red door belongs to the Caveau des Oubliettes.
The entrance is now around the comer, on the rue Galande. It
is an underground jazz club installed in what the owners claim
was once a prison. Oubliettes, from the French word meaning
“to forget,” were cells where prisoners were put away in solitary


20
                                        Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

holes and left there with nothing but a grate above for food to
go in and waste to go out. Tumover of occupants was rapid.
     Ownership is new since we were last here, but we hope the
new owners will be willing to show you the old prison holes
with the messages scratched by the dying, as well as the other
items in the prison: the guillotine, the chastity belt, and the
barbaric instruments of torture they claim their establishment
still contains. We’re skeptical. In fact, our research indicates
that the cells of the Caveau were used not for prisoners but for
monks, while the real oubliettes are those we speak about earlier,
on the right side of the rue Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre. The jazz club
is open every night from 9:30 PM. to 2 A.M. Jazz starts at 10 PM.
    Before turing into the rue Galande go into the garden next
to Saint-Julien. This is the square René-Viviani, the loveliest
park on the banks of the Seine. Eight hundred years ago it was
the scene of boisterous, bustling student activity and dormito-
ries. Later it became the site of one of the annexes of the Hotel
Dieu. Forty years ago it was the untended backyard of Saint-
Julien. Today it is an oasis amid the concrete, stone, and asphalt
of some of the busiest streets in Paris. Here you will find tired
tourists and passersby, couples, mothers and children, and an
occasional vagrant. The French frequently do not allow anyone
 to walk or play on the grass. But you can in the square René-
Viviani, because everyone is more relaxed in this part of town.
    Paris is filled with parks and small squares, but this one has
more to offer than most. It has the great distinction of affording
from its benches what may well be the finest view of Notre-
Dame. After peering through the trees and changing your seat
several times, turn and look at pieces of church sculpture in the
park itself. These odd fragments of broken statuary, worn down
by time and weather, were once a part of the Abbé de Cluny.
When pieces of sculpture decorating churches decay beyond
recognition, they are moved to parks and replaced by whole
new copies made in restoration workshops behind Notre-
Dame.
    What passes for the oldest tree in Paris stands in this park,
but not without the help of stone buttresses. The acacia, known
as a false acacia (Robinia pseudoacacia), which still blooms every


                                                                  21
Pariswalks

spring (a miracle of tenacity), was planted in 1680 by a Mr.
Robin, who brought it from Guyana. Two kinds of props hold it
up: the modern straight-lined, buttress-like crutch and the
older imitation trunk of ridged stone.
     A fascinating sculpture and fountain by Georges Jeanclos,
dated 1995, present Saint Julien in all his compassion and car-
ing. He is entwined on a triangular pyramid surrounded by suf-
ferers while water pours from the heads of three stags above.
Jeanclos says, “I wanted to express the action of supporting and
carrying the bodies of others in an act of love, tenderness, and
compassion.” Take time to examine the faces carefully and then
take a moment to appreciate the recently replanted flower gar-
dens.
     Return to the church and continue walking around it until
you reach a sealed window, which is in a lower garden. Directly
behind this window is the apse of Saint-Julien; in front of the
window there once was a well, believed to cure the crippled and
the sick. The window in the apse of the church was turned into
a door for easy access to the well, and the sick were charged for
its use. One day, the church decided to give the water away free
of charge. Suddenly it cured no one. The door was walled over.
     Go up the stairs and cross the square to what is now the rue
Lagrange (named after the great mathematician and astronomer
who helped invent the metric system during the French Revo-
lution), which starts at the quai and then bends toward the
place Maubert. The rue, from the quai to the bend, adjacent to
the park, has swallowed what was once the rue du Fouarre, of
which only a little leg is left, connecting the rue Lagrange and
the rue Dante. In the Middle Ages this was a narrow way, lined
solid with student housing, and its animation and intellectual
activity made it one of the most famous streets in Europe.
Classes were held in the open air, with the students sitting on
the ground and not on benches, in order that, as a document of
Pope Urban V in 1366 put it, “occasion for haughty pride be
kept away from youth.” The ground was always filthy and often
damp, so the students spread straw to sit on. The Old French
word for straw is feurre or fouarre, close to the English word for-
age. Hence the name of the street, originally named the rue des
Ecoliers, after the students.

22
                                          Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

    Classes were taught by such notables as Peter Abelard and
Albertus Magnus. At a later date, Dante Alighieri, whose street
begins where the present rue du Fouarre ends, studied here. In
his Paradiso, Dante refers to the vico degli strami (road of straws)
(10:137) and speaks of the violent discussions he shared in and
listened to there.
    When the rue du Fouarre was in effect the campus of the
Université de Paris, the students lived in dormitories called col-
léges in the square René-Viviani. Each dormitory represented a
different “nation,” and collectively they constituted the College
of Nations. In the thirteenth century these were Normandy, Pi-
cardy, France, and England. In time these proliferated, and all
European and even some Asian countries were represented in
Paris. Thousands of students and hangers-on filled this area.
     Vagabonds sleeping on the students’ beds during the day
and high life among the students and their clashes with the cit-
izens gave the street a bad reputation. In 1358, Charles V, then
regent, was forced to chain the street at both ends to keep it
closed at night. Today the old road is a wide thoroughfare, and
the rush of cars crossing from the Left Bank to the Ile de la Cité
is continuous.



                        Rue     Galande

Recross the park, where the colléges stood, and leave it by the
gate through which you entered. Go left, past the church, to
the comer of the rue Galande and the rue Saint-Julien-le-
Pauvre. This place marks the beginning of the road that led to
Lyons and Rome. In 1202 the street took the name Garlande,
later Galande, after the name of a family who owned a large en-
closure of land here. This was the road that students and
teachers took to go from the Ile, or from Saint-Julien, to the
rue du Fouarre, and it remained as important as the latter. In
1672 the street was widened to all of eight meters (twenty-six
feet) and became one of the best addresses in Paris, a place
where families of the nobility lived. After the Revolution
though, things went downhill, and by 1900 the guidebooks
were advertising Galande as one of the seamiest streets in the

                                                                  Lg)
Pariswalks

city. Much restoration, some of the best in the area, has taken
place on this street, and we will be able to see several of the
magically transformed buildings.
    Watch for two tiny houses tucked in between existing walls
or roofs, an economical way to build. No. 75 is a wooden
house, a rarity, above a restaurant. No. 77 is a french fry place
from which you can carry off your lunch and eat in the square
René-Viviani.
    The Trois Mailletz, at no. 56, has a long history. The stone-
masons who were building Notre-Dame came here for drinks
and food. After World War II it became known for a series of
jazz clubs housed there and for the torture instruments in the
oubliettes in the cellar, the same cellar as 14 rue Saint-Julien-le-
Pauvre. In the early 1980s the club was sold to a group of
young people, who remodeled the building and threw out the
torture instruments. When they couldn’t pay the rent, they too
were thrown out. Today there is an excellent fifties-style classic
jazz club on the spot, with food and music until 3 A.M.
     At the door of no. 52 a stone pillar has been uncovered. Cu-
rious caryatids adorn the corners of every window of this
house, front and back; the neighbors say the figure is Quasi-
modo. This is the entrance of the Caveau des Oubliettes. Visit
Le Chat-Huant, nos. 50-52, a friendly shop with Asian callig-
raphy supplies, jewelry, and clothes. This shop has survived for
decades, and its attractive and reasonably priced merchandise is
the reason.
     Cybele, at no. 65 bis, is a gallery, bookstore, and archaeolog-
ical treasure trove. The paintings are modem, featured in chang-
ing exhibits in the restored, vaulted twelfth-century cellar, while
upstairs there is a fine collection of books on the ancient civiliza-
tions of Egypt, Greece, and Rome, along with authentic archaeo-
logical artifacts in a restored seventeenth-century building.
     If you can get into the courtyard of no. 48, try to find, to-
ward the center back, an oval stone, the entry to an under-
ground cellar. A square stone under the planter on the left
covers the entrance to a corkscrew staircase descending to the
first basement.
     No. 65, now restored, was built in the sixteenth century


24
                                                 Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre




Sixteenth-century frieze at no. 65 rue Galande




and was occupied by the noble family of Chatillon. The restora-
tion here was undertaken by the City of Paris. The residents
moved out during the work period but were given the option to
return to this now magnificent building. The rents are low, and
the tenants have the right to pass their apartments on to their
children.
    Above the doorway notice the recently discovered frieze of a
woman’s head surrounded by garlands of roses and oak leaves.
When we were working on the first edition of this book, in
1973, we were the first to get a glimpse of her. One day, as we
were studying the building, something fell at our feet from
above the doorway, It was a blackened piece of nineteenth-
century plaster of Paris, which had covered the original
sixteenth-century stone garland carving. It made us feel as
though this was “our” discovery, and the carving became a
symbol of the hidden Paris we were uncovering for our readers.
    Garlands of acorn and oak appear above the French first-
floor windows, rolling waves above the next bank of windows,
and rosettes above the next. Garlands of flowers are a fitting
decoration for this street, rue Galande. The two-windowed,
rounded gabled roof is crowned by a double ledge extending
from the roofline. This sort of gable-front house, with the roof
at a right angle to the street, was declared illegal in the sixteenth


                                                                     25
Pariswalks

century because rainwater collected between the buildings.
From that time on, rooflines had to be parallel with the street so
that the rain would drain into gutters instead of falling on
passersby. About thirty gable-front houses still exist in Paris, on
a street that we will pass later. The stone sculpture of garlands
and an urn above the entry were also uncovered by the restora-
tion work on the building.
    Nos. 61 and 59 look like one building on the outside but
hold surprises on the inside; these were not revealed to us until
we had walked the street dozens of times. The flowing tresses of
a lovely Art Nouveau lady crown the entrance to both buildings
here. She is three hundred years younger than the lady to your
right, at no. 65. No. 59, as it says in the stone, was built in
1910, and it and no. 57 are examples of the brick construction
that Paris has used for low-cost houses. Rich and not-so-rich Pa-
risians insist on buildings with cut-stone facades.
     Notice that the building is set back about ten feet from its
neighbor. This is an example of the fond hope the city had of
moving back the building line in order eventually to widen the
entire street. As each building was torn down, its replacement
had to be set back at this prescribed distance. Fortunately, few
buildings do come down in Paris, and that explains the ins and
outs of Paris sidewalks.
    Except for the woman’s head, this part of the building is not
exceptional. The door here is usually locked, but give it a try.
The hall is divided in two; the left side leads to apartments, but




Twentieth-century frieze at no. 59 rue Galande

26
                                         Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

down the corridor on the right side you will find an iron-grille
door that opens to an old and beautifully restored house, no. 61.
    The stairway and stairwell beyond the iron grille are an ex-
ample of the care taken to bring the building back to its original
shape. When Martin Granel and his family bought the place, it
was almost impossible to get inside. The wall to the right of the
staircase bellied out so far that the pillar of the house on the
ground floor had to be reset. The brick-and-wood stairs were re-
done with old wood that came from the south of France. The
banister behind the pillar dates from the time of Louis XIII. The
stones on the ground in the courtyard to the left of the staircase
came from a former printing establishment next door, and black
print and designs, in reverse, were almost legible on the por-
tions of the floor that were not frequently walked on. A once-
open staircase, now enclosed behind a wide expanse of
beautiful windows, looked down on a green courtyard with a
stone fountain.
     In 1198 some of this land on the odd-numbered side of the
rue Galande was given to the Jews for a burial ground. It had
earlier served as a cemetery in Gallo-Roman times, from 270 to
360. In the twelfth century, the Jews retured from a sixteen-
year exile imposed by King Philippe Auguste, one of the many
exiles they suffered in different countries during those years of
crusading fervor and intolerance. They came back, of course, to
their old neighborhoods at the Petit Pont and rue de la Harpe,
where they had previously had a cemetery on the far side of
what is now the boulevard Saint-Germain at the level of the rue
de la Harpe. This site was not initially permitted for their use, so
they turned what had been a vineyard on the rue Galande into
their burial ground.
    When Philippe III became king, in 1270, he declared that
the Jews of Paris could have only one synagogue and only one
cemetery, so the one on rue Galande was abandoned in favor of
the one near Saint-Germain, which, by then, had been re-
opened. In 1306 Philippe le Bel expelled the Jews once again,
and closed this second cemetery.
    The absence of any trace of tombstones suggests that the
Galande ground may have been used by Jews of modest means.
The engraved tombstones found in 1849, however, under no.

                                                                 27
Pariswalks

79 boulevard Saint-Germain,       have generated passionate He-
braic studies.
    No. 46 was once the Auberge des Deux Signes, a restau-
rant that was a masterpiece of discovery and restoration. We in-
clude this building’s story to give you a flavor of what kind of
historical remains hide in these buildings, even though, unfor-
tunately, you can no longer visit them. The building belonged
to M. and Mme Dhulster. M. Dhulster’s father, who came from
Auvergne, had a coal and wood business, which he combined,
as was customary, with a restaurant-bar to serve the needs of his
workers. Because there was no central heating in those days,
each apartment needed its own fuel; because there were no ele-
vators, haulers had to climb a lot of stairs to deliver these goods.
By the time they returned to the coal depot, they required nour-
ishment.
     The coal and wood business turned into a restaurant. The
uncovering began when the municipality planned to realign
the street and remove part of the building, which dates from the
sixteenth century. Because the construction of the house was
superior to that of many around it, the owners received permis-
sion to let it stand and to restore it. Among their most success-
ful efforts was the cleaning of coat after coat of plaster from the
large beige stone pillars in front. These are now separated by
sections of plate glass, but, earlier, these spaces were filled with
many smaller panes, and originally there may have been only
shutters, open for trade in the daytime and closed at night.
    The big surprises lay hidden in the back of the house, where
construction from the fourteenth century was uncovered. Not
afraid of hard work, Dhulster decided, in 1962, to dig out a
lower level of his basement. Like all the basements in the area,
his had been flooded and filled with mud in 1910, and un-
doubtedly during previous inundations as well.
    A few steps down, he began to unearth vaulted arches built
six hundred years ago. With the help of his son, Dhulster carried
out twelve thousand coal sacks of dirt and gravel over a period of
two years, finally revealing a large vaulted room that had served
as a dormitory for a hundred monks from Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre.
    In 1969, while the family was redoing the bedrooms on the
French first and second floors in the back part of the house, a

28
                                         Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

pickaxe hit some iron, and the unveiling of an entire fifteenth-
century Gothic window began. Part of Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre,
the chapel of Saint Blaise, the saint for masons and carpenters,
once stood here. It was demolished in 1770, obviously not
completely, and in 1812 a house was built over and around the
wall that remained standing.
    This window, a stone pignon ogival (pointed gable), had to
be completely dismantled (each piece weighed about five hun-
dred pounds) because the floor and ceiling rafters attached to it
had pulled it out of shape. The enormous yet fragile puzzle was
then pieced together and returned to its original position.
Jacques Chirac, then mayor of Paris, awarded M. Dhulster the
National Order of Merit for the realization of this building.
     In a tiny alley that was once outside the chapel’s wall was a
well. Exploring this was Dhulster’s final project. Not only was
its border in perfect condition, but the well still had water in it,
beautifully limpid. Dhulster let himself down this deep well
and, as usual, made     another discovery. Some of the stones
moved on pivots; which meant that there was still another
buried cellar, farther down. Since M. Dhulster is no longer here,
it will probably never be explored.
    You can still eat directly across the street, at no. 57, a well-
run restaurant, La ROtisserie Galande. The owners use two
huge rotisseries, one for meats and one for fish. We had slices of
rare roast beef and roasted potatoes smothered in garlicky green
beans. Plain but delicious and reasonably priced.
    Outside, on the wall of no. 42, find the sculptured stone
rectangle depicting Saint Julien and his wife rowing their
charges across the river. It is the oldest standard (shop sign) in
Paris and mentioned as early as 1380.
    At the comer to the right, at no. 4 rue Dante, is Galerie
Bosser, a collector’s find if you want vintage comic books, a fig-
urine of Tintin and other comic characters, or old movie posters.
Also at no. 4 is the Librairie Gourmande. This is one of the two
cookbook stores in Paris. The proprietor, Mme Genevieve
Baudon, was a bouquiniste (bookseller) on the Seine for more than
thirty years with her husband. When she reached three thousand
books, she had to make a decision: open a bookstore or a
restaurant. Now in her bookstore, she advises some of the best

                                                                  29
Pariswalks

chefs in France and sells to “foodies,” collectors, and the rest of
us. The walls, tables, and even the floor are covered with books
old and new; the valuable ones are in a glass case at the back of
the store. A picture of her dear friend Julia Child hangs on the
wall next to her desk.
     Continue down the rue Galande with the rue Dante on your
right. At nos. 29 and 31 you can see fine examples of medieval
gabled roofs. Notice the room tucked in between the sloping
gabled roof and the straight wall of the house next door. The
restoration of these buildings, like most restorations here, took
place about thirty years ago under the careful surveillance of the
Monuments Historiques, a group that watches over all historic
renovations in Paris.



                Rue     de 1l’H6tel    Colbert

Across the rue Lagrange, at the corner of the rue de l’H6tel Col-
bert, is the Hippopotamus, where at all hours of the day you
can get grilled steak or hamburger—without the roll. Remember,
however, this is a chain—do not count on a great meal.
    On the other comer, across from the Hippo, be sure to look
at where the plaster has been neatly chipped away to show you
the original stones underneath. Walk down a bit, past the first
two windows, and you will come to a rounded one, probably
once an entrance. If you have the good fortune to find the cur-
tain pulled back, look in and you will see an extraordinary
blend of old and new—a huge stone fireplace to the left, a
modem     sunken kitchen at the back, a spiral staircase to the
right. A few steps farther and you can enter the apartment
building (femember that you might have to press a button in
order to be admitted, and again to leave) and look through an
iron grille to an interior garden. Tall French windows look out
onto a raised grassy section dotted with trees.
     At no. 12, a sixteenth-century house, is the restaurant Les
Bouchons, once used by the homeless as an asile de nuit (night
shelter), where they'd sleep d la corde (on the rope). A rope
would be stretched across the room, and for a sou, men could



30
                                          Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

stand-and rest their arms and heads on it. At dawn the rope
would be dropped, and all the men, brutally awakened, would
fall to the floor. Notice the wooden doors, beams, and stone
spiral staircase. Francois Clerc serves excellent southwestern
cuisine here, ranging from reasonable to fairly expensive. Wine
is sold at the store price. Reserve.
     The H6tel Colbert, no. 7, is a superb recent copy from a
seventeenth-century plan found in the archives of the Ecole des
Beaux-Arts. This is an elegant but personal small hotel and a
lovely place to stay. Its salon de thé, decorated with large uphol-
stered chairs, is perfect for relaxing after a long day of
“Pariswalking.” The rooms have all been redone, and they are
now air-conditioned. An apartment for four under the eaves
with a view of Notre-Dame and the rooftops of Paris through a
skylight just might fulfill your most romantic dreams.
     Look to the left, across the street at the corner building.
Above the street sign on the wall, at no. 8, you will find the old
name of the street cut into the stone, RUE DES RATS (street of rats).
An old resident assures us that the name was fitting, that just a
short time ago, rats abounded here. The name of the street was
originally rue d’Arras because a college from the diocese of Arras
was founded here in 1320. A poet rhymed it with rats, and it
wasn’t long before the new name took hold and was inscribed as
such when street names were cut in stone. In 1829 the inhabi-
tants of the street petitioned for something more elegant, and
the city authorities took the name from an important hétel (a
grand private residence) that once stood on the street. Why the
house was called the Hétel Colbert no one knows, because Col-
bert never lived there. In any event, the original building was de-
molished when the rue Lagrange was cut through, in 1887.
    The wall into which this street sign has been carved is the
side of the Amphithéatre Winslow, part of the old Faculté de
Médecine. Look up at the round decorated window, called a
bull’s-eye (oeil-de-boeuf), which you will soon see inside. The
entry is just around the corner to the left, on the rue de la
Bicherie.
    When you get there, notice the ironwork on the 1909 grille
inside the courtyard, on the right-hand wall. Enter the building,


                                                                   31
Pariswalks

which is now an information center on city benefits—from va-
cations to jobs—for government employees. Take a comfortable
seat to the left and read the history.
    The Faculté de Médecine was created by King Philippe VI
in 1331. Before this, in the Middle Ages, only monks studied
medicine, necessarily limiting medical care to men. (Given the
ignorance of the medical profession, women were lucky to be
neglected.) In 1131, however, an ordinance forbade men of
the church to study medicine, a prohibition confirmed in
1163 by the Council of Tours and thereafter enforced by ex-
communication.
   Thus, there were no trained doctors in France until 1220,
when several small schools were opened; these subsequently
merged into the Faculté de Médecine more than a hundred years
later. At first, classes were held with the other schools on the rue
du Fouarre, and exams were given in the masters’ houses. It was
not until 1472 that the present buildings were started. They
were subsequently enlarged on several occasions, and they flour-
ished until the Revolution, when the Faculté de Médecine, like
all the other schools, was abolished. In 1808 the buildings
passed into private hands and in the next century knew a wide
variety of uses: as a laundry, an inn, an apartment building, even
a brothel. In 1909 the structures were finally rescued, restored,
and classified by the city as historic monuments.
    In Jacques Hillairet’s Dictionnaire Historique des Rues de Paris,
there is a marvelous description of the kind of medicine that was
taught by this school in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries:

     The prescribed remedies were, for a long time, limited to a
     choice of three: laxatives, enemas, and bleeding. It was in
     this tradition that Charles Bouvard, Louis XIII’s doctor, ad-
     ministered to the king in one year 47 bleedings, 212 ene-
     mas, and 215 purgatives, total: 474 treatments, after which
     the doctor was ennobled. Richelieu submitted in the same
     year to 54 bleedings and 202 purgations. As to Ambroise
     Paré, he bled 27 times in four days a 28-year-old young
     man, that is, a bloodletting every 4 hours for 4 days, and in
     1609 Le Moyne took 225 pints of blood in 15 months from
     a young girl.

32
                                          Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

    There were, however, other treatments. A treatise on medi-
cine that appeared in 1539 affirms that the blood of a hare
cures gallstones; the droppings of mice, bladder stones; the ex-
crement of dogs, sore throats; boiled wood louse, scrofula. It is
also written that lung of fox washed in wine cures asthma:
earthworms    washed     in white wine, jaundice; kittens finely
chopped with goose and salt, gout; the excrement of a red-
headed man, weak eyes. The wax from your ears applied to the
nostrils promotes sleep. Montaigne wrote that a man’s saliva
will kill a serpent. In 1540 André Fournier, professor at the Fac-
ulté de Médecine, gave this recipe to make hair grow again: boil
three hundred slugs, skim off the grease, add three tablespoons
of olive oil and one tablespoon of honey, and anoint your skull
with the mixture. One of his colleagues in this same period rec-
ommended the following remedy to get rid of fleas: take the
heads of many red herrings, tie them with a string, place this in
your mattress, and the fleas will flee.
    From the Faculté de Médecine’s reception room, enter the
room to your left, where people are being helped, and turn left
again into the rotunda. This is the Amphithéatre Winslow, built
in 1744. The floor of the amphitheater is inlaid with rosewood
in a pattern representing the sun. The balconies are embell-
ished with wrought iron and friezes of roosters and pelicans,
supported by eight Doric columns. It is said that this room was
used for medical demonstrations. We wonder what one could
see from the balconies.



                   Rue     de la Bicherie

Turn right into the rue de la Biicherie to Galerie Urubamba,
at no. 4, which was formerly a butcher shop. Find the marble
slabs that served as counters and the meat hooks above the
window. Today, the shop has a fascinating collection of native
North and South American arts, including fabulous feathered
headdresses and silver-and-turquoise jewelry.
   Across the street, at no. 3, is Le Rouvray, one of the first
shops to brighten up this once dark and dreary neighborhood.
Run by an American,        Diane de Obaldia,    a connoisseur of

                                                               33
Pariswalks

American patchwork quilts, the shop is the center for this art in
Europe. Le Rouvray offers classes, equipment, and books for in-
struction.
    At no. 2 rue du Haut Pavé, don’t miss Tapisseries de la
Bacherie, the showroom for exquisite tapestry and embroidered
creations. Mme Dominique Sarl has written a book on medieval
tapestry, recognized by its field of “the thousand flowers” on the
cover—the flowers symbolize the fields in medieval tapestries.
She gives courses and lectures here, as well as at the Musée Na-
tional du Moyen Age and the Louvre and all over France. She
hopes to make this corner a center for embroidery and tapestry.



                Rue des Grands           Degrés

Cross the small square to the rue des Grands Degrés. The
street was called Saint-Bemnard in the fourteenth century, but in
the eighteenth it got its present name for the stone steps (de-
grés) that descended to the Seine. In this street in 1714, Voltaire
toiled as a clerk for a lawyer, M. Alain. As a twenty-year-old,
Voltaire had made brilliant law studies but was leading a loose
life in The Hague. His father had obtained an appointment for
him as the personal secretary to the Marquis de Chateauneuf,
but Voltaire was more interested in the attentions of a certain
Mlle du Noyer, an “adventuress.” As a result, his father was
more than slightly peeved and had an order for his arrest issued
if Voltaire did not return to the law.
      Open the door to no. 7, on the left, to see a lovely small
house. The door is unlocked because there is a doctor’s office
in the building.
      Le Reminet, at no. 3, is a tiny restaurant with two tables
outside (in good weather). It is a nice spot to enjoy a delicious,
not too expensive meal. Rebecca and Alison shared an appetizer
of lobster-stuffed ravioli that instantly brought forth smiles of
contentment. The chef’s wife, who is the hostess, speaks excel-
lent English.
    At the corner, look up at the third floor (in the American
system) of no. 1 to see the signs painted on the walls. These


sue
                                        Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre

were old shop signs, and although the paint is peeling, they are
still lovely and classified as historical.
      Continuing the food theme, take a break at Dammann’s ice
cream store. This shop carries about thirty delicious handmade
flavors, including Bulgarian yogurt, caramel with sea salt, and
chocolate-orange, all made with natural ingredients.
    Around the corner is one of the most serious restaurants in
the neighborhood. Atelier Maitre Albert, at no. 1 rue Maitre
Albert, used to be a heavily decorated spot for romantics, com-
plete with swings in the bar. In 2004 noted chef Guy Savoy re-
opened the restaurant with a modern but comfortable décor.
The front rooms are a smoking lounge and handsome bar, while
the back is a dining room bracketed with a fireplace on one side
and a huge rotisserie on the other. Savoy concentrates on the
food of his childhood, so this is a good choice to experience ex-
cellent French food without the esoteric ingredients that pre-
dominate at starred restaurants.
    The street is named for the medieval teacher and Domini-
can, Albertus Magnus. Magnus taught philosophy, theology,
and natural sciences at the bottom of the street in the place
Maubert, where there is a large open food market every Tues-
day. In the thirteenth century, the square was famous for its
outdoor classes.
    Diane Johnson’s delicious novel Le Divorce, about the ins
and outs of French-American intimacy, takes place on these few
streets near place Maubert. If you have read it, you will be walk-
ing familiar territory—always a delight.
