Walk 6: Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

                                                              NT
     Bastille              to
Eglise Saint-Gervais


     Today, nothing happened.
       —Louis XVI in his diary,
         July 14, 1789
    WALK 6: Bastille to Eglise Sai
                                                              nt-Gerv ais
                                                                            PLACE
                                                                     <>< ___SAINT-GERVAIS
                                                                                    ar
                                       Or,
    Ile Saint-Louis
                                            As.by       Sai: nt-GeryaisZ
                                                Mr.




                                                                                   S)
                                                            Beauvais           i
                                                                           v   2

                                   ub DUFIGUIER        _               i!
                                                                        g
                                                                               2
                                                             Cpe! | F
                             4                                     °/
                                                                   (m)                                y
                                                                                                  S$pag
                                                                           (SAINT-PAUL           oS
                              ry
                                     2, %     | Saint-Paul                                   4
                                                                                         ;
                                                                           RUE MALHER




                                                                 7 PLACE DU MARCHE
                                                                >, SAINTE-CATHERINE




                                                                   PLACE DES
                                                                    VOSGES




            Bassin
            A eenalde                ry A
                                        OULEVARD pEAUMARCESASS
 bein                PLACE            )
DE LA eaane(w)       DELA                    sey Rca,
          y| BASTILLE /@)                             DiieteVorg
 a eho)
pur?
     (xoN
                 —
                                                                                         w
                      >      RFR
                                    VED,
Starting Point: Place de la Bastille, 4th arrondissement
Métro: Bastille*
Buses: 20, 29, 65, 69, 76, 86, 87, 91



The place de la Bastille stands today on what was the site of
the fortified door known as the Porte Saint-Antoine in the pro-
tective wall of the city. In 1356, Etienne Marcel, the provost of
the merchants of the City of Paris, had this fortification built as
quickly as possible as part of his campaign to take control when
France was in turmoil. The king, Jean le Bon, was imprisoned
by the English, and the dauphin, Charles V, was the nominal
head of France. Charles, however, was only twenty years old,
and Marcel assumed that the young ruler could easily be over-
whelmed and that this was the opportunity for Marcel to shift
power to the bourgeoisie.

*Historical artifacts inside this métro station relate to the history of the Bastille. To fully
understand their significance you should read the history here before visiting them.
However, if you leave the station to follow the walk while you read the history, you will
be required to pay again to get back into the tunnels where the artifacts are located. The
decision is yours—the description of the interior of the station is on pages 188-89.
Pariswalks

     This new portion of the wall was attached to the older wall
of Philippe Auguste (see Walk 5), enlarging the enclosed, and
thereby protected, area of the city. The entry at the Porte Saint-
Antoine had a drawbridge and two huge towers called a bastille,
which was the term for a detached fortification.
     Etienne Marcel’s treachery against the French dauphin in-
cluded attempting to obtain the keys to the gate in order to de-
liver them to the king of Navarre and the English on July 31,
1358. However, the men guarding the gate refused to turn over
the keys, and instead hacked the provost to death with axes and
threw his naked body in the Seine. Subsequently, Charles V re-
gained control of Paris and had the wall completed. The Porte
Saint-Antoine was enlarged, first by the addition of two more
towers to create a fort, and then with two more; together, these
established the structure that would become known as the
prison of the Bastille.
      The fort was a huge, oblong structure with thick, high,
crenellated walls, eight round towers, a drawbridge, and a moat.
In the seventeenth century, Richelieu turned it into a prison.
Members of the aristocracy were often committed by a family
member or a rival politician. A secret letter (lettre de cachet) sent
to the king for his signature could put someone away.
     The reasons for imprisonment were often peculiar. Voltaire
was in the Bastille twice, once for writing malicious verse, an-
other time for challenging the Duc de Rohan to a duel. The
prison was not for brutal criminals, and being locked up in it
was not considered a disgrace. Quite the contrary. Prisoners
could keep a servant, bring their own silver and porcelain, and
make arrangements for receiving lovers. The Marquis de Sade
draped his walls with fabric; Cardinal de Rohan had a dinner
party for twenty. The prison was criticized as an expense to the
state and unnecessary.
      And it became, of course, the symbol of the French Revolu-
tion. Near the end of the eighteenth century, the price of bread
had risen sharply, and on July 14, 1789, a mob gathered at the
Palais Royale and prepared to make trouble. The revolutionaries
were short of powder for their guns, and rumor had it that there
were one hundred and twenty-five barrels of gunpowder in the
Bastille, so off they went to storm the Bastille to get the gun-

184
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

powder to start, in effect, the French Revolution. There were
some intermittent shots during the day, but at about four
o’clock an assault on the main gate began where no. 5 rue Saint-
Antoine is now located. Six hundred thirty-three revolutionaries
attacked thirty-two Swiss guards and fifty-two pensioners. Eighty
revolutionaries and only one Swiss guard were killed.
    The revolutionaries forced the governor of the Bastille, the
Marquis de Launay, to give up the gunpowder and release the
pnisoners. He gave up the keys and was rewarded by being cut
to pieces along with six Swiss guards.
    Who were the prisoners? Four forgers, one accomplice to an
attempted murder, a count accused of incest sent there by his
family, and a madman. Hardly the makings of revolutionary
symbolism, but that didn’t matter to the angry mob. This was
the start of the Revolution. On that day, Louis XVI wrote in his
diary, “Today, nothing happened.”
     General Lafayette eventually gave the key to the Bastille to
U.S. President George Washington. The eighteen-inch key is
now on view at Mount Vernon.
    Today, the location of the ancient walls of the Bastille is
marked in the pavement of the place in brown bricks. There are
many of these bricks in the traffic circle, but they can be hard to
see because of the constant traffic. Those at the entrance to the
rue Saint-Antoine are usually easy to find.
    July 14 became a national holiday in 1880. Bastille Day is
celebrated July 13 with a grand ball at the Bastille from 8 PM.
on, with fireworks at the Eiffel Tower, and with a military parade
on the Champs-Elysées on the fourteenth at 10 A.M.
    Five years after the Bastille was torn down, in June 1794,
the revolutionaries, ever vigilant in their campaign against the
enemy, brought the guillotine from the place de la Révolution,
better known today as the place de la Concorde, to the place de
la Bastille for three days. It was far from idle—seventy-three vic-
tims were beheaded in that time.
    The place, however, was more frequently used as a location
for large, symbolic public monuments. In 1793 the first foun-
tain was erected, a colossal plaster figure of the goddess Isis
spouting water from her breasts. In 1808, Napoléon’s minister
of the interior placed the first stone for a new statue of an

                                                               185
Pariswalks

elephant that would commemorate the arrival of water through
the subterranean canal from the Ourcq River into the city.
Napoléon wanted the statue to be so monumental that one
could enter through a leg and climb an interior spiral staircase
to a viewing platform in a tower on the beast’s back. The bronze
was to come from cannons liberated from Spain, and the pachy-
derm’s trunk would spray water.
     The wood-and-plaster model was over sixty feet high and
nearly fifty feet long. The project was abandoned, though the
model stood for thirty-five years, serving as a nesting place for
millions of rats. Victor Hugo used it as a hiding/living place for
Gavroche in Les Misérables. You can see what the elephant
looked like in a fascinating copy of an engraving on a wall of the
Bastille métro station.
      In 1830, a law was passed to create    a monument to com-
memorate those who died in Les Trois Glorieuses, July 27, 28,
and 29, 1830—the three days of fighting that marked the end
of the reign of Charles X, ultraroyalist brother of Louis XVI. A
column was designed to stand on the foundation that had been
built for the elephant, with the bones of the honored dead laid
to rest inside. The Colonne de Juillet is divided into three por-
tions to represent the three days, with the names of the dead
inscribed in gold in each section. It is topped with a statue of
the golden spirit of Liberty breaking his irons and scattering
light. The monument is dedicated: A LA GLOIRE DES CITOYENS
FRANCAIS QUI S’ARMERENT ET COMBATTENT POUR LA DEFENSE DES LIB-
ERTES PUBLIQUES DANS LES MEMORABLES JOURNEES DES 27, 28, 29 JUIL-
LET, 1830” (To the glory of the French citizens who armed
themselves and fought to defend the public liberty on those
memorable days of July 27, 28, and 29, 1830). The column
was completed in 1840 and soon became a favored site for sui-
cides. As a result, the interior was closed.
     There are several things to see in and around this hectic traf-
fic circle, and we advise that you walk around only in the cross-
walks and with the light. If you arrived on the métro there are a
number of things to see in the corridors before you leave the
station. If you came by bus you should invest in a métro ticket
to enter the station. Use the entrance on the rue de Lyon, on


186
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

the right of the Opéra if you are facing that building. Go down
the stairs, pay, and take the hallway to the right, marked with
the sign SORTIE RUE DE LYON—OPERA BASTILLE, BLVD. DE LA
BASTILLE, JARDIN DU BASSIN LARSENAL. This leads you to a hallway
with copies of historic engravings of the place de la Bastille.
Among the panels is the famous Fragonard drawing of the inte-
rior of the Bastille prison, with the elegantly dressed women ar-
riving to visit their wealthy imprisoned relatives; the elephant
statue; and the demolition of the Bastille. These panels will
help you understand the history of this area by providing im-
ages of what is no longer here.
    The quai for ligne 1, direction Chateau de Vincennes, is an ele-
vated quai with glass windows offering a view of the canal below
and the houseboats docked in the marina. On ligne 5, direction
Bobigny, is the remains of a piece of the protective wall (con-
trescarpe) that once surrounded the Bastille.
    Back outside in the place, go down to the banks of the canal
if the weather is nice. Known as the Bassin de l’Arsenal, this
marina was built to connect the Canal Saint-Martin with the
Seine. In the summer it is charming, with flowers and fantasies
of life on the river in a neat little houseboat.
    Back in the place, the most notable building is the Opéra,
which is built on the site of a small Jewish ghetto known cen-
turies ago as the Cour de la Juiverie. The Opéra de Paris-Bastille
opened in 1989 to celebrate the bicentennial of the French Rev-
olution. It could not be more different from the Opéra-Garnier,
built in 1875. This, however, is not a surprise, because in the
past forty years Paris has been choosing a bold approach to
modern architecture.
    The Opéra de Paris-Bastille is almost four blocks long, a
huge hulking building, sectioned alternately in glass, metal, and
stone, and free of any decoration. The building itself has been
declared by many critics to be a complete failure. In the rush to
complete it, materials were slapped on, and the large stone
slabs that make up the facade have been falling off, requiring
netting to be strung across the front to catch them. But the
building takes on a different aspect each night as the lighting
magically changes its appearance. The Opéra-Garnier, in contrast,


                                                                187
Pariswalks

sits on a small island of land, and it is sculpted, pillared, arched,
and decorated to the very top of its famous copper, gold, and
stone dome.
    The wide high steps of the Opéra de Paris-Bastille, called les
grandes marches, take you inside, where there is another stair-
case, geometrical, unadorned, curving high as it reaches the
top. The Garnier’s doubled, marbled staircase, illuminated with
chandeliers sitting on caryatids, was made for a different time—
a time for beautiful people in their grand clothes to descend
and be admired. The Paris-Bastille, however, has a different
function. Like the Centre Pompidou, it seeks a wider, more
popular audience.
      The main auditorium, narrow and high with few side bal-
conies, is centered directly on the stage. The seats are made for
comfort, with individual heaters undemeath. Other auditori-
ums are used for smaller musical performances.
     New technology makes it possible to perform several operas
in one week. A series of elevators allows an assembled stage set
to be brought up from below with the push of a button. We saw
this remarkable feat with our own eyes by taking a tour (in
French) of the building. For rehearsals, there is a second stage
that is an exact duplicate of the main stage. Eight opera sets are
made each year for both the old and new opera houses by
teams of painters, tapestry workers, carpenters, sculptors,
seamstresses, milliners, and designers in a work area of seventy-
five thousand square feet in the bottom of the Bastille.
     Unfortunately, buying tickets is complicated. The automatic
telephone service never connects to a real person, and the voice
is French. The best method is to try to navigate the Internet.
Tickets range from €5 to €180. Good luck.
     Next door to the Opéra is the brasserie Les Grandes
Marches, named for the uninspiring steps. Until 1990 the
restaurant was known as the Tour d’Argent, in recognition of
one of the eight towers in the Bastille known as the Tour du Tré-
sor, where Henri IV kept his savings. (According to his minister,
Sully, Henri IV had nearly 16 million livres, quite a treasure.)
The restaurant used to be graced with a large, highly visible red
neon sign proclaiming the name of the restaurant. Apparently


188
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

this less-than-sophisticated display of the name was more than
the world-famous Left Bank restaurant of the same name could
stand. Claude Terrail, owner of that Tour d’Argent, sued for ex-
clusive rights to the name and won.
    Four years ago, Elizabeth and Chris de Portzamparc com-
pletely redid the interior of Les Grandes Marches, making it
very modern, with a touch of Art Deco. Especially notable are
the chairs, which look amusing but are very comfortable to sit
in. The restaurant is known for its shellfish. It also has a special
arrangement whereby, during the entr’acte (intermission) at the
Paris-Bastille, operagoers can make a reservation and eat imme-
diately following the end of the performance. Many stars of the
opera stage have dined here and signed the guest book.
     Continue around the place to your right. The rue Richard-
Lenoir is known      for its food market,   Marché    Bastille, on
Thursday and Sunday mornings. This is one of the less expen-
sive food markets, and people come from far away to shop here.
Even though prices may be lower than at other markets, the
quality remains high. A short walk down the street takes you to
another Wallace fountain (see Walk 1). Notice the complete Art
Nouveau métro entrance on the boulevard Beaumarchais.
     Between the rue de la Bastille and the rue Saint-Antoine is
the Café des Phares, a neighborhood hangout. The café hosts
a philosophy debate every Sunday morning at eleven, drawing
people from all over Paris. This was the first of about twenty
cafés philos in Paris, many of which are near the university on the
Left Bank, and many more all over France.
     At the corner of the rue Saint-Antoine is a plaque commem-
orating Charles de Gaulle’s famous World War II motivational
speech: LA FRANCE A PERDU UNE BATAILLE! MAIS LA FRANCE N’A PAS
PERDU LA GUERRE! (France has lost a battle! But France has not
lost the war!) France, he insisted, had to continue to fight in or-
der to be present when the German enemy was crushed and,
thereby, recover its liberty and grandeur. NOTRE PATRIE EST EN
PERIL DE MORT. LUTTONS TOUS POUR LA SAUVER! (Our fatherland is
in danger of death. We must all struggle to save it!)




                                                                189
                                                                                                              aee
                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                               ies
                                                                            an   a5
                                                                                 PERE

                                                                            es
                                                                                                               Ah
                                                                                                                §
                                                                                 TENET

                                                                           ae



                                                                                                               Be Re
                                                                                 wa
                                                                                 t? =                          A




Beaumarc = 3 ct)
                       —
                   5 = tHG cv) g   E )
                                    30   eo} aefy
                                                    feu
                                                      iS parie)   = ftG cY) FOSsre oO wu (o)=iY 6)rmT== co)
                               Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

                    Rue     de la Bastille

Leave the place on the rue de la Bastille. This small street came
into being when the Bastille turned the rue Saint-Antoine into a
dead end, and Parisians needed a way around the fortress and
out of the city. Today the street’s attraction is its good restau-
rants. The chief example is the brasserie Bofinger, at no. 3.
Outside, the huitrier (oyster shucker) arranges and opens his
fresh oysters in brimming bins; inside, patrons dine in luxury in
magnificent Art Nouveau rooms. A colored-glass skylight dates
from the restaurant’s restoration, in 1919. For reservations in
this nonsmoking room, ask for the coupole (dome). The restau-
rant’s specialties are the fruits de mer (seafood) and choucroute
(an Alsatian mélange of sauerkraut and sausage cooked in beer).
Bofinger is very popular for late-night meals after the opera. Re-
serve in advance and have a quintessential French experience.
Across the street, at no. 6, is its little sister restaurant, Bistrot
de Bofinger, with a simpler menu and lower prices—a less ele-
gant but still comfortable setting with similar food.
    At the corner, at no. 2, is Le Bistrot du Dome. Under the
same ownership as the famous café Le Déme in Montparnasse,
this location specializes in very fresh fish. We began our lunch
with a plate of tiny gray crevettes (shrimp) that had been lightly
fried, which we ate whole like gourmet popcorn. Our meal was
delicious, the prices were moderate, and the staff was friendly.
     Turn left onto the rue des Tournelles into a tiny island at the
junction of the rue Saint-Antoine and Tourmelles. This triangular
intersection boasts a statue of Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beau-
marchais, watchmaker and author of the comedies that inspired
Mozart’s The Marriage of Figaro and Rossini’s The Barber of
Seville, and who lived in this neighborhood in the eighteenth
century. Behind his statue is Fauchon, a fine foods store. This
shop fills a social need created by a custom that is still de
rigueur in France—you do not go to dinner at someone’s house
empty-handed. Fauchon sells expensive food gifts and ready-
made food entrées. They also have gorgeous pastries, which, of
course, are not cheap either. See Walk 7 for information on their
original shop.


                                                                 191
Pariswalks




Art Nouveau at Bofinger, no. 3 rue de la Bastille


                         Rue      Saint-Antoine

Across from the statue you will find the rue Saint-Antoine,
which you are now ready to explore. At first glance it appears to
be a busy and uninteresting commercial street. While the Left
Bank was inhabited as far back as the sixth century, the Right


192
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

Bank, or Marais (marsh), was not settled for another five hun-
dred years or more because the area was too wet to be habit-
able. Even at the height of the Middle Ages, in about the
thirteenth century, this land was still largely field and meadow,
much of it church lands. The major buildings were churches,
chapels, convents, and monasteries, with smaller dependent
structures nearby. The only built-up street was the rue Saint-
Antoine, which was the major road into Paris from the east.
    One hundred years later, the Marais was to become the cen-
ter of fashionable Paris. The rue Saint-Antoine, because of its
width from what is now the rue de Sévigné to the place de la
Bastille, offered the best site in the city for the jousts and games
that were the delight of the court and for the solemn pro-
cessions, atrivals, and cortéges that were the public pageants of
the day. When the center of Paris—that is, the Ile de la Cité—
became dangerous for Charles V in the fourteenth century (a
very troubled time, complicated by war with England, civil con-
flict, and urban uprisings), he moved to the Palais Saint-Pol
(Saint Paul), near the Bastille, where he could take care of busi-
ness and pleasure and yet still be able to get out of town in a
hurry. The king’s presence in the neighborhood drew wealthy
courtiers, who built large residences that, with their fields and
gardens, towers and walls, seemed like so many chateaux in an
urban setting. One of these, called the Hétel des Tournelles be-
cause of the small towers that marked its walls, came under the
ownership of the crown in 1407 and replaced the Palais Saint-
Pol as the royal residence. Tournelles was on the north side of
the rue Saint-Antoine and included the area that is today the
place des Vosges. (See Walk 4 for information on the Hétel des
Tournelles.)
    The custom of games, processions, and spectacles in the
rue Saint-Antoine continued throughout the sixteenth century
with the addition of autos-da-fé at which heretics (that is,
Protestants) were burned for the salvation of their souls and the
edification of the populace. It was here that Henri II, in June
1559, engaged in the joust that cost him his life and ended the
role of Tournelles   as royal residence,    a story recounted    in
Walk 4.
Pariswalks

     No. 5 rue Saint-Antoine was the entry courtyard to the
Bastille prison stormed by the revolutionaries on July 14, 1789.
No. 7, La Bastoche, is a small pre-Revolutionary house remark-
ably like the Petit Chatelet in Walk 1.
     The large church at no. 17 is the reformed church of
Sainte-Marie, open only during Sunday service, at 10:30 A.M.
Originally this was a mansion owned by several illustrious peo-
ple in the fifteenth century, including Charles VI and his
brother Louis d’Orléans. In 1554 the hétel was bought by Diane
de Poitiers, Henry II’s favorite mistress; in 1566 it went to the
renowned architect Philibert Delorme.
     The mansion’s destiny as a church stems from Jeanne
Frémiot, a woman born in 1572 in Dijon. She married the
Baron de Chantal and gave birth to a son, who married Marie
de Coulanges and fathered the future Marquise de Sévigné.
Jeanne, who was widowed at a young age, devoted her life to
the religious order of the Visitation Sainte-Marie (also known as
les Visitandines). She became the mother superior of this order
devoted to the education of young girls and care for the sick. A
century after her death, Jeanne became the only married
woman to be canonized by the Catholic Church.
     In 1618 the religious order came to Paris, and in about
twenty years the convent owned a vast property just inside this
eastern edge of the city, including the mansion where the
church now stands. The famed architect Francois Mansart built
the chapel in the form of a huge rotunda inspired by the Santa
Maria rotonda in Rome. Many of Mme de Sévigné’s relatives
and other aristocrats were laid to rest in its chapel.
    In 1637 Mme de La Fayette sought shelter in the convent to
escape the attentions of Louis XIII. He continued to visit her,
but she succeeded in keeping the relationship platonic. On the
other hand, Cardinal Mazarin’s niece Hortense Mancini was
locked up in the convent to terminate her less than virtuous be-
havior. She took her revenge by putting black ink in the stoup
(the receptacle for holy water in the church), and watched as
the nuns smeared their foreheads with ink.
     During the Revolution, the convent was demolished, leav-
ing only the chapel, which became a revolutionary club. In
1803, Napoléon, in an effort to equalize all religions, gave the

Os
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

chapel-to the Protestants. Today the exterior is not very attrac-
tive and needs cleaning.
     One door down from the church stands one of the more
impressive hdtels of the Marais. The Hétel de Mayenne, at no.
21-23, has been partially refurbished, and it demonstrates the
vast difference between restored and unrestored buildings. The
school in the center is dark and depressing. The office buildings
on either side are glorious. Eventually the school will be demol-
ished. The hétel was built in the classic seventeenth-century style
of the Marais—combined brick and stone capped with a steep
slate roof, just like the Hétel de Sully farther down the street.
     The school was added above the rounded pediment in the
center portion over what was once the grand entry to the hétel,
built in the style known as entre cour et jardin (between court-
yard and garden). This architectural plan called for a wide entry
flanked by two taller fagades that formed the wings of the main
building, which was centered between the courtyard and gar-
den. The wings were used for the horses and servants, while the
center of the house held the reception rooms and living quar-
ters of the noble residents. The restored Hétel de Sully at no. 62
rue Saint-Antoine, farther on in this walk, is built on the same
architectural plan.
    Originally the Hétel de Mayenne was the Hotel du Petit
Musc, bought by Charles VI in 1378 and given to his brother
Louis d’Orléans. In 1562, it became the Hotel de Boissy, under
the ownership of the Marquis de Boissy. Henri III’s mignon (ho-
mosexual friend) Quélus was brought here after he suffered
nineteen stab wounds in a vicious duel, along with two other of
Henri’s mignons, against three supporters of the Duc de Guise.
At 5 A.M. on April 27, 1578, the six men met in the place des
Vosges. After the dust settled, two were dead on the spot, one
died the next day, two survived their wounds, and Quélus lin-
gered for thirty-three days in the Hotel de Boissy before expir-
ing. In an effort to save him, Henri ordered straw be strewn on
the rue Saint-Antoine to muffle the noise of the traffic and then
ordered the street closed to all.
    Ironically, in 1613 the property came under the ownership
of the nephew of the Duc de Guise who had incited the fatal
duel thirty-five years earlier. Henri de Lorraine, son of the Duc

                                                               195
Pariswalks

de Mayenne, asked architect Jean Androuet to design his new
hétel. Androuet was only twenty-three years old at the time;
eleven years later he was also the architect for the magnificent
Hotel de Sully, farther down the street. After passing through
many aristocratic hands, the hétel was leased to the Christian
School of the rue des Francs-Bourgeois—hence the name on
the present facade.
     Today, the rue Saint-Antoine is primarily a commercial
street, as this section attests. Stores selling inexpensive kitchen-
ware are popular. No. 32 has an amusing facade based on Al-
ice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Tiles portray characters from the
children’s book, including Alice, the Dodo, and the White Rab-
bit, along with a bottle labeled Bots-mo1 (drink me). Originally
this was a children’s dress shop called La Petite Alice, but today
the shop is an unrelated tanning salon. The next street on your
right is the rue de Birague, which leads into the place des Vosges,
the subject of Walk 4.
      Across Saint-Antoine} on the next block, no. 53 is nicely re-
stored with different styles of iron balconies. Back on the right
side of the street, at no. 52, in the front of the natural foods
store Naturalia, is an example of the building beams that were
used to make seventeenth-century houses. The employees here
have no information on the history of the building, but go in-
side anyway and see how massive these support beams were,
and while you are there, note the coffered tin ceiling.
      The H6tel de Sully, at no. 62, is one of the finest hétels of
the Marais. Built between 1624 and 1630 by the architect An-
drouet, it was not actually owned by the Duc de Sully until
1634, when Sully was already seventy-four years old and mar-
ried to a much younger and faithless wife. She was so blatant in
her affairs that when he gave her housekeeping money he sup-
posedly said, “Here is so much for the house, so much for you,
and so much for your lovers.”
     For a good view of the facade, cross the street to get some
perspective. In typical early-seventeenth-century style, the
street facade was built to impress, something it does admirably,


                                   Spring and Summer at the Hotel de Sully

196
eeOF™
—


a

a


a

meses”

oe


all

mall
Pariswalks

especially when compared with its tasteless neighbors. Iwo
two-story pavilions are divided into three windows each and are
crowned with stately pyramid-shaped roofs with an ornate
semicircular window. Between the pavilions is the spacious
courtyard’s entry for horse-drawn carriages. During the Revolu-
tion, this center section was filled in the same way as the Hotel
de Mayenne is today. The splendid interior was crowded with
workrooms, and the gardens were covered over with sheds and
lean-tos. In 1951 the building was restored.
     Enter the courtyard. The two wings leading to the main
body of the house (the section straight ahead of you) were used
for stables, a garage for carriages, the kitchens (noise and cook-
ing odors were kept far from the reception areas, guaranteeing
cold meals in drafty rooms), and housing for the vast staff re-
quired to maintain a home of this magnitude.
    Look up at the sculptured bas-reliefs above the doorways.
On the body of the hétel are male figures representing two of
the four seasons. Fall holds a bunch of grapes and has a hunting
dog frolicking at his feet, and Winter is a balding old man with
a serpent wrapped around a staff. Spring and Summer are in the
back, on the garden side of the principal building. The wings of
the building are decorated with four female figures representing
the elements. On your right are Water with a rainbow behind
her and a dolphin at her feet, and Earth with a lion; on the left
are Air, in wind-swept draperies with a chameleon (reputed to
live on air), and Fire, with electrified hair and a salamander (a
mythical animal said to be able to withstand the heat of fire).
The fashion for these symbolic sculptures dates from the end of
the sixteenth century. You can see more of them in the court-
yard of the Musée Carnavalet in Walk 5. We have always ad-
mired the allegorical sculptures in the Carnavalet but, in
comparison, these are carved with more depth and in greater
detail.
     Pass between the two sphinxes with broken noses and enter
the building. A little off center, to the right, is a staircase that
was already dated by the time it was built. It consists of two
straight runs of stairs parallel to each other and covered by a
vaulted ceiling. An apocryphal story has the Duc de Sully repri-


198
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

manding his wife for letting her lovers use the main staircase.
She could have her lovers, he said, but they were to stay off the
staircase he used. Inventories show, however, that her rooms,
contrary to tradition, were on the ground floor and he was on
the étage noble (our second floor).
     On the left is the portion of the hétel that is open to the
public. The large room with painted beams is a bookstore. It
stocks an excellent collection of books on Paris, including
books in English. The other rooms are open only once a year, in
September, as part of lejour du patrimoine (heritage day). Passing
back into the gardens, remember to look up at Spring and Sum-
mer over the doorway. Spring holds a bird in one hand and a
cormucopia in the other; a vase of flowers stands next to her.
Summer also holds a comucopia—hers is filled with wheat—
and her scythe.
     At the back of the garden is the orangerie—a large, formal
greenhouse that all self-respecting noblemen had in order to
grow their own supply of fresh fruit in the winter. This is one of
the two remaining orangeries left intact in Paris. In the back right
comer of the garden is an entrance to the place des Vosges (see
Walk 4). Sully enjoyed entering the square and promenading
under the arcades. Today, if you enter the hétel from the place, it
is like stepping through a magic doorway and being transported
back in history to a private seventeenth-century home.
    Return to the rue Saint-Antoine. A little farther down, on
the left side of the street, are several food stores. At no. 75 note
the three gold horse heads, the required standard for a horse
butcher. Horse butchers have become rare in Paris and are gen-
erally located only in working-class neighborhoods. No. 77
houses a cheese shop that will mail vacuum-packed cheeses to
the United States. When we stopped in, they had a wheel of
Comté cheese in the front display case that was nearly two and
one-half feet wide.
    Across the street, at the level of no. 84, is the entrance to
the rue Caron, which leads to the place du Marché-Sainte-
Catherine, one of the most charming squares in Paris. In the
thirteenth century this area was the priory of Sainte-Catherine.
In 1767, when the Jesuits were driven out of their property at


                                                                199
Pariswalks

101 rue Saint-Antoine (and out of France), the religious order of
Sainte Catherine took over the Jesuits’ property and demol-
ished their own to make room for a market.
    Today the place is a picturesque spot to sit quietly on the
benches or to have a meal in any one of the several restaurants
that line the square. These include Le Marché de la Place; Ar-
iang, a Korean barbecue restaurant; and Pitchi Poi, a Polish-
Jewish establishment that specializes in smoked fish and blinis.
We enjoyed a meal at the Bistrot de la Place, which, at the
time, was festooned with chandeliers waiting to be shipped
down to the owner’s newest venture—an inn in the south of
France. Those chandeliers may be gone, but will they have been
replaced by others? The interior is very eclectic, and the chan-
deliers add an extra element of fun. If you are lucky enough to
have good weather, take a table outside and relax.
     Return to the rue Saint-Antoine. Nos. 101 and 99 rue Saint-
Antoine are the addresses for the Lycée Charlemagne and the
church of Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis. This was the location of the
first Porte Saint-Antoine in the Philippe Auguste wall in the
twelfth century. We will see traces of the wall behind the school
later in the walk. The door was one of the four principal en-
trances to the city and stood here until 1382, when it was re-
placed by the door at the Bastille.
     In the mid-sixteenth century, two hétels were built here. In
1580, the Cardinal Charles de Bourbon, the uncle of the future
Henri IV, gave one of these hétels, no. 101, to the Jesuits. The Je-
suits made it a retirement home for the superiors of their order.
In 1594, however, a graduate of a Jesuit college made a failed
assassination attempt against Henri IV, and Henri, in a rage, ex-
pelled the Jesuits and gave the property to the Hiéronymites (a
Spanish order of priests who took Saint Jerome as their patron
saint). They stayed only three years, to be replaced by artists fa-
vored by the king. In 1603 the Jesuits regained control of the
hotel, and this time they firmly entrenched themselves by buy-
ing the neighboring properties.
      The Jesuits built the church of Saint-Louis between 1627
and 1641. It was the preeminent church of the Marais and pro-
vided the confessors for Louis XIII and Louis XIV. Mme de Sévi-
gné was baptized here. During the Revolution, the hétel became

200
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

a repository for more than a million books taken from convents
that were suppressed by the regime. Many of the volumes were
stolen or sold by weight—three sous a pound. The lycée (high
school) that now occupies the site was begun in 1804, and the
buildings of the school look as though they have hardly
changed since that day. Although closed to the public, the
school is said to have some very fine wrought-iron stair rails and
an important frescoed ceiling painted by Gherardini in 1690 in
what was then theJesuits’ library.
     The church, Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis (commonly called the
Eglise Saint-Paul—its official double name was given to com-
memorate the original Eglise Saint-Louis, which was destroyed
in the Revolution), was originally built during the reign of Louis
XII]. Today, Saint-Paul lacks the delicacy of earlier Gothic
churches that inspire a feeling of spirituality. Information pro-
vided by the church states that “this facade, inspired by Saint-
Gervais, was little appreciated in its time and was found too
heavy. Today, it seduces you with its nobility.” To most, its
baroque facade still appears heavy, dark, and over-ornamented.
Divided into three sections, the statues are modern (the originals
were broken during the Revolution), while the clock dates from
1627 and was rescued from the original church of Saint-Paul.
     The interior is also oppressive with sculpture, although
most of its treasures were lost in the Revolution. During the
Revolution, the church’s religious relics were also sold. The
hearts of Louis XIII and Louis XIV were sold to the painter
Saint-Martin. He wanted to use them to make a paint pigment
called “mummy,” which required mixing ground organic mate-
rial with oil to achieve a brown glaze unavailable from any veg-
etable or mineral. This pigment was rare and highly sought
after. Saint-Martin used part of Louis XIV’s heart because it was
the larger of the two. At the Restoration he returned the hearts
and received a gold snuffbox from Louis XVIII in thanks.
     In the seventeenth century this church was the site of awe-
inspiring ceremonies for which no excess was spared. In his
Guide de Paris, written in 1685, Germain Brice described the
interior: “There is no altar in the kingdom that is more richly
decorated and where there are more reliquaries, vessels, cande-
labras, chandeliers, lamps, and other similar things unknown

                                                              201
Pariswalks

to our ancestors, who liked simplicity in the house of God, and
that the new orders have invented to warm the cooling devo-
tion of the last few centuries.” The church is still heavily deco-
rated with an elaborate altar surrounded by paintings, arches,
Corinthian pillars, chandeliers, and balconies and is capped
with a heavily sculpted rotunda. One of the more charming
decorations is the two huge shells for holy water given by Vic-
tor Hugo on the occasion of his daughter’s marriage. Contrast
this interior with the simplicity of the interior of Saint-Gervais
later in the walk.



                         Rue     Saint-Paul

Backtrack to the rue Saint-Paul, known for its Village Saint-
Paul, an antiques center. Turn right into this street, which was
named for a seventh-century church that disappeared with the
invasion of the Norsemen in the ninth century. The street led to
a busy harbor on the Seine that was also a swimming and wash-
ing area. Henri IV swam here accompanied by his subjects,
while the ladies of the court were tucked away in a nearby tent
where they could spy on the naked and cavorting men. The
scene inspired this verse:

      On y accourt pour voir l’homme en son naturel
      Et tel qu’il est sorti des mains de l’Eternel.

      We came running to see man in his natural state
      And as he came from the hands of the Eternal.

    No. 44 is an old one-window-wide building with an exposed
beam over the door. No. 47, the Cygne Rose, is owned by an
Englishwoman who serves as an unofficial helper to English-
speaking tourists in the neighborhood. Her shop specializes in
antiques and unusual gifts. No. 31 is actually the arched en-
trance to the tiny pedestrian rue Eginhard. This street makes a
ninety-degree turn in the middle and ends up on the rue
Charlemagne. A few steps in on the right is a small gated and
locked garden. In the center is a memorial that was recently

202
                                Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

placed here to commemorate a Jewish family that once lived on
this spot. The inscription states:

    ICl ONT VECU MONSIEUR ELIAS ZAJDNER
    MORT POUR LA FRANCE A LAGE DE 41 ANS
    ANCIEN RESISTANT DEPORTE A AUSCHWITZ PAR LES NAZIS
    EN MAI 1944 AVEC SES TROIS FILS. ALBERT, AGE DE 21 ANS
    SALOMON ET BERNARD AGE DE 15 ANS
    MORTS DANS LE BLOC DES EXPERIENCES.
    NOUS N’OUBLIERONS JAMAIS.


    Here lived Mr. Elias Zajdner
    died for France at 41 years old
    resistance fighter who was deported to Auschwitz by
         the Nazis
    in May 1944 with his three sons. Albert 21 years old,
    Salomon and Bernard 15 years old
    who died in the medical experiments.
    We will never forget.

     We got the whole story from the daughter, Mme Sarah Yal-
ibez, a Holocaust survivor. She was one of nine children living
here with her parents when they heard rumors that Vichy off-
cials were gathering Jews and taking them away. Where, they
did not know. Mime Yalibez’s mother left Paris, and some of the
younger children had been sent to live with Catholics in the
country. On the day the rest of the family was to follow them
into hiding, the twins opened the door to Vichy officials. One
brother jumped out the back window and survived the war in
hiding. Albert considered jumping too, but he stayed because
he said he was needed to carry his grandmother’s suitcases on
the journey. Mme Yalibez, who was fifteen and a half when she
was taken, survived Birkenau, but the others did not survive at
Auschwitz. The twins were killed in Mengele’s medical experi-
ments on twins.
     Mme Yalibez was very pleased that the French government
finally let her put up a memorial fifty years after the war. Her re-
quests had been rejected since after the war, but she was deter-
mined. When she applied yet again in 1995, the government

                                                                203
Pariswalks

had a new policy and had begun making public gestures to
atone for the crimes of the Vichy government. The neighbors
were not happy when the memorial was placed and immedi-
ately planted a row of trees to block the view. Mme Yalibez
pulled up the trees and asked the city to plant grass. It did, and
locked the gate.
    Return to the rue Saint-Paul. On the left side of the street
note nos. 28, 26, and 20. They are all old and attractively re-
stored.
    On the right side of the rue Saint-Paul is a treasure trove of
antiques and collectibles. No. 27 to no. 1 is known as the Vil-
lage Saint-Paul, an enclave of antiques shops selling everything
including postcards, paintings, furniture, Art Nouveau glass-
ware, keys and locks, and rustic farm tools. Some of the shops
have a folder with a list of the participating stores and a map of
the interconnecting courtyards that will help you uncover all of
this charming complex.
     In the twelfth century the basements under these buildings
were used as dormitories by the religious orders and as a hos-
pice for travelers. The property was just outside the city walls
and served those who arrived when the gates at Saint-Antoine
were closed. We have been told that the vaulted cellars under
nos. 21 and 9 have been restored.
   _ The Village Saint-Paul sells more affordable, less elegant an-
tiques than those sold at the Antiquaires du Louvre or the Vil-
lage Suisse. Here the stores are generally open from 11 A.M. to
7 pM. from Thursday through Monday. Take time to wander
through the stores. Meet Annie at Le Puceron Chineur (the
flea market prowler), which sells solid silver and silver-plated
items. She is very friendly and will help to orient you to which
shops are open and what to see. Wander down the rue Saint-
Paul and through the courtyards of the Village to appreciate an-
tique dolls, Art Nouveau and Art Deco objects, kitchenware,
keys, lamps, paintings, and knickknacks of all kinds and prices.
     In the courtyards pause to enjoy the old buildings that have
been renovated for reduced-price housing. In 1996 the media
revealed that some of these apartments, coveted for their prime
location and low rents, were occupied by relatives of high city
officials, though the scandal has not changed the neighborhood

204
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

in any visible way. At the far side of the first courtyard, exit to
the rue des Jardins Saint-Paul. In the sports terrain across the
street is the largest surviving piece of the Philippe Auguste wall
and two stone towers. To your right, at the end of the street, is
the back of the Lycée Charlemagne and the church of Saint-
Paul. To the right of the Village’s exit from the center courtyard
is a lovely trompe V’oeil door painted to look like the flower-
draped entry to a private garden. It is the back door of the ate-
lier Un Autre Regard, a painting gallery on the rue
Charlemagne. (If you have not been wandering in the court-
yards, go in the entrance from the rue Saint-Paul marked
15-17-19.)
    After you have taken the time to wander through the court-
yards and found a few treasures to carry back home, you may
find yourself tired. If you wish, you can stop walking here and
return to see more, including the beautiful Hétels de Sens and
Beauvais, another time. You are near two different métro stops:
walk back up rue Saint-Paul and, making a left onto the rue
Saint-Antoine, go past the church and the lycée, and you will
find yourself at the métro Saint-Paul. Or continue down the rue
Saint-Paul, toward the Seine, make a right at the river, and walk
two blocks to the métro Pont Marie.
    If you are ready to continue, then return to the rue Saint-
Paul. At no. 20 is the Thanksgiving restaurant and its associ-
ated food shop around the corner, on rue Charles V. The two are
owned by an American woman, who does the cooking, and her
French husband, who does the buying. Thanksgiving’s menu is
mostly Cajun cooking, but its small store supplies Americans,
and the French who admit to liking American products, with
foods from all regions of the United States. Their weekend
brunch is mostly American and is especially popular, serving
pancakes, lox and bagels, and other American breakfast foods.
Reservations for brunch are required.
    No. 22 is a bookstore, The Red Wheelbarrow, which sells
books in English. Unlike the Abbey Bookstore and Shake-
speare and Company, their books are all brand new, organized,
and neatly shelved. The store is bright, with light and friendly
English-speaking employees, and the owners, Penelope and Abi-
gail, are often there as well. Penelope opened her first bookstore

                                                               205
Pariswalks

in Canada at the age of nineteen and later moved to Paris, where
she opened The Red Wheelbarrow in 2001. She told us that the
neighborhood has a huge Anglophone community, drawn by
the English department of Paris VII (a section of l'Université de
Paris) nearby, and that the bookstore has become a community
center for English speakers in Paris. She and Abigail also own a
children’s bookstore around the corner, at no. 13 rue Charles V
      On the corner of Saint-Paul and Charles V, at no. 25 rue
Charles V, is another good restaurant, LEnoteca, an Italian wine
bar. The restaurant offers delicious Italian food paired with a
choice of about 360 Italian wines chosen by three sommeliers.
Make reservations for dinner.
    Detour down the rue Charles V with its nicely restored
buildings (no. 23, for example). At no. 14 is LExcuse, which
serves French nouvelle cuisine and is quite expensive. Then
stop at no. 12, the Hétel de la Marquise de Brinvilliers, also
known as the Hotel d’Aubray. Today only the doorway capped
with a mascaron (mask decoration) of a man has been restored.
But it is the story of one of its residents that is most remarkable.
The Marquis de Brinvilliers, Antoine Gobelin of the famous ta-
pestry family, married Marie-Madeleine-Marguérite de Dreux
d’Aubray in 1651. The marquise turned out to be astonishingly
immoral, even in an era when the nobility were allowed consid-
erable latitude.
      By her own account, she “deviated from virtue” at seven
and was a regular partner of her younger brothers. (Contempo-
rary historians would probably reexamine her history for indica-
tions of sexual abuse.) Her father gave her an extremely
generous dowry of 200,000 pounds when she married at
twenty-one. She had three children, although their parentage
was uncertain because she did not restrict her attentions to her
husband. She became the mistress of the knight Godin de
Sainte-Croix, a man introduced to her by her husband. Her
husband said nothing, but her father objected, and he had
Sainte-Croix arrested as he rode in her carriage on the Pont
Neuf. Sainte-Croix was imprisoned in the Bastille, where he
made use of his time by learning about poisons from an Italian
named Exili.
    When Sainte-Croix was released, he and the marquise es-

206
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

tablished Exili in a laboratory to make poison for them. His
concoction included venom of toad, arsenic, and vitriol. The
marquise had, by now, spent her considerable dowry, and she
set her sights on her inheritance. As a result of her charity work,
she had access to patients in the city hospital, the Hétel Dieu.
She used this opportunity to experiment with proper poison
dosages, and when she thought she had it right, she poisoned
her father. He was evidently stronger than the sick hospital pa-
tients because it took ten tries to do him in. Four years later, in
1670, the marquise killed the older of her two brothers and at-
tempted to poison his wife. Her younger brother was next, al-
though she failed with her younger sister, a Carmelite nun. Next
she set her sights on her husband, but Sainte-Croix thwarted
her because he was afraid that if her husband died, he would be
obliged to marry this dangerous woman.
    Not content with just her family, the marquise persuaded
Sainte-Croix to assassinate the tutor of the two illegitimate chil-
dren she had conceived with Sainte-Croix. She had had affairs
with the tutor and two of his cousins, one of whom fathered her
sixth child. The assassination attempt failed because the lucky
tutor, on the balcony across the courtyard, had seen the mar-
quise hide Sainte-Croix behind the fireplace.
     In 1672, Sainte-Croix died suddenly of natural (!) causes.
As soon as the marquise heard the news she rushed to his
house to retrieve the box that contained her letters. She made
such a scene that the authorities became suspicious and confis-
cated the box. In it they found thirty-four letters detailing their
crimes and twenty-seven recipes entitled “curious secrets.” She
fled, taking asylum in a convent in Belgium. She was lured out
of the convent, however, by an agent of the head of the Paris po-
lice and was arrested.
     She wrote a confession that admitted to having set fires, to
losing her virginity at seven, to having poisoned her father and
brcthers, to having attempted to poison her sister, to incest, to
adultery, and to attempted abortions. On July 15, 1676, she
was condemned to make a confession at Notre-Dame and to be
beheaded and then bummed in the place de Gréve, her ashes
scattered to the wind. She was exempted from having her hand
cut off for her patricide.

                                                               207
Pariswalks

    Mme de Sévigné witnessed the execution and wrote up the
events in a letter to her daughter. The executioner spent a quar-
ter hour preparing the woman for her death, but “finally, it’s
done. Brinvilliers is in the air: after the execution, her poor little
body was thrown in a very big fire, and her ashes are in the
wind... .”
      Return to the rue Saint-Paul, pausing to peer in the name-
less shop at no. 25 rue Charles V to see if the gentleman within
is repairing violins and cellos, then head down the street to the
left, toward the Seine. Downstairs at no. 11 is the Musée de la
Curiosité et de la Magie (museum of curiosities and magic).
Normally the museum is open Wednesday, Saturday, and Sun-
day afternoons. During school vacation periods, children are of-
fered a tour and an introductory lesson in performing magic.
The last time we were here during a vacation, the line of chil-
dren spilled into the street.
    Note the facade of no. 10 and its frieze below the top floor.
Check and see if you can go into the very pretty courtyard of
no. 8. When we visited in the spring, the trees were flowering
and a cat picked its way through the little gardens. Notice the
wrought-iron stair rails on the left, in the square tower marked
ENTRANCE 8D, and the supports for the balconies. Apartment 8D
also has a small section of wall that is cantilevered out. This was
the privy in the days when apartments did not have private wa-
ter closets. 8A and 8B have beautiful wrought-iron balconies, in
contrast to the cast-iron balconies of 8C.
     There are a few more antiques stores as you go. Turn right
onto the rue de l’Avé Maria. At the comer on the right are two
stores selling old lace. No. 2, Fuschia Dentelle, sells blouses,
skirts, and cloth. Next door, Francine Dentelles carries dresses
remade with lace. She also has a stand at the Marché aux Puces.
Other stores on the street carry a number of interesting an-
tiques Gif you are not already antiqued-out after your trip
through the Village Saint-Paul).
    Continue down the street, to the Hétel de Sens, at no. 1
rue du Figuier. This striking hétel is one of the oldest
nonchurch buildings in Paris, built in an architectural mélange
of Gothic and Renaissance, military and civilian. The building
was commissioned      in 1475 by Tristan de Salazar, the tenth

208
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

archbishop of Sens, and completed in 1519, the year of his
death. Until 1622, Paris had only a bishop, who was under the
direction of the archbishop of Sens. This situation called for
suitable housing in Paris for the archbishop, although because
he had six other bishoprics to manage, he was rarely in resi-
dence. This infrequent use protected the building from being
renovated over the years by succeeding archbishops.
    In 1605, Henri IV asked the current archbishop for the use
of the hétel to lodge his ex-wife, Margot, who had been ban-
ished from Paris for the preceding eighteen years because of her
unseemly behavior. (See Walk 3 for Margot’s story.) She did not
live there long, but when she did, the sober hétel was trans-
formed into a gambling den while Margot was locked up for
days at a time with her very young lovers.
   When the Revolution came, the hétel was sold, and a series
of commercial tenants defaced and destroyed the original archi-
tecture. These included a laundry, a rabbit-skin wholesaler, and
a jam factory. The City of Paris finally bought the hétel, in 1911,
and restored it in bits and pieces over decades.
    The turrets on both sides of the facade, while decorative,
served the military purpose of permitting the residents to see
down the streets on either side of the hdtel. Before you enter the
courtyard, stop to appreciate the flamboyant Gothic details of
the mansard window flanked by angels, in contrast to the plain
facade. Don’t miss the gargoyles. Also find the hole above the
portal that was intended to permit the residents to drop boiling
oil on unwelcome visitors. Enter the courtyard to see the por-
tions of the hétel that are open to the public. On the left is a
bookstore selling cards and posters of old advertisements and
an exhibition space with changing exhibits. Straight ahead, in
the back of the courtyard, is the Bibliothéque Forney, a library
of art, decorative arts, and art techniques. Take the re-created
staircase to the main reading room, on the first floor (our sec-
ond floor), pausing to look at the photographs of the building
before it was restored. The reading room is lovely and light and
packed with students hunched over worktables and lined up to
wait for books to be fetched from the stacks. In the back left
corner, behind the door, is a corkscrew staircase, one of the few
original portions of the building to survive. The rest of the

                                                               209
Pariswalks

building is a re-creation in the style of the period. The library is
open from Tuesdays through Fridays, 1:30 pM. to 8 pM., and on
Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 8 PM.
     Turn right as you leave and take rue de l’Hétel de Ville.
This side of the building has beautiful, flamboyant Gothic
mansard windows that match the front window. There are also
figures of dragons, musicians, and animals, and another turret
to allow residents to see in both directions of the curved street.
Behind the hétel are formal French gardens and two more beau-
tiful mansard windows.
     You are now on the rue Nonnains-d’Hyéres and facing you
is the Jardin Albert Schweitzer, a playground for children. Sit
for amoment on the benches and watch the children play table
tennis and climb on the equipment. Continue along the edge of
the Seine, on quai de l’Hétel de Ville, to the back garden of
the Hétel d’Aumont. The hétel was owned by Michel-Antoine
Scarron,   uncle   of the poet Paul Scarron.    In 1629,   Michel-
Antoine’s daughter married up socially to the Duc d’Aumont. In
1648, the Duc d’Aumont sold his hétel in the place des Vosges
and moved in with his father-in-law. When the father-in-law
died, in 1656, the duke enlarged the property by buying four
surrounding houses. The architect Mansart was hired to trans-
form the main building, while the interior was turned over to
Vouet and Le Brun.
    The duke died at sixty-nine of apoplexy. (It apparently ran
in his family—his son and grandson both died of it. The third
duke was taken ill at his mistress’s; she hastened to send him
home half dead in his carriage so that he would expire at Au-
mont rather than in her bed.) When the first duke died, his wife
sought consolation in a new marriage, to which her son took of-
fense. He had her confined to a convent, but before she was ex-
iled, she managed to get back at him by burying a large sum of
money, which was never recovered.
     This second duke apparently did not control his wife as well
as he did his mother. His wife, the duchess, lived a gay life that
preceded her marriage and did not end with it. The story is told
that one lover, surprised by the sudden return of the duke, was
forced to hide in an armoire all day before he could make his es-
cape. While the duke’s wife collected lovers (including promi-

210
                             Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

nent members of the clergy), the duke collected furniture and
art. He collected so much that, at his death, the public sale of
his possessions took several months.
     Today, only the garden facade by Mansart and a ceiling by
Le Brun remain. The ceiling survived only because it had been
covered over with a false plaster ceiling and forgotten, perhaps
for centuries. The garden facade is a classic French construction
with mascarons, oeil-de-boeuf (bull’s-eye) windows, tall windows
and French doors on the ground floor, and wrought-iron bal-
conies. The garden is mostly bare, save an inappropriate and
rusting modern sculpture that resembles perhaps a broken see-
saw. This elegant facade by Mansart is a sharp contrast to the
heavy, graceless facade of the hdtel on the rue de Jouy. Return at
night to see Aumont and Sens dramatically illuminated, rising
out of the darkness like a stage set.
     Walk along the Seine with the river and the bouquinistes
 (booksellers) (see Walk 2 for information on the bookstalls) on
your left and the Cité Internationale des Arts on your right.
The Cité provides one hundred and eighty apartments for
artists from all over the world to come and study in Paris for a
year. More than three thousand artists, musicians, and perform-
 ers have come from seventy countries. Turn right onto the rue
 Geoftfroy-l’Asnier.



                 Rue Geoffroy-l’Asnier

No. 17 rue Geoffroy-l’Asnier is the Mémorial du Martyr Juif
Inconnu,    memorial to the unknown Jewish martyr, and the
archives of contemporary Jewish documentation. When we vis-
ited, it was provisionally closed for restoration, until January
2005; however, we did not see any kind of work going on.
When it reopens it will be called the Mémorial de la Shoah and
will include a wall with the names of all the French Jews who
were deported. We don’t know if the restored building will still
include    the crypt, which was    a somber,   belowground-level
room with a large Star of David with an eternal flame burning in
the center. Two hundred thousand tiny lights burned in mem-
ory of the two hundred thousand French dead in concentration

                                                              Zilia:
Pariswalks

camps. There was also a sculpture, Despair, by artist Michael
Goldberg, reminiscent of a Virgin Mary with the martyred Jesus
across her lap; it represents the universal pain of the loss of a
child, a parent, a sibling. It is dedicated to the six million who
died in the Shoah.
    When we previously visited, the center had a temporary ex-
hibit upstairs on the experience of the French Jews. France was
unique during World War II in that it was the only country to
deport Jews from territory not yet occupied by the Germans. It
is only recently that the French have begun to acknowledge
their official collaboration in the Holocaust.
    No. 20, directly across the street from the center, has lovely
mascarons of a lady. No. 26 is the Hétel de Chalons-
Luxembourg, built in the early 1600s. One of the early owners
was Antoine Le Févre de La Boderie, the French ambassador to
England, who returmed to Paris with a gift of one hundred and
fifty horses. He was unable to stable them and so distributed
them to his friends, keeping the best one for himself. Alas,
Henri IV heard about the equine gifts and remarked, “Well, pal,
am I the only one of your friends not to get one of your horses?”
Reluctantly, Le Févre was forced to give away his prize horse.
    Above the door is the head of a magnificent lion with a lux-
uriant mane framed by a seashell. The finely carved horses in
the door knocker recall Le Févre’s gift.



                  Rue    Francois-Miron

Return to the street and continue on to the rue Francois-Miron,
turn right, and walk to no. 68, the Hétel de Beauvais. There has
been a residence here since 1200, and the Gothic remains are
still found in the ogival arches of the cellars. The hétel’s name,
however, is due to its seventeenth-century owner, Catherine Bel-
lier. Known as Cateau, this woman was reportedly ugly and blind
in one eye, but she was the confidante and main chambermaid of
Anne of Austria, wife of Louis XIII.
      As a reward for intimacy (she listened to the details of
Anne’s romance with Mazarin and administered her enemas),
Cateau and her husband, Pierre Beauvais, originally a ribbon

213
                                      Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais




The newly restored courtyard of the Hétel de Beauvais



seller, were given a baronetcy. Anne was especially thrilled
when, after she told her maid her fears for the sexuality of her
son, the future Louis XIV, Cateau (forty at the time) relieved the
sixteen-year-old of his virginity so that he would not be frigid
like his father.
     The Baroness de Beauvais received such a large sum of
money for her service to the crown that she purchased this
piece of property and hired Antoine Lepautre, the king’s first ar-
chitect, to build her hétel. The property was irregularly shaped
and required creative use of the space. The resulting building is
a polygon with the principal residence in the facade on the
street rather than behind the courtyard as, for example, in the
Hétel de Sully. In addition, the architect designed the street
level with stores, unheard of for a noble residence but revenue-
producing for nobility of humble origins.
    One of the building’s glories was a magnificent balcony that
was topped by a triangular pediment decorated with reclining

                                                                   pple,
Pariswalks

allegorical figures. On August 26, 1660, the famous balcony
was the choice spot to watch Louis XIV and his new bride make
their triumphant entry into Paris. Anne of Austria, Queen Hen-
rietta of England, and her daughter shared the Persian-carpeted
balcony, shaded from the sun by a red velvet canopy as the
royal procession made an honorary stop in front of the Hotel de
Beauvais.
       More than a hundred years after Catherine Bellier, Wolfgang
Amadeus Mozart, his father, and his sister stayed here for five
months. Mozart, only seven, was the breadwinner for the fam-
ily. Although he was a great success at the court of Versailles, he
was apparently unhappy that, after his concert, Mme de Pom-
padour did not embrace him.
       In the last edition of this book, we wrote that the facade was
in a mutilated state and we bemoaned the lack of funds to re-
store this unusual hétel. The interior had been divided into flats,
chopping the vast reception rooms into small, featureless
rooms. For a dozen years*before the restoration, the building
was in such bad shape that it was sealed up. Today we are
happy to say that the restoration is complete and the gleaming
facade lights up the street.
    The administrative offices of the Court of Appeals has a
seventy-five-year lease, which means that passersby can see the
courtyard but cannot get past the security guard at the gates to
enter it. Take a moment to appreciate this graceful oval court-
yard with its very tall premiére étage (first story) and mascarons.
Note the frieze under the balcony that alternates intertwined
Bs, for “Beauvais” and “Bellier,” and the head of a ram (bélier).
     Because you can’t enter the building, some impressive
restoration work is inaccessible, including two remarkable stair-
cases. The grand staircase is four ramps of solid carved stone
supported by four Corinthian columns. The vaulting is richly
decorated with putti, mascarons, rams’ heads, sphinxes, and so
on. In the east wing is the original oval wrought-iron stair rail that
once led to the hétel’s private chapel. If you are curious, be sure
to visit the Association pour la Sauvegarde et la Mise en Valeur du
Paris Historique, down the street at no. 44 rue Francois-Miron.
They have a scale model and photographs of the building.
       Continuing on rue Frangois-Miron, nos. 72 through 78

ails
                              Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

have nicely restored eighteenth-century facades. No. 82 is three
arcades wide, with a different mascaron on each arcade. The
center one is the head of a moor with a turban. Notice also the
elaborate balcony and the wrought-iron railings. On the win-
dow above the center balcony is a pediment with another mas-
caron. Go around the comer on the rue de Fourcy to see the
garden and wing of this hétel. In order to widen the street and
still have a sidewalk, this side of the building is cantilevered out
and held up by pillars.
    On Frangois-Miron, cross the rue de Fourcy and continue
on the same sidewalk (at this point Frangois-Miron merges into
the rue Saint-Antoine) to the second building from the comer.
The Hétel de Séguier, at no.        133, was built in 1626 and
owned by the Séguier family until the Revolution. Note the bal-
cony supported by fantastic chimeras.
    Retrace your steps back down the rue Francois-Miron. At
the corner of Francois-Miron and the rue de Jouy is the restau-
rant Au Bourguignon du Marais, where they serve lunch and
dinner Mondays through Fridays. The menu is traditional
French and they offer many wines by the glass—the owner
comes from a Burgundy grape-growing family, so he knows
about wine. In warm weather sit outside for your meal and then
buy some wine from their shop to take back to your hotel when
you are done.
    Continue on to nos. 44 and 46, the Maison d’Ourscamp,
home of the Association pour la Sauvegarde et la Mise en
Valeur du Paris Historique, whose official mission is to under-
take and lead all action to promote, protect, and make Parisian
neighborhoods known in order to preserve their architecture
and social harmony. This nonprofit group, which is staffed by
dedicated and educated retired volunteers, seeks to promote
and protect historical Paris. The offices are open daily, 2-6 PM.
    In the twelfth century, abbeys across France were rich and
powerful. They found that they needed a pied-a-terre in the city
for the abbot and a dormitory for their students at the school of
Notre-Dame. Ourscamp was originally one of these houses, as
the vaulted medieval cellars attest. The house owes its name to
the Sire de l’Ours, an unfortunate man who lost his head in the
early fifteenth century for conspiring against Charles VI’s wile.

                                                                PANS
Pariswalks

The building went through many owners and commercial ten-
ants until, in 1941, it was declared insalubrious and was sched-
uled to be torn down. Almost nothing was left of the original
building and the cellars had become a rubbish dump.
    The association was founded in 1963, and their first project
was to save nos. 44 through 46 rue Francois-Miron, at their
own expense. Work began, with young volunteers who gave
their weekends to empty rubbish from the cellars with shovels
and buckets. Forming a chain up the stairs, they passed heavy
buckets of stones up to the Dumpsters, manually clearing out
two thousand tons of gravel. Upstairs, they broke down walls,
uncovered walls, and tore out floors. So much dust billowed
out the windows that the fire department came several times,
called by alarmed neighbors. In 1970 the money ran out, and
work stopped for fifteen years. The tarpaulins finally came off in
1987, revealing the beautifully restored facade for the first time
in decades.
    Take the time to visit the interior, which is like a museum of
ancient construction. The floor of no. 44, much lower than that
of no. 46, is a thirteenth-century stone floor; the latter’s is
made of sixteenth-century hexagonal tiles, except where a glass
panel reveals a belowground medieval column. The reception
area is in the left half (no. 46), where they have a to-scale model
of the Hotel de Beauvais, while most of the artifacts are on the
right. On the wall a Gothic window tracery displays items dis-
covered at the bottom of wells that were on the property. No.
44 also displays wrought-iron balconies and a wooden stair rail,
a spiraling wooden pillar, and painted beams. The beams in the
ceiling and one propped up vertically were recuperated from
the Hétel de Lamoignon. There are two staircases in no. 44.
The stairs to the cellar are very steep stone stairs and must be
descended cautiously. The cellars are medieval vaulted stone.
On one visit, the cellar room was transformed into a Russian
nobleman’s castle for a movie set.
    At the base of the stairs leading to the premiére étage is an ex-
posed wall of chimney tiles marking the site of an old fireplace.
If someone is available to accompany you, go up the stairs to
look out the window onto the courtyard. The interior facades
have been restored with the exposed beams. The rounded pro-

216
                             Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

tuberances were the privies. Each floor had one privy fitted out
with a pot for wastes. Most likely, when the pots were full, they
were dumped in the sewers or the river.
    The association offers excellent guided tours of historic
Paris, conducted in French. However, with advance notice, they
can organize an English-speaking tour for a minimum of ten
people.
    Directly across the street is the café Chez Raymond. Here
men, mainly from North Africa, spend the day smoking and
playing cards or backgammon. When we asked where the
women were, one gentleman smiled and joked, “The women
are in the cellar.” Back on the even-numbered side of the street,
no. 42 has a lovely double balcony and a mascaron of a man
with lion paws. Nos. 40 and 36 also have mascarons, including
the eighteenth-century ladies on no. 36. Across the street, on
the odd side, nos. 11 and 13 have been remodeled to represent
how an average house looked in the seventeenth century. The
buildings used to be in deplorable shape and were propped up
with huge wooden crutches to keep them from crumbling into
the street. No. 13, known as “at the sign of the sheep,” has a
fine fourteenth-century gabled roof. No. 11 is known as “at the
sign of the reaper.” The researchers at the Association pour la
Sauvegarde et la Mise en Valeur du Paris Historique told us that
the exposed beams are not full-size, but are thin wooden pieces
put on the facade for effect.
    Nos. 36, 34, and 13 are Japanese stores selling pottery, fab-
rics, and all kinds of sleek, beautifully designed objects. No. 30
is Izrael, Epicerie du Monde, a cache of foodstuffs. This is the
way stores used to be or perhaps the way we would like to re-
member them. As you enter, the odor of curry and pickling
brine hits you, you begin to salivate, and your stomach begins
to grumble. Unlike an American supermarket, where food is
carefully packaged to maintain sanitary conditions, here every-
thing is exposed, and the mingled scents are an inspiration to
the pleasures of eating. The store is lined floor to ceiling with
shelves overflowing with packages, cans, and jars. You have to
pick your way around the aromatic barrels of olives and pickled
vegetables and bags of beans, nuts, and grains. The store is an
excellent source of all kinds of exotic spices that are doled out

                                                              OPTS
                                    Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

at your request into little plastic bags. There is a second room
with teas, jams, mustards, and even some American mixes like
brownies. They also sell cooking tools, bowls, baskets, posters,
and all kinds of treasures.
     The shop is owned by a husband and wife. Francoise
Izrael’s father originally opened the store when he came out of
hiding after World War II. He had managed to avoid the Nazis
by living in the woods in the Dordogne. M. Izrael, who was
from the Balkans, stocked the shop with foods from that region.
When Francoise married a man with the first name of Israel, she
brought him into the business. She has worked more than forty
years in the store, and her husband more than thirty. Now their
son helps out. Monsieur, with a big white beard, is the friendlier
one, but Madame can be drawn out, and even gave us recipes
that use some of the spices she sells. We left with a bag of can-
died kumquats, Moroccan preserved lemons, and some Hun-
garian paprika. Note: this store keeps traditional French
hours—it is closed for a long lunch from 1 to 2:30, except on
Saturdays, and is closed all day Sunday and Monday.
    When you leave the store, go around the comer to the black
glass door of what appears to be a modern building, at 22 bis
rue du Pont Louis-Philippe. Push the door open and, once in
the courtyard that lies behind the Izrael store, you will be sur-
prised to see the restored wall to your right. It is of brick and
stone and has a wooden mansard at the top.
    The interesting and pricey shops on this street include sev-
eral clothing and paper shops and even a lute maker. Return to
Francois-Miron and turn left. Nos. 14 to 4 are decorated with
elegant wrought-iron balconies that run across the building at
the American third-floor level. They are decorated with an elm
tree in the center to recall an elm that once stood in the place
Saint-Gervais, at the end of the street. From medieval times,
people used the huge tree as a meeting point: “Attendez-moi
sous l’orme” (Wait for me under the elm). The tree was pulled
down during the Revolution, and although a new one was
planted in 1912, it does not have the significance the ancient



Exotic and abundant groceries at no. 30 rue Frangois-Miron

                                                                 219
Pariswalks

one had. At no. 4 is a plaque to recall the home of the musical
Couperin family, who played the organ in the church next door.
     Walk to the place Saint-Gervais and pass in front of the
church of Saint-Gervais (we will return here shortly) to the
Compagnons du Devoir, at no. 1. This is a training school for
twenty-one different trades. Here students follow a five-year
course of study to become masters of carpentry and building,
shoemaking, ironworking, and les métiers de la bouche (the
mouth trades) of pastry- and bread-making. The students, who
are sixteen to twenty-five years old, live in this building under
the watchful eye of a head mother.
     To become a compagnon you must complete a chef d’oeuvre
(masterpiece), some of which are displayed here. Go inside,
past the wooden model of a cathedral tower and down the
stairs with their wrought-iron railing. Go out the door to the
courtyard and enter the first door on your right to see a show-
room of examples.
     Return to the churclr of Saint-Gervais. The history of the
church is as old as civilization on the right bank of the river.
This spot was one of the few hillocks rising above the marsh
and was the first to be settled by fishermen and boatmen. It be-
came a point on the path for the Roman road going northward
as well as the site of a pagan cemetery. A chapel was built to
serve the cemetery when it became a Christian burial ground
dedicated to the twin martyrs Saint Gervais and Saint Protais.
    There is little record of this church; it was probably de-
stroyed in the Norman invasion. In 1190, the wall of Philippe
Auguste enclosed this plot of land, making it very attractive to
the residents. The church became too small to serve its parish-
ioners, and a new one was begun in 1213, not to be completed
until 1420. All that remains of this church today are the first
two levels of a bell tower that stood outside the body of the
building. When the new church became too small, the third
(and current) church was begun in 1494. This engulfed the bell
tower, whose dimensions set the plan for the size of the whole
building. The church was built in the flamboyant Gothic style
despite its construction in the Renaissance, but it took so long
to complete (sixty-three years) that the facade was built in the


220
                                     Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais




Miséricordes in the pews at the church of Saint-Gervais



heavy baroque style that was then current, copied by the
church of Saint-Paul.
    Paris was so taken with the facade with its three sections in
the Ionic, Doric, and Corinthian styles that Voltaire (an anti-
Catholic) remarked perhaps sarcastically, “This is a masterpiece,
lacking only a square to hold its admirers.” The nineteenth-
century statue of Saint Gervais is on the left, one of Saint Protais
on the right. The evangels, above, date from the early twentieth
century. The original statues were demolished during the Revo-
lution.
     Saint-Gervais was an important church of the Marais. Mme
de Sévigné was married here and innumerable prominent peo-
ple were buried here. In modem Paris, however, the church has


                                                                  PEON
Pariswalks

become isolated from its congregants, surrounded as it is on
one side by administrative buildings including the city hall (H6-
tel de Ville), the non-church-going students from the Cité des
Arts on another, and the predominantly Jewish and Arab neigh-
borhood on a third.
      On Good Friday, 1918, the church suffered the disaster of
being hit by a German shell of the type known as Big Bertha;
The shell killed fifty and injured two hundred. As a result of the
damage, the stained-glass windows are now all modern.
    Enter the church and appreciate the freshly brightened
Gothic pillars, especially the flamboyant ones behind the altar.
The nave is fumished only with stools because the church’s
monastic order, the Communion de Jérusalem, believes in sim-
plicity. In contrast, the organ is elaborately carved with gar-
lands, ribbons, and cherubs.
      The treasure to discover in this church are the miséricordes
carved in the pews of the choir, including animals, faces, and
scenes representing trades. Find the lion, the man and the
woman sharing a bath, and the lady dancing with a jester. These
small sculptures were tucked under the brackets on hinged
seats that priests could lean against during portions of the ser-
vice that required prolonged standing. In addition, there are dif-
ferent faces carved on the armrests between the seats. This
decoration expresses the humor and vitality of the anonymous
tradesmen who built these massive churches.
     Leave the church by the back door at the end of the left aisle
(an area under construction at the time of our visit). You are
now on the rue des Barres. To the left and down two doors, at
no. 15, are the remains of a building and a room with a beamed
ceiling. Through the back, the church gardens are visible.
Across the street, at the comer of rue Grenier sur l’Eau (the
street name that inspired the postcard shop mentioned in Walk
5), a building shows its exposed beams and sags from age. This
building, no. 12, has been beautifully restored as an inexpen-
sive youth hostel. It was once a convent and now houses stu-
dents from all over the world. Peek into the lobby to see the fine
antique furniture.
     The rue des Barres offers a dramatic view of the flanks of the
church and its attractive roofs and gargoyles. Across from the

22D
                               Bastille to Eglise Saint-Gervais

chureh is LArtisanat Monastique, which sells products from
monasteries all over France—primarily jams, honeys, soaps,
candles, and religious articles. The monks and nuns from Saint-
Gervais are the salespeople.
   In good weather, a small restaurant, LEbouillanté, serves
meals under the wings of the church, in the pedestrian street
that dips down to the Seine. The outdoor tables are highly
sought after in their peaceful and attractive surroundings. The
restaurant is inexpensive and serves generously. It specializes in
teas, salads, and hot sandwiches called brik.
    If you continue to the end of the street you will be at the
Seine across from the tip of the Ile Saint-Louis. If you are not
too tired, walk over to visit this unique community within Paris.
Until the twentieth century, it was not uncommon for residents
of the Ile Saint-Louis to be born and die there without ever hav-
ing left the island. Today it is famous for Berthillon ice cream (at
31 rue Saint-Louis). Pay high prices for precise, small scoops of
flavorful ice creams and sorbets.
    The bridge to the ile, the Pont Louis-Philippe, is a meeting
place for the French and for tourists. On summer nights and on
Sundays, singers, mimes, and all kinds of performers line the
pedestrian bridge and pass the hat.
     Another option would be to retrace your steps to the front
of Saint-Gervais and go from there to the place de l’Hétel de
Ville. The elegant city hall always has interesting free exhibits on
some aspect of the City of Paris, and the department store
across the street, the Bazaar de |’Hétel de Ville, commonly re-
ferred to as the BHV, has a good stationery department and the
best hardware department in Paris. After a fruitless search
through antiques stores all over the city, we found a perfect
solid brass lion-faced door knocker in the basement of the BHV
for a very reasonable price. Stop by their Café Bricolo, a café
dedicated to do-it-yourselfers, offering daily workshops on a va-
riety of home-repair projects.
