Walk 6: Saints and Sinners

nearest Metro station is Temple.WALK
Saints and
Sinners
The beautiful Southern Marais is full of architectural surprises that reveal
the history of some of Paris’s most famous, and infamous, characters.
In the 1380s, CharlesV built a splendid palace here called St Pol. Once the king
settled in it, wealthy aristocrats quickly bought up land nearby and built their
own grand mansions. The palace eventually consisted of a jumble of these
mansions, bought piecemeal by the king, and exotic gardens were created
between the buildings, where he could wander in security. Parisians had invaded
the old Palais de la Cite during an uprising in 1358. In case this happened again
the new Palace of St Pol was linked to the Bastille by a secret passage, and the
River Seine offered a royal escape route by boat. This residential quarter
continued to develop and prosper until the reign of the Sun King, Louis XIV.
When he moved his court to Versailles in 1683, his courtiers followed and new
mansions were built, while the old Marais district was abandoned. Eventually,
Parisians realized the importance ofthe architectural heritage ofthe Marais, and
since the 1960s the city has begun to restore many of the beautiful buildings.Start at Hotel de Ville Metro station
in front of Hotel de Ville, the seat of
the city’s mayor.
This imposing building is a reminder that
this square was once the heart of Paris.
The River Seine to the south is wide and
deep, making a sheltered port between
lie de la Cite and the Right Bank. In
medieval times, boats using the 500-mile-
(800km-) long Seine for transporting
merchandise could dock here and unload
goods for trade. This square became the
central market of Paris. The Hotel de
Ville was built by the city for its chief
merchant, who was also the tax collector.
Revolutionaries burnt down the original
building in 1871, and the present building
is a late 19th-century rebuild, nicknamed
the ‘wedding cake’.Twenty-two colossal
copper statues on the rooftop symbolize
the regions of France; the reclining male
and female figures on either side of the
central clock symbolize the Seine and
Marne rivers, whose confluence is at the
eastern limit of the city.
Cross rue de Rivoli, and walk down
rue du Temple beside the BHV
department store.Turn first right into
rue de la Verrerie, and left into rue des
Archives.At No. 22-24 is the entrance to
Les Billettes.
This atmospheric cloister is used for
exhibitions of arts and crafts. It was built
in 1427 and is the only complete one to
have survived in Paris.The strange story
behind this building is that the land was
the property of a moneylender called
Jonathas. He was said to have desecrated
a holy wafer by piercing it with a knife.
It bled, so he then boiled it, but the water
turned red with blood. When this was
made public he was condemned to death
and burnt alive. The church was built
here to commemorate the miracle.
3Leave the Billettes and walk back
down rue des Archives, cross rue
de Rivoli again and continue on rue de
Lobau.Turn left into place St-Gervais
and stop to admire the square and the
facade of the church before going inside.
In the middle of the square is an elm tree,
beneath which local judges convened
m order to dispense justice and sort out
quarrels and disputes between members
of the congregation after church services.
The church is mostly 17th century; its
classical facade was the first in Paris. 43
OPPOSITE: HOTEL DEVILLE CLOCK ON FRONT OF HOTEL DEVILLEdistance 1.2 miles (2km)
allow 2 hours
start Hotel deVille Metro station
finish St-Paul Metro station
<?/>
V
250 m
o or j
v/W 7®/>
s’
7VV Hotel deVille
<u
O
oI
<v
ChAtelet
®»l.
Hotel de Ville Q
(RER) js
Hotel deVille ?
<4
lie de *
la Cite Q.
# *
Or
A
6.
A
X 4V
Notre-Dame
Statues of the two saints to whom the
church is dedicated decorate the niches.
These saints, St Gervais and St Protais,
were twin brothers who converted to
Christianity and were martyred for it
by the lst-century Roman Emperor
Nero. Inside the church, in the third
side chapel on the south side, a modern
stained-glass window depicting a sunburst
commemorates the lives of some 90 local
people who were killed duringWorld
War I by missiles fired from ‘Big Bertha’,
the formidable German howitzer (siege
gun). At the rear of the church are some
wonderful modern stained-glass windows
by the artist Sylvie Godin. Godin died
aged only 42, shortly after completing
this, her last and most spectacular project.
In the choir there are some superb stalls
sculpted with meaningful scenes from
everyday life - look for the medieval
butcher roasting meat on a spit, the
cobbler with a row of clogs hanging in
his shop behind him, the couple bathing
together, and the reclining infant leaning
on a skull, symbolizing philosophy.HOTEL DE SENS
Leave the church by its rear exit,
left of the main nave.Turn left then
first right into rue du Grenier sur I’Eau.
Cross rue du Pont Louis Philippe and
continue to Le Memorial de la Shoah
(the Jewish Memorial) on the right.
There has been a Jewish community
living in Paris since Roman times. In
the medieval period,Jews settled in
the Marais quarter, which is why the
memorial commemorating the atrocities
that took place during World War II is
here. On the school to the left a plaque
attests to the French collaborators’
responsibility for the round-ups and
assassinations. The long bronze plaque
is called the Mur des Justes (Wall of the
Righteous). It lists by name the people
honoured for helping Jews during the
Occupation years.
I’Ave Maria. Look behind you for a
magnificent view of Hotel de Sens.
The Hotel de Sens is one of the few
surviving examples of domestic Gothic
architecture in Paris. Built at the end of
the 15th century, it was originally the
Paris pied-a-terre for the Archbishop
of Sens. The building has medieval
watchtowers, gargoyles and, at the point
of the archway above the main entrance,
a triangular opening, originally used
for dropping a vertical battering ram. A
cannon ball remains lodged in the upper
left-hand roof gable.
SContinue along the rue de I’Ave
Maria; the wall in the playground to
your left is part of the 12th-century city
wall of Paris. Continue a little further,
turning left into the Village St-Paul.
46
5Turn right into rue Geoffroy
I’Asnier, then left along rue de
I’Hotel deVille. Cross rue des Nonnains
d’Hyeres and continue to square de
This labyrinth of courtyards and
passageways was once part of the Hotel St
Pol, built by CharlesV. Nothing remains
of the original palace but the courtyardsare very evocative of the ancient city.
Nowadays the area consists of art galleries
and antique shops; window shopping is
great in this area but there are definitely
no bargains to be had.
7Walk through the main courtyard
and continue into a smaller court.
Go up the stairs to your right and
through the half-timbered passage into
a third court.Take the arcade on your
right onto rue St-Paul. Cross the street
here into rue CharlesV and walk along
to No. 12 on the left.
The infamous Marquise de Brinvilliers
lived in this Marais mansion with its
elegant carriage entrance. Her lover was
a man called Godon de Ste Croix; with
his help, she poisoned her wealthy father,
her husband, two brothers and her sister,
who was a nun. At this time, poisons were
known as ‘inheritance powders’.When
her lover was found dead in 1672, police
discovered recipes for poisons at his home
and irrefutable evidence of the Marquise’s
guilt. Eventually, she was discovered
hiding in a convent, forcibly brought
back to Paris, and put on trial. She was
found guilty, beheaded, then her headless
body was burnt at the stake. The witty
writer Mme de Sevigne followed the
case with interest and wrote:‘It is done,
Brinvilliers is in the air everywhere, her
poor little body has been thrown, after
execution, onto a great fire and the ashes
are blowing in the wind; we are forced to
breathe them and who knows, through
her spirits perhaps we will all unwittingly
catch the poisoning fever!’
WHERETO EAT
m BRIOCHE DOREE,
66 rue de Rivoli;
Good bakery with eat-in or
take-away facilities.
L’EBOUILLANTE,
6 rue des Barres;
Tel: 01 42 74 70 52.
The speciality is crispy pancakes
known as ‘Bricks’.
LETRUMILOU,
84 quai de I’Hotel deVille;
Tel: 01 42 77 63 98.
Old-style traditional French bistro.
8Walk back to rue St-Paul, turning
right.At No. 22 is the Red
Wheelbarrow English bookstore. Cross
to the left and continue, turning left into
the passage St-Paul.Walk through the
passage into the church of St-Paul.
The passage St-Paul is an ancient street
still lined with bollards to protect
buildings and pedestrians from the
dangers of iron-rimmed carriage wheels.
