Walk 14: The Golden Triangle

Rivoli for Concorde Metro station.WALK The Golden
Triangle §#MWI \
This walk will take you along the western half of Paris’s grand processional
axis, with a detour into the‘Golden Triangle’ of Paris fashion houses.
Napoleon wanted to create a grand open-air theatre where he could choreograph
displays to celebrate his military victories. The Champs-Elysees was to be the
stage, the Arc deTriomphe the backdrop. In the early 1800s the woodlands to
the west of Paris were landscaped into a gentle hill from Concorde to the
Etoile. The small, steep streets at the top right-hand end, such as rue de Berry,
are where the landfill was dumped. This created a slope, which means that
wherever you stand you have a wonderful view. Napoleon’s only journey
/
through the Arc de Triomphe and down the Champs-Elysees was made feet
first, when he was taken in his coffin to his final resting place at Les Invalides.
In the 1980s, President Mitterrand prolonged the historical axis as far as La
Defense, the business centre that includes La Grande Arche, although this
monument is dedicated to the glories of mankind rather than the military. The
Champs-Elysees is still the parade ground for Paris and regular events here are
the military parade on 14 July, the Fete de la Musique on 21 June, and the April
Marathon. Crowds throng for the finish of the annual Tour de France.Start atTuileries Metro station.Walk
into the middle of the gardens, turn
right and walk to place de la Concorde.
Jardin desTuileries were royal gardens,
laid out m front of the Tuileries Palace
in the 16th century. Since the 17th
century, the public has been able to
enjoy them, too.Tuile means a tile, and
refers to the kilns that made tiles for the
rooftops of Paris that stood here in the
Middle Ages. The palace was built for
Queen Catherine de Medici in the 16th
century, but was burnt to the ground
during the Paris Commune in 1871.
You will find two art galleries beside the
place de la Concorde.The Orangerie, on
the river side, holds a fine collection of
Impressionist paintings, including Monet’s
famous work, Les Nympheas. It has two
large oval rooms creating a complete
environment of water lilies. On the rue
de Rivoli side, the Jeu de Paume hosts
temporary modern art exhibitions.There
are several cafes in the gardens, and a
great variety of modern sculptures.
Climb the ramp to view place de la
Concorde from the terrace that
overlooks the square.
The land rises here because it is the place
where the old city walls once stood. The
guillotine occupied this square at the
time of the Revolution and over 1,000
people were beheaded in the space of
about one year (1793-4), including the
king and queen Louis XVI and Marie
Antoinette. The guillotine, nicknamed
the nation’s razor, was named after one
WHERETO EAT
LATERRASSE DE POMONE,
[|Oj]Jardin desTuileries;
Tel: 01 42 61 22 14.
Brasserie/creperie with plenty of
outdoor seating.
tOU LE VICTORY,
33 avenue Franklin Roosevelt;
Tel: 01 43 59 47 33.
Local brasserie, lunch or tea stop.
m LADUREE CHAMPS-ELYSEES,
75 avenue des Champs-Elysees;
Tel: 01 40 75 08 75.
Featured in the film Marie Antoinette
by Sophia Coppola.
Dr Guillotin, who was horrified that it
was given his name. He had promoted it
as a humane way of dispatching people,
saying that they would feel only a slight
tickle on the back of the neck. Luckily
for him, he never found out if this was
true. In the centre of the square is the
obelisk from Luxor, a present to France
from Egypt, which at 3,300 years old
is Paris’s oldest monument. The Arc de
Triomphe is visible in the distance.
Walk across the square and into the
Champs-Elysees Gardens on the
right-hand side. Continue until you reach
the Palais de I’Elysee on the right.
/
Champs-Elysees means Fields of Paradise.
In the spring and summer these gardens
with their beautiful flowers are truly 99
OPPOSITE: ARC DETRIOMPHEPRIME MINISTER CLEMENCEAU
DISTANCE 2.2 miles (3.5km)
allow 3 hours
start Tuileries Metro station
FINISH Charles de Gaulle Etoile Metro station
heavenly. Some splendid gates afford
/
walkers a view of the Elysee Palace,
the official resicience of the President
of France, and its gardens. Outside
the gates, in the surrounding public
gardens, you will find some small statues
commemorating Jean Moulin (1899-
1943), leader of the French Resistance
during the German Occupation, and a
curious statue of President Pompidou
emerging from a flowerbed. If you want
to look into the courtyard of this grand
residence, walk up avenue de Marigny on
your right and go round to the front.
100
Stop at the corner of avenue de
Marigny and the Champs-Elysees.
Position yourself in the best place to
appreciate the dramatic view of the
golden dome of Les Invalides.
Fes Invalides was built as a military
hospital for Fouis XIV and is where
Napoleon is buried. (See Walk 16.) The
ornate bridge is the Pont Alexandre III,
and the two large exhibition palaces,
with their belle epoque decoration, are
called the Petit Palais and the Grand
Palais.They were built for the World
Trade Fair in 1900, as was the bridge. The
Petit Palais (on your left) has a large and
varied collection of art, from Greek vases
to Impressionist paintings, and is free to
visit. The Grand Palais (on your right)
houses temporary exhibitions. It has a
breathtakingly magnificent arching dome
of metal and glass that was a marvel of
engineering in its day. It is big enough to
stand Notre-Dame inside. Two statues are
visible from this point. On your right is
General de Gaulle, striding purposefully
along, and on the left is Prime Minister
Clemenceau, wearing a military greatcoat
and seeming to emerge from the trenches
of World War 1.
5Walk around the side of the
Grand Palais, along avenue du
Gen Eisenhower.Turn left into avenue
Franklin D Roosevelt to find the
entrance to the Palais de la Decouverte.Grande Arche i
de la Defense '
Avenue Kleber
Boissiere
Arc de
Triomphe
Avenue de WagramLADUREE CHAMPS-ELYSEES
This museum is dedicated to a lively and
interactive approach to science. It has
temporary exhibitions and a planetarium.
PALAIS DE LA DECOUVERT;
TUE-SUN 10-6;TEL: 01 56 43 20 21;
www.palais-decouverte.fr
SCross avenue Franklin D Roosevelt
and turn right into rue Francois
Premier.At the pretty square with its
fountain, turn left into rue Jean Goujon
and stop for the chapel Notre-Dame de
la Consolation.
This chapel was built to commemorate
125 people who perished in a fire at the
Charity Sale Bazaar, the building that
occupied this spot in 1897. A display
caught fire, there were no fire escapes,
and the aristocratic ladies attending the
event were impeded in their attempts at
escape by their voluminous fashionable
dresses. Many of the women who died
came from wealthy families who later
financed the building of the chapel in
their memory. This terrible event led to
the beginning of the identification of
bodies using dental records.
Go back to place Francois Premier
and turn left into rue Francois
Premier. Stop for avenue Montaigne.
This section of the city is referred to
as the ‘Golden Triangle’ because of the
concentration ofluxury shops here.
Ifyou walk up and down this street
you can window shop in many world-
renowned stores. Turn left and you will
find Dior, Prada, the Plaza Athenee
luxury hotel where many celebrities stay,
and the Champs-Elysees Theatre, whichspecializes in music, opera and dance.The
simple design of this art deco structure,
with its marble facade and dancing Greek
gods, was ahead of its time when it was
built in 1911.The Russian ballet dancer
Vaslav Nijinsky (1890-1950) shocked the
public with his suggestive dancing here,
and Josephine Baker (1906-1975), known
as the Black Pearl, danced semi-naked,
clad only in a wreath of bananas. At
the end of the road is the Alma tunnel,
where Princess Diana and Dodi A1 Fayed
were killed in a car crash in 1997. In the
opposite direction is Chanel and other
designer shops.
8Follow avenue Montaigne back to
the Champs-Elysees, stop at the
Rond Point roundabout and admire the
plantings, which are changed once a
month.Walk up the Champs-Elysees
to the Arc deTriomphe.The arch is
accessible by an underpass on the
right-hand side of the Champs-Elysees.
The Arc de Triomphe was ordered by
Napoleon as a monument to the army,
but was unfinished in his lifetime. At
the time of his wedding to Marie Louise
ofAustria in 1810, they built a canvas
mock-up for him to march through!
The statue decorating the right-hand
side of the arch (a female figure leading
a group of soldiers), by the sculptor
Francois Rude, is called La Marseillaise,
which is the French national anthem. At
the base of the arch is the tomb of the
Unknown Soldier. It has a permanently
burning flame, rekindled every evening at
a ceremony at 6pm.You can climb to the
top, from which there is a magnificent
view of the avenues leading from the
arch, in the shape of a star. This gives the
square its original name: Place de l’Etoile.
From the Arc de Triomphe you can
see in the distance the huge modern
arch of la Defense, which is situated just
outside Paris, in the business quarter,
where it jostles with the skyscrapers. If
you take line I from Charles de Gaulle
Etoile metro station, it takes 15 minutes
to get to La Defense. Get off at Grande
Arche de la Defense to visit the arch.
This arch, chosen by President
Mitterrand, echoes Napoleon’s Arc de
Triomphe, but celebrates the glory of
mankind rather than military victory.
It is big enough to stand the Invalides
building inside.You can take a lift to the
top tor a spectacular view over Paris.
