Walk 20: From Romans to the Revolution

and the Brasserie Lipp.WALK From Romans to
the Revolution
Around Paris’s I 2th-century city wall you can trace the Romans’ route, the
birth of La Sorbonne and the inventor of the Guillotine.
The old Latin Quarter is a maze of streets that have grown up around the
medieval Sorbonne University. It is still the haunt of students and is therefore
young, dynamic and extremely lively.You will be walking the streets trodden by
thinkers, philosophers, poets, theologians and artists. Dante wrote his Inferno
while here, and Picasso painted his famous mural Guernica. This ancient part of
the capital was the centre ofRoman Paris and spectacular remains have survived.
The Roman capital with a population ofabout 20,000 was called Lutetia (born
of the waters), an appropriate name for a city that began on an island. Its centre
/
was the crossroads now formed by rue des Ecoles and rue St-Jacques. The
Romans didn’t build on the Right Bank because it was beneath the flood plain
of the Seine. In the 4th century, they dismantled many of their monuments,
a
taking the stone to lie de la Cite to build the city’s first wall. Luckily, both the
Roman Baths and the Arenas survived.From St-Michel Metro station walk
into place St-Michel.
The imposing fountain represents St
Michael, leader of the celestial armies,
fighting the Devil. St Michael is the
patron saint of the French military. The
square has been associated with him since
the Middle Ages, but the surrounding
architecture dates from the 1860s. Marble
plaques record the names of soldiers who
fell as the Allied tanks rumbled down
the boulevard during the Liberation in
August 1944. Opened in 1910, the Metro
line at place St-Michel was the first to
cross the Seine. The station took four
years to construct and was built above
ground then lowered into position.
WHERETO EAT
S0CREPERIE DE CLUNY,
20 rue de la Harpe;
Tel: 01 43 26 08 38.
The speciality is pancakes.
01 LES DEGRES DE
NOTRE-DAME,
10 rue des Grands Degres;
Tel: 01 55 42 88 88.
Mixture of traditional French and
North African cuisine.
J0IJLA FOURMIAILE,
8 rue du Fouarre;
Tel: 01 43 29 40 99.
Tearoom serving lunches.
Leave the square by rue St-Andre
des Arts.Walk to rue des Grands
Augustins on the right, turn into the
street and continue to No. 7.
This is where Picasso (1881-1973) lived
with his young lover, Francoise Gilot, and
where he painted Guernica.
3Go back and take the first right, rue
Christine, and cross rue Dauphine
into the passage Dauphine. On leaving
the passage turn right into rue Mazarine,
left into Jacques Callot and left again
into rue de Seine.Turn immediately right
into rue de I’Echaude, right into rue
Jacob and first left into rue Furstemberg.
The attractive place Furstemberg was
once the stables of the Abbey of St-
Germain-des-Pres. Looking across the
square you can admire the handsome
brick and stone facade of the Abbots’
Palace. The Musee Delacroix is located
m the corner of the square. Delacroix’s
(1798-1863) most celebrated painting in
the Louvre is Liberty Leading the People.
Leave the square by the rue
Cardinale, then rue de Bourbon le
Chateau.Turn left into rue de Buci,
continue until the crossroads, then go
straight on into rue St-Andre des Arts.
Take the first right into the covered
arcade Cour du Commerce St-Andre.
Le Procope (to the right) claims to be
the oldest coftee house in Paris, and was
the meeting place ol revolutionaries and
intellectuals. Benjamin Franklin, Lafayette
and Jefferson all came here. Further along 141
OPPOSITE: SORBONNEOPPOSITE: LA PROCOPE
distance 1.8 miles (3km)
allow 2.5 hours
start St-Michel Metro station
finish Cluny Sorbonne Metro station
250 m
p. Palatines
de Vaugirard
Palais du
Luxembourg
the passageway is the workshop where
Dr Guillotine invented ‘the nation’s
razor’. It is said that he practised the
blade’s action on newborn lambs. During
the Revolution some 3,000 people were
guillotined. The little courtyard to the
left was used during the filming of the
musical film Gigi, starring Lesley Caron
and Maurice Chevalier. In the window
of the boutique at the courtyard entrance
you can see the remains of a huge stone
tower, which was part of the original city
142 wall and dates from the 1180s.
Continue through the series of
courtyards until you come out
on rue du Jardinet.Turn right into rue
de l’Eperon,then left along boulevard
St-Germain until you reach boulevard
St-Michel. Cross over and walk up
the boulevard to view the exterior
courtyard of the Roman Baths.
The remains of the baths are extensive
and date back to the 3rd century. There
were three bath complexes in Roman
Paris, serving a population of aboutt
20,000, each divided into hot, tepid and
cold bathing rooms.The courtyard you
are looking into was the tepidarium and
the massive paving stones on the floor
originally formed the road surface of
the Roman rue St-Jacques. Continue
around to the rue du Sommerard side,
where the corner chamber or steam
room can be seen, and huge sections of
the collapsed vault lie on the ground. The
lower walls of stone and layered brick are
still plastered with the original Roman
mortar. The ancients used their public
baths much as we might use a sauna; here
they washed, shaved and came to enjoy
aromatherapy massages. Men and women
came on separate days.
I
*
;l
Continue along rue du Sommerard
to the entrance of the Musee de
Cluny, a little further along on the place
Paul Painleve.
The museum houses an exceptional
collection of medieval art and artefacts.
The house is late 15th century, a rare
example of domestic architecture in
the Gothic style. Many churches have
survived but there are only three houses
from this period in Paris. The courtyard
is decorated with carved cockleshells,
the emblem ofJacques d’Amboise, for
whom the house was built, and holds a
curious Wild Man well. The octagonal
tower hides a spiral staircase.The striped
wall to the left, behind the arcades, is
part of the Roman baths, onto which
the Cluny mansion was built. One of the
most beautiful exhibits here is the series
of tapestries known as The Lady and the
Unicorn. Scholars still debate the exact
meaning of the strange allegories; five
of the scenes are known to symbolize
\
the five senses, but the sixth part of
the puzzle is not yet fully understood.
Other exhibits include stained-glass
windows, medieval metalwork, carvings
and sculptures, locks and keys, armour,
pilgrims’ badges and medieval flea combs.
There is an excellent book and gift shop.
MUSEE DE CLUNY; WED-MON 9.15-5.45;
TEL: 01 53 73 78 00; www.musee-moyenage.fr
7Return to boulevard St-Germain
and cross over to rue de la Harpe,
by the entrance to Cluny La Sorbonne
Metro station.Take rue St-Severin on
the right and go into the church.
The portal is 13th century and was
brought here from the lie de la Cite in
the 1840s. Most of the building is 15th
century, in the style called Flamboyant
Gothic. This name comes from the flame
shapes in the tracery, as seen in the rose
window. Students of the Sorbonne used
the church, and the side chapels are
decorated with plaques giving thanks
for good exam results. At the back of the
church are some modern stained glass
windows and an ancient well.
8Continue along rue St-Severin, cross
rue St-Jacques and turn left into rue
St-Julien le Pauvre. Stop for a while in
front of the church.
Masonry remaining after the completion
of Notre-Dame was used to build this
lovely old church.The courtyard in frontot the building contains a well and just
behind it, to the right, is a massive paving
stone from the old Roman road.This
was the first church of the students at
the Sorbonne, and they held elections
lor the Chancellor ol the university here.
In the 17th century, students rioted and
sacked the church.The first two bays
were destroyed and the facade you see
today was built to repair it.You can see
parts of the ruined original facade on the
left-hand side of the courtyard.
9Cross the garden to quai de
Montebello.Turn right.Walk along
the quai to rue de Bievre on your right.
This street is evocative of medieval Paris.
Dante stayed here when he began writing
his Inferno and the infamous Marquise de
Brinvilliers, who had a grudge against her
family and poisoned several of them, lived
at No. 28 for a time (see also Walk 6). No.
22 was the home of President Mitterrand.
I Turn right into boulevard
St-Germain, continue across
place Maubert-Mutualite, then turn left
into rue St-Jacques and right into rue
des Ecoles. Stop in front of the statue of
Michel de Montaigne.
Michel de Montaigne (1533-1592) was a
great thinker of the Renaissance and the
father of the essay. He taught here, at the
Sorbonne University, which was founded
in the 13th century by a monk named
Robert de Sorbon.The building you see
today dates from the Napoleonic era and
was built to educate up to 5,000 students.
By the 1960s, some 20,000 students
were crammed in here, a situation
that led to the student revolution of
May 1968. Nowadays, the university
campus comprises some 18 buildings
m and around Paris, where 250,000
students are engaged in study. Until the
French Revolution, which repressed the
university, the language of learning was
Latin, but when Napoleon reopened
the school he decreed that classes be
taught in modern French.You can walk
around the building, taking the rue de la
Sorbonne to the facade of the Sorbonne
church, which is built in the Jesuit style.
