Walk 7: Backstreets of the Bastille

;T ' I iWALK Backstreets
m of the Bastille
Before the Revolution, the Bastille area was a faubourg (a district outside
Paris) and there’s still a flavour of the past in its narrow streets.
The Bastille was a massive medieval castle built to defend the Paris of CharlesV.
It took 13 years to build and was completed in 1382, but took only four months
to destroy in 1789. During the reign ofLouis XIV the Bastille became notorious
as a place where the king could send his enemies without them being tried.The
king’s infamous ‘Lettres de Cachet’ were enough to earn someone an
indeterminate sentence; among the famous here were the Man in the Iron
Mask, the Marquis de Sade, Voltaire and the celebrated Latude, who escaped
several times. The poor were kept in dungeons in bad conditions where they
were left to starve, or drown when the Seine flooded. Louis XI, the ‘Spider
King’, kept prisoners in tightly fitting cages. Prisoners with money or
connections could live well, bringing their own staff and holding sumptuous
dinner parties. Some had so much freedom that one of the towers was named
the Liberty Tower. To best enjoy this walk, avoid Sunday when the courtyards
are closed and the garden is crowded. The morning market is on a Thursday.From quai de la Rapee Metro station
cross the road (pont Morland),go
down the steps and walk along beside
the canal and its Port de Plaisance.
This pleasant marina provides moorings
lor boats, some ol which are semi¬
permanent and some are just visiting,
lucky enough to find a berth at this
prime location.The pretty gardens were
planted in the 1980s when the area was
gentrihed and there is now a cafe called
the Grand Bleu, named alter the film,
where you can take tea or an ice cream
while enjoying the lovely view of the
many and various boats.The old walls
on the other side of the canal are part of
the 14th-century city fortifications. Boats
leave from here to go up the canal St-
Martin on an enjoyable cruise.
Walk up the canalside slope to
reach the place de la Bastille.
From here you can see the new opera
house, Opera Bastille, with its elegant
modern curving glass front.Venezuelan/
Canadian architect Carlos Ott designed
the building in the 1980s. It provides
2,700 seats, some at quite reasonable
prices, and almost all with perfect
visibility. The booking hall is on the
right-hand side; sometimes guided
tours are available. In the middle of the
square is a column to the memory of the
Revolution of 1830; the Revolution that
saw a king put back on the throne.You
can see the dates on the base:July 27-29.
On the top is a statue of the Spirit of
Liberty holding broken chains.This was
an area quick to participate in uprisings
due to the large working class population.
Cross boulevard Bourdon and
boulevard Henri IV and stand in
front of the cafe Fran^ais.
Look on the ground tor the paving stones
that trace the shape of the Bastille prison,
which stood here. The Bastille was a
defensive fortress built on the eastern side
of the city to protect it from invasion.
When Paris grew larger the Bastille was
no longer on the outside of the city and
it became a prison. At the Revolution
of 1789 on 14 July it was stormed by a
mob wanting gunpowder for the guns
they had raided from Les Invalides.They
freed seven prisoners, mostly madmen or
murderers, who were astonished to be
paraded as heroes. Soon afterwards the
building was demolished and the stones
were sold off as souvenirs. Bastille Day on
14 July is now a national holiday. 5 I
OPPOSITE: BASTILLE DISTRICT PORT DE PLAISANCEOPPOSITE: FRESH PRODUCE MARKET
DISTANCE 1.5 miles (2.5km) - plus optional promenade plantee
2.8 miles (4.5km)
pets:
Hi 1
m.
ALLOW 2.5 hours
START Quai de la Rapee Metro station
finish Gare de Lyon Metro station
15 furies
p De/escluze
•D
Antoine
250 m
250 yds
91 & -o
-5 i/i
o
Pass Brulon(j
Cross rue St-Antoine and turn left.
Walk ahead for one block.
A large statue ofPierre-Augustin
Caron de Beaumarchais (1732-1799)
commemorates the entrepreneur and
author of Le Barbier de Seville and Le
Mariage de Figaro, who lived nearby.The
works were written as plays but were
made into two of the most popular
operas ot all time; they are often
52 performed at the Bastille.
Turn right into rue de la Bastille,
walking past Restaurant Bofinger at
No. 3.This restaurant has a stunning art
nouveau interior and also serves good
traditional French brasserie food.
Continue walking round the Bastille
square.A large fresh produce market is
held on boulevard Richard Lenoir on
Thursday and Sunday mornings.Turn left
into a pretty courtyard, Cour Damoye,
and walk along to the end.Turn right
into rue de Lappe.iffSt:RUE DE L^PPE
Rue de Lappe is very lively in the
evenings, with a multitude of restaurants,
bars and clubs. Halfway along is an
old-style dance hall from the 1930s, the
Ballajo, still a popular venue for those
who love to dance the tango or rock and
roll style. The area used to be famous
for its dance halls and an atmosphere in
which the rich could enjoy slumming
it with the working classes. Shops and
restaurants here serve specialities from
the Auvergne, an area famous for its
galoches (workmen’s leather clogs), which
are often hung in the windows. Many
Parisian restaurants were set up by people
from this relatively poor region in the
19th and 20th centuries.
This unusual restaurant, with its
\
spectacular interior converted from
an old furniture showroom, makes
an interesting place for lunch. In the
evenings it is crowded and a lot more
expensive, but at lunchtime it has a
reasonably priced menu. Peep in, ask for
their card and enjoy the interior decor
even ifyou do not eat here.Turn back
and walk into the attractive courtyard
at No. 56.There is a second courtyard
behind on the right.
Turn back down the rue du
# Faubourg St-Antoine and go into
the small passage way on the right.
54
At the end of rue de Lappe turn
TX right into rue de Charonne. Cross
the rue du Faubourg St-Antoine, and
walk along it on the right to No. 46 for
the restaurant Barrio Latino.
Passage du Chantier is lined with
workshops where small-scale furniture
is still made by craftsmen. The area has
been associated with the furniture-
making business since the 15th century,
when Louis XI gave people the right
iA&A CAPSto set up shop here in a bid to relieve
local poverty. At the time, the district was
outside Paris. Some of the famous French
furniture-makers, such as Weisweiler and
Carlin, who produced the masterpieces
of the 18th century for Queen Marie
Antoinette, had workshops here. Now
it is a mixture ol brash furniture stores
with pieces made cheaply abroad or small
artisans making traditional-style pieces.
However, the trades of upholstery and
gilding have survived in the workshops ol
the smaller backstreets.
Turn left and then turn first right
beside a hospital curiously called
the Quinze Vingts, meaning 15 x 20.
This name is an old-fashioned way ol
referring to the ‘300’, a group ol blind
soldiers housed in a special hospice
founded by Louis IX in the 13th century.
The institution is now a general hospital
specializing in eye disorders.The gateway
to the hospital and stone buildings at the
entrance were once the quarters of the
famous Musketeers in the 18th century.
The modern hospital has replaced the
other buildings from that era.
fj| Walk down rue Moreau, turn right
into avenue Daumesnil and then go
up the steps to the promenade Plantee.
The attractive raised walkway, planted
with greenery and flowers, was built to
replace old railway tracks, and a station
once stood where the opera house is now.
Ifyou wish to go to the end, the walk
will take you to the Bois deVincennes,
WHERETO EAT
MJ BOFINGER,
3 rue de la Bastille;
Tel: 01 42 72 87 82.
Art nouveau brasserie.
Reservations recommended.
MJ CAFE FRANQAiS,
3 place de la Bastille;
For meals, tea, a drink, or delicious
snacks and ice creams to take away.
MJ BARRIO LATINO,
46/48 rue du Faubourg St-Antoine;
Tel: 01 55 78 84 75.
Spectacular interior.Very trendy.
a park just outside the city. The railway
tracks were raised because the trains went
through a densely populated area. Since
the area has been renovated, craftspeople
congregate under the walkway.
Leave the raised walkway where
1 %*# avenue Daumesnil and boulevard
Diderot cross.Walk along avenue
Daumesnil and look in the windows
under the arcades of the viaduct.
