THE 6th ARRONDISSEMENT
n fine weather, the terrace of the Deux Magots, at the foot of the medieval
[e= tower of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, overflows with a medley of locals

and tourists from the four corners of the earth. They have gathered here to
raise ghosts from a past blessed with an aura of Left Bank intellectual and artistic
nonconformity and of postwar scandalous existentialism. Here the intelligentsia
spent their days in heated conversation on bustling café terraces and at night
plunged into its basements, to be caught up in frenzied sounds of Dixieland or
Bebop. The rest of Paris showered insults upon these ‘rats de cave’, (‘basement
rats’) ‘troglodytes’, (‘cave-dwellers’)
‘qui ont du Sartre sur les dents’ (a pun on
‘tartre’- who have tartar/Sartre on their teeth, that is, who talk of nothing but

Sartre). Simone de Beauvoir was derided as La Grande Sartreuse (a pun on
‘Chartreuse’, a Carthusian nun) or Notre-Dame de Sartre (a pun on ‘Chartres’).

To her friends she was known fondly as Castor because of her methodical diligence. Today’s visitors to the Deux Magots look vaguely for Jean-Paul Sartre’s
chair, not knowing that Sartre’s hang-out, during the last war, was not the German-infested Deux Magots but the upstairs of the next-door Flore: a heating stove
placed in the middle of the room by the café’s owner, Monsieur Paul Boubal,

proved a blessing, particularly during the harsh winter of 1943/4. Huddling into
these cosy premises, J.P. Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and others spent their days
at separate little tables, absorbed in their writing, Sartre working on Les Chemins
de la liberté, de Beauvoir on Tous les hommes sont mortels. But the spacious,

sunny terrace of the Deux Magots on the square is more appealing than the narrow terrace of the Flore, constricted by the traffic-ridden Boulevard Saint-

Germain, especially in summer, when it is often livened up by buskers and by the
celebrated merry-making band of the Beaux-Arts school. J.P. Sartre and Simone
de Beauvoir did not, however, stay long at Saint-Germain — by the time passersby sought them out after the war, they had migrated elsewhere, notably to the bar
of the Pont-Royal hotel on rue du Bac (in the 7th arr.).
Although Sartre’s ‘band’ did not frequent the Deux Magots, others did and the
presence of Jacques Prévert and his ‘band’, of Picasso, André Breton, Mouloudji,

Roger Blin, to mention but a few, amply justified the establishment’s catchphrase: ‘le rendezvous de |’élite intellectuelle.’ Following Parisian traditions,
each coterie took up residence in a given café and, within that café, in a distinctly
delineated territory. During the 1920s, for example, Paul Valéry, André Gide,
Joseph Kessel, Léon Blum and Gaston Gallimard frequented the terraceless but

highly ‘atmospheric’ Brasserie Lipp; in the 1930s André Breton and his Surrealist


friends preferred the Deux Magots, which, however, fell out of favour during the
Occupation because it was popular with the Germans. After the war communists
and their sympathizers gathered at the Bonaparte’on Place Saint-Germain-desPrés, or in Marguerite Duras’s flat on rue Saint-Benoit, while musicians showed
preference for the Royal Saint-Germain (now replaced by the Drugstore Publicis).
If few connect the Flore with Sartre, fewer still are aware that several decades

earlier it had been the haunt of the promoters of political anti-semitism. Here in
1899, when the retrial of Alfred Dreyfus unleashed vehement passions throughout
France, the virulent Jew-hater Charles Maurras, Léon Daudet, son of Alphonse,

and others founded 1’Action Francaise, a movement and a magazine of unspeakable virulence, which prepared the ground for what was to come four decades
later. It is not insignificant that, in 1945, on being sentenced to life imprisonment
for collaboration and expelled from the Academie Francaise, Charles Maurras
cried out: “It is the revenge of Dreyfus!”
j
The American ‘expatriates’ who joined in during the 1920s, came for fun rather
than for ideology. Making good use of the favourable dollar exchange rate and
breaking loose from the shackles of prohibition at home, they found Paris a place
of plenty and of limitless opportunities. The newly-wed Hemingways, freshly
arrived in Paris in December 1921, could enjoy a hearty meal at the Pré-auxClercs, on the corner of rue Jacob and rue Bonaparte, for the puny sum of 6
francs, with wine at 60 centimes extra. And although many Americans had to
content themselves with a dingy hotel room with no running water, up a steep
staircase, the sense of freedom, away from puritanical America, the colourful

streets overflowing with abundant, cheap food, and the sens of comradeship provided by the smoky cafés largely compensated for those shortcomings. Of course
there were also those Americans who were not short of money at all. Natalie
Barney’s literary salon at 20 rue Jacob, with its charming, shady courtyard overgrown with ivy, was the gathering-place of the beautiful people, where friendship,
love, art and literature were celebrated in a mock Greek temple, dubbed Le Tem-

ple de l’Amitié, in an atmosphere of genteel refinement — Miss Barney disliked
the crude atmosphere of café terraces, but had to compromise eventually and
allow whisky to be served instead of tea. However, the main occupation of the
‘expatriates’ was writing, for which encouragement came from two American
ladies: Gertrude Stein, who opened her home at 27 rue de Fleurus to those in
whom she had faith - or who did not threaten her; and Sylvia Beach, who was

able to publish and sell their works through her shop, Shakespeare and Company,
at 12 rue de l’Odéon. It took a lot of courage on her part to publish James Joyce’s
Ulysses in 1922, but she trusted his genius and was proved right.
Dingy hotel rooms were the order of the day until well after the war - La


Louisiane on rue de Seine (Simone de Beauvoir’s quarters), Le Montana on rue
Saint-Benoit, Le Madison on Place Jacques-Copeau, Le Taranne on Boulevard
Saint-Germain,

The Pont-Royal on rue du Bac (in the 7th arr.) - all now

respectable three- or even four-star establishments. Meals were taken in cheap
‘canteens’ such as Le Petit Saint-Benoit, still going strong on rue Saint-Benoit, or
Le Catalan on rue des Grands-Augustins, where Picasso ate during the Occupation, conveniently across from his studio at n° 7, and frequented also by Dora
Maar, Paul Eluard, Jean Cocteau and Balthus. But the backbone of Saint-Germain

were its café terraces, between which the ‘Germanopratins’ drifted, straying from
their ‘home’ cafés at different times of the day. The Flore and the Deux Magots,
for example, were afternoon favourites, while the Rhumerie Martiniquaise, at n°

166 Boulevard Saint-Germain, filled up at night. It took them barely five minutes
to cross the ‘village’, a tiny rectangle bounded by rue Jacob, rue Bonaparte,
Boulevard Saint-Germain and rue Saint-Benoit, with some extensions here and
there. In its heart stood the church of Saint-Germain and its square; around it lay
bustling cafés caught up by the fever of the 1920s, which had spread to here from
Montparnasse, only four stations away by Métro from Vavin and easily reached
on foot. Though somewhat abated, the fever persisted throughout the war, exemplified by the Zazous, those jolly youngsters, in provocative attire and passionately keen on jazz — it was after all one form of protest against the German
occupiers, No sooner was Paris liberated than the entire neighbourhood blazed

into freedom. The explosion, which lasted into the early 1950s, this time focused
on Saint-Germain-des-Prés, occasionally spreading to Montparnasse.
The blast of trumpets accompanied the blaze through the small hours of the
night, as Boris Vian and his friends celebrated the end of oppression at the Tabou,
on rue Dauphine. Pushing east Claude Luter brought his unbridled clarinet and
Dixieland to the basement of Lorientais on rue des Carmes (in the 5th arr.), in the

heart of the Latin Quarter. When the parents of his student audience lost patience
with their offspring swinging all night and skipping classes the following morning, the place had to close down and Claude Luther’s orchestra ended up at the
more expensive Vieux-Colombier, where he was later joined by an American jazz
clarinettist called Sydney Bechet; but the audience was no longer the same. The
Tabou also had to close down after an ephemeral existence of several months, due

to complaints from neighbours. Club Saint-Germain, at 13 rue Saint-Benoit, took
up the baton in 1948 with a glorious array of American jazzmen - Charlie Parker,
Coleman Hawkins, Max Roachman, Duke Ellington, Miles Davies - though it

never succeeded in recreating the wild, spontaneous atmosphere of the Tabou.
Meanwhile the French natives expressed their new freedom in their own way.
At the Rose Rouge on rue de Rennes (before that on rue de la Harpe in the 5th
arr.), the Fréres Jacques, combined the words of Prévert, Queneau or their own,


with music, acrobatics and mime to create a new genre of perfectly lubricated,
three-minute songs of sheer joy. Juliette Gréco, more sedate, theatrical, dressed in
black, and with her low-pitched, ironical voice, became the spokeswoman of
‘existentialist’ Saint-Germain as she sang to the lyrics of Sartre, Queneau, Desnos
and Prévert and to the music of Kosma, such songs as the unforgettable Feuilles

Mortes. All-purpose black had first been worn by Saint-Germain because it had
come in handy in those days of penury. However, in a city bent on fads, it soon
became the trademark of Saint-Germain’s youths and of Gréco, their model.
Meanwhile, perpetuating French traditions of protest, a new generation of antiestablishment poet-singers - Georges Brassens, Jacques Brel, Léo Ferré, Francis
Lemarque - made their appearance in the vaulted cabarets of Saint-Germain, at
L’ Arlequin, L’Echelle de Jacob, L’Ecluse and Le Quod Libet.

The liberation also released bulimic creativity. Art galleries, such as those of |
Pierre Loeb on rue des Beaux-Art and René Breteau on rue de Seine, flourished,
new ones opened and dozens of exhibitions, displaying the works of artists such
as Atlan, Hartung, Henri Michaux, Serge Poliakoff and André Masson, were
organized to satisfy a public starved of art and culture. The concept of art itself
was questioned and revised. The painter Fautrier, for example, wrote, “Je réve
d’un tableau mal composé,vilain de couleurs, mal dessiné, mais qui existe” (“T
dream of a badly painted picture, of ugly colours, badly drawn, but which
exists”). Dubuffet insisted on the use of raw materials because “painting becomes
insipid if it does not return from time to time to its stone age.”
Above all, Saint-Germain drew together France’s anguished intelligentsia, united in their sense of its helplessness in the face of war’s devastation. Jean-Paul
Sartre spoke for them in his definition of man’s ‘existentialist’ condition: “La
guerre en mourant, laisse l’homme nu, sans illusion, abandonné a ses propres
forces, ayant enfin compris qu’il n’a plus & compter que sur lui ”(“War in its
agony leaves man naked, disillusioned, abandoned to his own resources, having at

last understood that he can rely only on himself”). Albert Camus claimed that it
was required of his generation to rise “up to its despair” (étre a la hauteur de son
désespoir”).
People in great numbers took up their pens, hoping out of the ashes of destruction to reconstruct a better world. All of them were anti-fascists and all, whether
pro-, anti-, ex- or future communists or just sympathizers, defined themselves in
reference to the Communist Party, the party of ‘cent mille fusillés’ (one hundred
thousand shot dead), which promised total revolution to purge and redeem the
world and which in the 1946 legislative elections, had obtained 28.6% of the
votes. Essays, novels, plays, poems flooded the desks of old-established publishers such as Gallimard, who boasted an impressive list of authors - Camus, Queneau, Duras, Ionesco, Genet, Mouloudji - and also the translated works of


Hemingway, Faulkner, Dos Passos and Steinbeck. Small new houses followed
suit: Le Point du Jour, which published Paul Eluard, Tristan Tzara... and especially Jacques Prévert; Le Sagittaire, which published Queneau, Adamov and
André Breton; Le Scorpion, Boris Vian’s publisher; and Minuit which took pride
in its underground past during the Occupation. It had been founded by Vercors
(real name Jean Bruller) in order to publish his famous Silence de la Mer; other
members of the Resistance had joined him and under guise of pseudonyms contributed courageously to the war effort: Louis Aragon (Francois La Colére), Elsa
Triolet (Laurent Daniel), Francois Mauriac (Foriez) and Paul Eluard (Jean du

Haut) among them. New reviews and magazines also proliferated. Some were
ephemeral but others were to last, such as Le Temps Moderne, founded by Sartre,
Combat, with Camus as chief editor, Les Lettres Frangaises, one of the numerous

mouth-pieces of the Communist Party, with Aragon as chief editor, and La Table
Ronde, co-founded by Raymond Aron, Albert Camus and André Malraux. Understandably, the desperate absurdity of man’s condition was the underlying theme
of postwar playwrights as well - Eugéne Ionesco, Albert Camus, J.P. Sartre,
Adamov and Samuel Beckett. Saint-Germain-des-Prés supported the theatre passionately, welcomed experimentation and followed enthusiastically a new generation of actors, among them Suzanne Flon, Loleh Bellon, Maria Casarés and

Gérard Philippe.
La Hune, a bookshop-gallery at the very heart of Saint-Germain, just between
the Deux Magots and Flore and opposite Lipp, became the focus and meetingplace of the intelligentsia. It had first been set up by a group of young book-and
art-lovers, on rue Monsieur-le-Prince, on the fringe of the Latin Quarter. In 1946,
Jeanne Bucher, highly regarded as the owner of a famous art gallery on Boulevard du Montparnasse, visited it and exclaimed, “La Hune sera célébre!”’ At the

new site, exhibitions were held upstairs and books sold downstairs, to help promote the works of writers and artists. La Hune also published some written
works.
The intellectual and artistic calling of the 6th, however, though stimulated by
the war, goes centuries back. Its eastern section is part of the Latin Quarter,

whose tradition of scholarship dates from the Middle Ages. To the west, the
arrondissement developed around the abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, which
started as a basilica in the late 6th century: “I have begun to build a church...” we
are told by Childebert, son of Clovis, in a deed dating 6 December 558. It was the
Bishop of Paris, Saint Germain, who had urged Childebert to erect a sanctuary for

Saint Vincent, the patron of wine-growers and the martyred deacon of Saragossa
which Childebert had taken from the Wisigoths. A relic of the Saint’s tunic and a
gold cross, said to have belonged to King Solomon,


which Childebert had

brought back from Saragossa were laid in the new basilica. Later Childebert and
Saint Germain were also laid there, as was the royal family for the next hundred

years.
>
Saint Germain was determined to bequeath to posterity a monument of splendour, decorated with magnificent mosaics and topped by a gilded roof. Glittering
in the sun amidst peaceful meadows, it was deservedly nicknamed SaintGermain-le-Doré. Beyond artistic aspirations, Saint Germain also had in mind
political considerations in choosing this site on expansive fertile land, which
would secure economic prosperity. Being a clear-sighted politician, he proceeded
to extricate the monastery from episcopal jurisdiction, thus paving the way for its
future independence as a powerful abbey, and meanwhile gaining popularity
among the people whose well-being he had ensured. Before long the brilliant,
enterprising Bishop became a legendary miracle-worker superseding even the
fabled Saint Vincent.
Thus, it was thanks to Saint Germain’s supernatural intervention that the abbey
set up a heroic resistance to the Norsemen three centuries after his death, as
reported by a contemporary monk called Abbon. One Danish brigand was tied up
to a chariot by the Saint, then chased into hell by Death; another one lost his way
on one of the turrets and rolled off the steep slope of the roof; a third lost his sight
as he turned his eyes towards the Saint’s sepulchre, whilst a fourth was snatched
away from above, apparently by the invisible hand of the Saint. At a time of
boundless imagination, Abbon’s testimony increased the prestige of Saint
Germain as the patriot who had fought back the invincible Dane and bore significant political consequences on the destiny of the abbey. In 903, while the abbey
was still lying in ruins, King Charles le Simple reconfirmed its possessions and
soon the abbey was reconstructed and enjoyed greater prosperity than ever before.
Less than a century later the church tower that still dominates the Place SaintGermain-des-Prés pierced the skies of Paris. On 21 April 1163, when the church
was at last completed, it was consecrated by Pope Alexander III. The Bishop of
Paris Maurice de arrived for the occasion in his ceremonial attire, but the Abbot

exerted pressure on the Pope to have him withdraw, a spectacular humiliation
intended solely to mark the independence of the abbey. By that time an embryonic borough was germinating here, the nucleus of the arrondissement, which in all
logic would have expanded homogeneously to the east, towards the centre of the
city, had Philippe-Auguste not decided otherwise.
Having decided to extend the city walls to the Left Bank, he began by erecting
the tower of Nesle by the Seine (roughly on the site of the present Institut de
France), to secure the control of the Seine to the west and as a pendant to the
tower of the Louvre on the Right Bank. The new walls ran from the tower, along
the present rue Mazarine, rue de |’ Ancienne-Comédie and rue Monsieur-le-


Prince, leaving the abbey and its dependencies outside the city boundaries. With
the foundation of the University of Paris and its growing power in the 13th century, the area lying within the city walls naturally fell within the University jurisdiction and by the 14th century was totally beyond the control of the abbey, much to
the displeasure of the latter, especially as the University then enjoyed great privileges and prestige. Most of the remaining vacant land of the future arrondissement was taken over by various religious orders, with the encouragement of the
throne, in particular the pious Louis IX. Thus, this pastoral expanse was transformed with graceful architecture, neatly cultivated domains and the magnificent,
palatial pieds-a-terre of the provincial clergy, of which the Hétel de Cluny (in the
5th arr.) alone has survived. Unable to use these homes during the Hundred
Years’ War, the provincial clergy sold them off to prominent families of the
noblesse de robe, who were pleased to settle in them alongside a couple of
already resident old families of the noblesse d’épée.
Meanwhile, west of the city walls, life rotated around the abbey, which was fortified in its turn because of the war. Following the usual feudal pattern, a rural
population cultivated the land, largely covered with vineyards, while tradesmen
and craftsmen were grouped into guilds, earning much less than their counterparts
in the city. The annual fair of Saint-Germain boosted the economy of the borough
and provided a considerable source of extra income to abbey and royalty alike.
Tradesmen, artisans and money-changers flocked here from far and wide, displaying the most gorgeous commodities of the day. Drapers from Flanders, jewellers from Italy, bankers from Lombardy and Jewish pedlars converged here
between 3 February and Palm Sunday (and usually beyond), turning the area
around the present rue Mabillon into the colourful crossroads of Europe. This was
carnival time too, when people of all social classes came to be entertained, even
princes and royalty until their move to Versailles. In a letter written on a Wednesday evening of February 1607, Henri IV instructs his minister Sully to withdraw
three thousand crowns from his savings account and pay off to a certain
Berringhen the gambling debt he had incurred at the Fair. While artists, encouraged by the highly cultivated abbots of Saint-Germain, used the opportunity to
exhibit their works and gain recognition, animal-tamers (it was here that the rhinoceros made its first Parisian appearance in the 18th century), street performers
and puppeteers offered the area an embryonic form of theatre, all of which contributed to the development of the arrondissement as a place where the performing and fine arts could flourish, unlike the 5th arrondissement, which was above

all confined to learning.
’ However, the theatrical tradition of the arrondissement developed mainly outside the fair. In 1643 Moliére established his first theatre, Le Théatre Illustre, on
the site of a a jeu de paume, Les Métayers (now rue Mazarine). In 1672 Lully’s


opera house was inaugurated with his opera Pomone in the neighbouring Jeu de
Paume de la Bouteille (now on the corner of rue Mazarine and rue Jacques-Callot). The same premises were taken over by the newly-founded ComédieFrangaise after Moliére’s death the following year, Lully having moved to yet
another jeu de paume, L’Etoile, close to the Luxembourg Gardens (now rue de
Vaugirard). Moliére’s troupe and the troupe of the Marais were merged into one
company called Les Comédiens du Roi and their new premises, situated next to
the Hotel de Guénégaud, were known as Le Théatre Guénégaud. The theatre was
inaugurated on 9 July 1673 with a highly acclaimed performance of Moliére’s
Tartuffe. In 1689 they moved to yet another jeu de paumes on rue des FossésSaint-Germain (now rue de 1’ Ancienne-Comédie), and opened the season on 17

April with a double bill of Racine’s Phédre and Moliére’s Médecin Malgré Lui.
In 1782 a new magnificent theatre opened on Place de l’Odéon to accommodate
the prestigious troupe which twelve years earlier had to close down its centuryold home on rue des Fossés-Saint-Germain because it was on the verge of collapse.
More importantly, the Saint-Germain fair was at the origin of arguably the most
essential cultural and social institution in France in these past 300 years. Indeed,
when in 1672 two Armenians called Pascal and Maliban began to market a newly
introduced exotic beverage from the Orient called coffee, at the price of two and a
half sous per cup, they were confident in its future universal popularity. At first,
however, it received mixed response: some supported its beneficial medicinal
qualities, others claimed it caused impotence. The Princess La Palatine, Louis
XIV’s sister-in-law and mother of the future Regent, had definite tastes in matters
culinary and declared it smelt like the breath of the Archbishop of Paris. A Sicilian nobleman who had been helping the two Armenians, Francesco Procopio dei
Coltelli by his Italian name, better known today as Francois Procope, added to the
beverage its cultural dimension when around 1685 he opened the first Parisian
café on rue des Fossés-Saint-Germain. By 1723 the chronicler L.S. Mercier
counted between 600 and 700 such establishments in the capital. When the
Comédie-Frangaise

moved across the street in 1689, Le Procope became its

antechamber, from where the general public watched the comings and goings
around the theatre and could spread gossip around. Critics gathered here too to
determine the fate of actors and actresses or of a new play, a practice maintained
throughout the next century. Thus it was here that in 1784 Beaumarchais waited
anxiously for the verdict on his play Le Marriage de Figaro.
The Laurent, on the corner of the present rue Dauphine and rue Christine, fol-

lowed suit and both became places of intellectual exchange, gradually replacing
the literary salons, albeit without the refinement and the polish. Here names were
smeared, coarse diatribes and vociferous insults sallied forth, occasionally com-


ing to a head in duels, which were fought in the back yard next door, an atmosphere derided by Voltaire:
Quand Piron, contre l’Olympie

Avait bien vomi son fiel;
Quand Rousseau le misanthrope
Avait bien philosophé
¢a, Messieurs, disait Procope,

Prenez donc votre café.
(When Piron against Olympia had vomited all his
venom; / When Rousseau the misanthropist / had amply
philosophized / Well then, gentlemen, said Procope, / do
have your coffee.)
Voltaire himself was no less venomous towards his mortal enemy, Fréron:
L’ autre jour, au fond d’un vallon,

Un serpent mordit Jean Fréron.
Que pensez-vous qu’il arriva?
Ce fut le serpent qui creva.
(The other day, at the bottom of a valley,

A snake bit Jean Fréron.
What do you think happened?
The snake it was that died.)

Montesquieu, on the other hand, was struck rather by the pretentiousness of the
clientele:
Il y en a une [maison oW 1’on distribue du café] ot 1l’on

appréte le café de telle maniére qu’il donne de |’esprit 4
ceux qui en prennent: au moins, de tous ceux qui en sortent, il n’y a personne qui ne croie qu’il en a quatre fois
plus que lorsqu’il y est entré.
(There is one [house where coffee is served] where cof-

fee is prepared in such manner that it bestows wit upon
those who drink it: at least, of all those who leave, there

is not one who does not think that he now has four times
more than when he entered.)
Les Lettres Persanes

But the Procope was also a place of serious intellectual debate, where Diderot
and d’Alembert conceived the idea of the Encyclopédie and where new ideas germinated that would bring about the fall of the Ancien Régime. Already in 1685
the head of police, La Reynie, and the King had been forewarned that “in several


places of Paris, where coffee is served, there are gatherings of all sorts of people...”. Aware of their potential for subversion, Louis XIV ordered one of his
functionaries to write a report on the matter and, although no action was taken
against those establishments, they were flooded with spies, to which the
philosophes responded by inventing a coded terminology. Hence ‘liberty’ became
known as Jeannette, ‘religion’ as Javotte and God as Monsieur |’Etre. Louis XIV

had good reason to worry, for a century later the Procope became the stronghold
of the Revolutionary intelligentsia, many of whom were living locally, among
them Danton, Camille Desmoulins and Marat. In the 19th century the Procope
again became the haunt of literati, such as Musset, George Sand, Théophile
Gautier and Balzac and later of Verlaine, Huysmans and Emile Goudeau and oth-

ers. Obviously the atmosphere of the Institut de France rubbed off on its clientele
and the area at large.
:
The forerunner of the Institut de France on the site was the Collége des QuatreNations, which was founded and funded by Mazarin to ensure the education of
noble students from the four nations defeated and annexed by France. There was
also a project for an academy where young members of the nobility would be initiated into the arts and skills that made up l’honnéte homme — art, science, riding,
dancing and fencing — but the University, having a different notion of education,
opposed the project and it therefore never materialized, except for the library. The
site of the long disused Hétel de Nesle, opposite the Louvre, provided a privileged location for the new institution. 24 elegant shops sheltered by an arcade
opened next to it, displaying paintings, engravings, beautiful furniture and books,
and attracting discerning clients for the next hundred years.
During the Revolution, when the place was used as a prison, the father of the
guillotine, Dr Guillotin, was himself detained here. Mazarin’s

enterprise

foundered but the library flourished: tens of thousands of volumes, looted from
the closed-down abbeys and convents, filled its shelves, as well as those seized
from the King’s private collection and from various members of the nobility. In
1805 it was decided to transfer to these disused premises the five academies
founded in 1695 and hitherto established in the Louvre: the Académie Frangaise,

the Académie Royale des Belles-Lettres, the Académie Royale des Sciences, the
Académie Royale de Peinture et Sculpture and the Académie d’ Architecture. In
1816 the last two were merged into the Académie des Beaux-Arts while a fifth
academy, the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, was founded in 1832.
Together they make up the Institut de France. On 1 February 1989 Peter Ustinov,
sporting the green costume of an Académicien with its splash of gold embroidery
of laurel leaves, and its honorific sword, was elected to the Académie des BeauxArts, to the fauteuil vacated by Orson Welles. On 27 October 1992 a similar honour was bestowed on Vaclav Havel, the President of post-communist


Czechoslovakia which was then on the brink of breaking up, when he was elected
to the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, there to join such glorious
figures from the past as Alexis de Tocqueville, Albert Schweitzer and Raymond
Aron.
Perhaps because it is the oldest of the five academies founded by Richelieu in
1635, the Académie Frangaise outshines the other four and even some locals con-

fuse it with the Institut de France, of which it is only one component, assuming
that an Académicien is necessarily a member of the Académie Francaise. The
Académie Frangaise is certainly an institution of great prestige and election to it
both an honour and a media event. Entrusted with the task of preserving the
French language, its 40 venerable members guard against any threat from the
‘vulgum’, the latest dating from 1991, when the Minister of Culture, Jack Lang,
had all but passed through an extravagant spelling reform. A stronghold of conservatism, the Académie waited 350 years before it admitted its first woman, the

writer Marguerite Yourcenar, in 1980. A sign of the times is that Captain
Jacques-Yves Cousteau is now also an Académicien. Throughout its history, the
Académie has rejected nonconformist candidates - La Fontaine, Beaumarchais,
Balzac (4 times), Emile Zola (24 times!) and, more recently, poet/singer Charles

Trenet. There were also those who spurned the proffered honour - Descartes, Pascal, Diderot, André Malraux, de Gaulle - and those who were expelled after the

last war - Charles Maurras and Maréchal Pétain - a rare measure, since an
Académicien is by definition ‘immortal’.
The aura of the Académie Frangaise should by no means eclipse that of the
Académie des Beaux-Arts, which, in the last century, contributed largely to the
promotion of art in the arrondissement. Dominique Ingres, Charles Garnier, Victor Baltard, Hector Berlioz, Charles Gounod and Gabriel Fauré were among its
members, and even Delacroix, who was something of a renegade and was reject-

ed seven times before gaining admittance.
In the early 19th century, the premises of the Institut de France were used as
temporary studios by David, Horace Vernet, Pradier and others awaiting the completion of the school of Beaux-Arts next door. When the school finally opened on
rue Bonaparte and quai Malaquais, throngs of art students invaded this northern
section of the arrondissement, enlivening the street scene with a bohemian bustle,
recreating some of its medieval atmosphere. Indeed, in the Middle Ages the Uni-

versity owned an enclave on the extensive domain of the abbey, the Pré-auxClers, where rowdy youths from the Latin Quarter would come to create havoc
and to antagonize the community of the abbey. In the 19th century this was a
derelict neighbourhood, just fit for an impoverished population of would-be
artists, occupying wretched attics or dingy hotel rooms, where they lived from
hand to mouth. In Scénes de la Vie de Bohéme, better known in Puccini’s operatic


version, Henri Miirger depicted Rodolphe and Marcel’s Christmas Eve, spent by
the fire of a hotel room: “‘... the damp logs of poor drift-wood burnt away without
any flame, generating no heat.” Rodolphe remiriiscences on the three-penny
restaurant on rue du Four, “where we were so hungry when we had finished eating.” “Bohemia,” Henri Miirger wrote, “is the apprenticeship to artistic life: it is
the preface to the Academy, to the Hotel-Dieu [hospital] or to the Morgue.”
Without the presence of the aristocracy, the 6th would not have had that extra
touch of worldliness that makes it the most sophisticated arrondissement in Paris.
Moreover, without the energetic patronage of the aristocracy, artistic creativity
could have not flourished here before the Revolution. There were always some
noble families established in or visiting the area. In 1718 a contemporary mentions the presence of 12 princes and over 300 barons and counts. No dwelling in
medieval times could match in size and beauty the Hotel de Nesle, standing by
the water, facing the Louvre, and adjacent to the defence tower by the same
name. It was built in the 13th century by Simon de Clermont, Seigneur de Nesle.
Philippe le Bel bought it in 1308 and from then on it remained in the hands of the
royal family. When Jean Duc de Berry and brother of Charles V (1340 -1416)
lived there, it became a dwelling of exceptional splendour. A great patron of the
arts, the Duke assembled the finest artists of his time at the Hétel de Nesle,

notably the Limbourg brothers who produced a beautiful illuminated manuscript
known as his Book of Hours (Les Trés Riches Heures du duc de Berry), one of
the world’s masterpieces of medieval art (which inspired the sets of Laurence
Olivier’s Henry V). Among the illuminations is the world-renowned view of the
old Louvre as seen from the Hétel de Nesle. The hétel enjoyed a magnificent
position by the water but by the same token suffered periodic flooding. Hence the
construction of the first guai in Paris, in 1313.

Nearly three centuries later Marguerite de Valois chose to reside opposite the
Louvre, her childhood home when, as daughter of Henri II, she was Princess

Royal. She built herself a mansion along the Seine, the entrance to which was on
the corner of the present rue de Seine and quai Malaquais and moved there in
1606. However, as the repudiated wife of Henri IV she had to bear with the presence of Marie de Medici, Henri IV’s new wife, in the royal palace, across the
water. Queen Margot, as she came to be known, devoted special attention to the
mansion’s gardens, which became the joy of the neighbourhood when she opened
them to the public. From across the Seine, Marie de Medici eyed her gardens and
before long had a promenade laid for the King, the Cours-la-Reine, on the opposite Right Bank. Nor did she stop there. For a while she had had her eye on a
16th-century hdtel belonging to Frangois de Luxembourg. In 1611 the widowed
Queen bought the Adtel and set out to create a dwelling and gardens in the image
of the Pitti Palace of her native Florence. The Palais du Luxembourg, as it came


to be known, later also contributed to the promotion of art, for in 1750 its east
wing was turned into a painting museum, the first of its kind in France. Even during the devastating days of the Revolution the future arrondissement maintained
its artistic mission. In 1791 the Chapelle des Louanges, built by Marguerite de
Valois on her estate, in praise of the Patriarch Jacob, was converted by the
archaeologist Alexandre Lenoir into a museum, le Musée des Monuments
Frangais, where he deposited whatever monuments and sculptures he could rescue from the wreckage. The Chapel (now 14 rue Bonaparte) became the nucleus
of the above-mentioned Beaux-Arts school during the Restoration.
The opening of the Drugstore Publicis in the 1960s, a glitzy version of an
American drugstore, heralded a new era. Baroque ugly hands, mouths and eyes
belonging to members of Tout-Paris, from Brigitte Bardot to Jean Cocteau, decorated the flashy premises, creating no small sensation. The Royal Saint-Germain
that had stood here before, one of the pillars of the ‘village’, had had its day.
Today’s Saint-Germain, like the rest of the arrondissement, is a very expensive
district, inhabited by successful artists, writers, professionals and by members of
showbiz and of Tout-Paris. Its once-dingy hotels have become three- or four-star
hétels de charme and a small cup of espresso at the Deux Magots costs as much
as 21 francs. Largely taken over by the prét-d-porter industry, usually on the
expensive side, its consumers have little in common

with the impoverished war

generation. This is even truer of the clients of the antique shops and other boutiques located in the north-western section of the arrondissement. With its art galleries around rue de Seine and its scattering of antiquarian bookshops,
Saint-Germain has become the glamorous shadow of its past, typified until
recently by the Castel night-club, jealously reserved for the glittering few and a
world away from the makeshift, free-for-all Tabou.

Nostalgia aside, the 6th arrondissement is in many ways unique. No arrondissement combines so many hues, shades and touches: the discreet charm of old
courtyards on rue Jacob, rue des Saints-Péres, rue du Cherche-Midi; artists’ stu-

dios near Montparnasse; quaint alleys charged with history on the edge of the
Latin Quarter; or the sheer beauty of its guais, graced with the dome-capped Institut de France and the stunningly classical Hétel de la Monnaie: all these make the
6th is a treasure trove for the aesthete. This is also where France’s leading publishing houses are based - Gallimard, the Presses de la Cité, Hachette, Robert Laffont, Flammarion, Plon, Stock, Seuil - as well as multitudes of bookshops of all

kinds and sizes, some specialized, some not, some dusty, some glittering, some
downright practical, some fabulous.

Crowning it all, a palette of riotous colours sets ablaze the area around the junction of rue de Seine and rue de Buci, where a ravishing array of flowers, an array


of culinary delights and the music of buskers provide the most exquisite appeal to
the senses.
~

WHERE TO WALK...
FROM PLACE SAINT-MICHEL TO THE INSTITUT DE FRANCE
ur first walk will take us to the north-eastern section of the arrondissement,
which, despite the artificial border between the 5th and 6th arrondissements

created by Haussmann’s Boulevard Saint-Michel, is still part of the Latin Quarter.
This time we suggest you come in the afternoon, if you want to enjoy the jolly
atmosphere enhanced by buskers’ music. Place Saint-Michel, our starting-point,
is dominated by Davioud’s fountain of muscular energy,.erected to the glory of
the archangel who struck down the dragon; it thereby makes amends for the ~
demolition in 1781 of the 12th-century chapel of Saint-Michel, which stood
across the river, next to the Sainte-Chapelle. The monument is, in fact, no more
than a facing on the side wall of the first house on the block, a clever device to
create a grand gateway to the Boulevard Saint-Michel without taking up any
space. Its effect is rather obscured these days by the mobbish atmosphere that prevails in front of the fountain.
Walk along Boulevard Saint-Michel and turn right into rue Francisque-Gay.
Ahead is a sea of colourful sun umbrellas at a central café on Place Saint-Andrédes-Arts; these, along with the picturesque, flowered facade of the brasserie
l’Alsace 4 Paris on your left and the rustic low-roofed café opposite make the
place look like a holiday resort. Only the name recalls the medieval church of
Saint-André, where Voltaire was baptised in 1694, and which, having been closed
down during the Revolution, was razed to the ground in 1808.

Turn right into Place Saint-Michel and left under the archway across the street,
to enter a maze of quiet, narrow streets, with its medieval layout preserved intact.
Rue de I’Hirondelle, beyond the archway, is an ancient, silent alley, ignored by
passers-by, except for some youngsters on a night out, who leave graffiti on old
historical houses as an act of defiance, rather as their ancestors did in the days of ©
Francois Villon and Rabelais. One such historical building, n° 20/22, is now
defaced and derelict, but its magnificent entrance door and the wrought-iron decoration of its fagade indicate that this was once the home of a person of note.
Closer scrutiny reveals a salamander sculpted in the stone and eroded by time, the
emblem, you may remember, of Francois I. Indeed, here stood the splendid lovenest he had built for his favourite, Anne de Pisseleu, Duchesse d’Etampes.

Renowned both for her radiant beauty and her wide knowledge - “la plus belle
des savants et la plus savante des belles” - the Duchess decorated her house with
beautiful tapestries and murals, thus also providing work for artists and patroniz-


ing the arts. Anne took advantage of her hold over Frangois I to meddle in public
affairs. Inevitably she made enemies, particularly among the followers of Diane
de Poitiers, her most formidable foe, albeit ten years her senior. When Francois I

introduced Diane to the court, Anne made short shrift of her, unaware that the
wheel of fortune would some day turn against her. For Diane found comfort in
the arms of the Dauphin, Henri, and bided her time. In 1547, after seven years of

open warfare between the two women and their respective clans, Frangois I died
and the impatient Henri II came to the throne at last. The ravishing Anne was
banished to the provinces, and to add insult to injury, was ordered to hand over
her personal jewellery to her rival. The lascivious Venus, the emblem of the
Duchesse d’Etampes, was supplanted by Diana, the virtuous goddess of the hunt,
the emblem of the new favourite. In the seraglio of France almost every dog had
its day: after all, in 1526 Anne had ousted Francoise de Chateaubriant, the King’s
then mistress, after a merciless struggle. The present house was built only in the ©
18th century and it is not clear whether the salamander on the fagade and the
other salamanders on the bas-relief in the courtyard were transferred from the
original building or mere copies.
At n° 25 le Caveau de la Bolée is an old-time cabaret, where Charles Baude-

laire spent many a night with his mistress Jeanne Duval. Paul Verlaine and Oscar
Wilde also liked the place. Its 13th-century cellar hosts a nightly French-style
cabaret show and a modern jazz quintet on Sundays, while its ground-floor back
room is a stronghold of chess addicts. Turn left into rue Git-le-Coeur, lined with
some elegant old facades, notably the one at n° 12 with its wrought-iron decorations, now a well-known repertoire cinema. Turn right into rue Saint-André-desArts. Note the gorgeous facade at n° 27 on the right. An old bookshop at n° 37,
founded in 1878, takes pride in its beautiful editions of history books and is fighting a rearguard action to perpetuate the scholarly traditions of the Latin Quarter,
in the face of an invasion of T-shirts and modern paraphernalia.
Rue Séguier to your right is a drowsy, pleasant street that leads to the river. It
was a stronghold of the Left Bank’s nobility, who had bought out the Parisian
properties of the provincial clergy. N° 3, for example, belonged to the Bishops of
Lodéve in the 15th century and to the Bishops of Rodez in the 16th. The Bishops
of Autun and subsequently those of Laon owned the hétel on the site of n° 6 in
the 14th century. The hdtel was sold to a member of the nobility after the Hundred Years’ War and in the 16th century belonged to the Duc de Nemours-Savoie.
The Hotel Séguier at n° 16 is named, like the street, after a famous magistrate

who lived here in the first half of the 19th century; although between 1588 and
1672 the Séguier family had already produced a dynasty of illustrious magis-

trates. In the 18th century the Adtel had been inhabited by Madame Marigny,
widow of the Pompadour’s celebrated brother, who had been in charge of all the

construction projects in the capital. Notice also the exquisite corner window of
the antiquarian bookshop at n° 8.
Back on rue Saint-André-des-Arts, on the corner of rue de l’Eperon, the restaurant Allard is another old-timer and staunchly maintains its tradition of solid,
excellent, unpretentious French cuisine. At n° 47/49 rue Saint-André-des-Arts

stood the hdtel of Jeanne de Navarre, wife of Philippe le Bel. For several generations it remained the property of the crown and home to various members of the
royal family. Later, in 1612, it was the home of Jacques de la Guesle who, in
1589, had hired Jacques Clément to assassinate Henri III. The King was sitting on
his commode in his tent at the camp of Saint-Cloud, wearing nothing but his
dressing-gown, when Clément burst in and stabbed him to death.
Retrace your steps and turn into rue de l’Eperon. N° 45 on the corner is the
Lycée Fénelon, the first girls’ lycée in Paris, which opened in 1883. Rue de
l’Eperon offers charming courtyards, peace and greenery and the extra reward of
the pretty vista of rue Suger, at a sharp angle on your left. At n° 1 rue Suger, Saint
Louis had established the Order of the Sachettes, who were later supplanted by
the Augustins, Philippe le Bel’s protégés. At n° 3/5 stood a famous college founded in the 14th century, Le Collége de Boissy. Its chapel was taken over in 1770
by the Portuguese Jewish community who were timidly moving into the neighbourhood at the time and turned it into a synagogue, the first to be put into service
in Paris since the Jews were expelled in 1394. Continue along this pretty street,
then retrace your steps and walk along rue de |’Eperon. Turn right into rue du
Jardinet, a serene and romantic alley, with its overhanging street-lamps. The best
is yet to come: three successive courtyards, known as la Cour de Rohan, are perhaps the jewel in the crown of the arrondissement. Like nesting Chinese boxes,
each courtyard reveals new surprises as it unfolds before your eyes. The crooked
paving, the ancient well at n° 1 on your left, the cascading creepers and the rose
bushes are all bound to enchant you. The third courtyard is painter’s paradise with
its jumble of balconies, terraces and windows of all shapes and sizes. From the
centre of the shady courtyard two trees stretch up their endless, slender trunks,
reaching out for the sun, then spread open their leafy branches above the roofs to
offer them their shade. As you approach the exit allow your eyes to wander up
over the extraordinary jumble of terraces, exploding with rose bushes, ivy and
honeysuckle that climb above a white cottage with bright blue shutters. A row of
rustic garrets, decked with a neat row of geraniums, completes the picture.
As you walk out of the courtyard, you will see on the cottage walls paintings of
the enlightened representatives of the Siécle de Lumiére. The great luminary,
Voltaire, cut out of ply wood, has even taken up position on the pavement outside. It is all tourist kitsch but the charm works. For you have landed in the alley
of the Cour-du-Commerce-Saint-André, the heart of the 18th-century Enlighten-


ment, the stronghold of its Philosophes, who gathered, notably at the Procope, the
very cottage in front of you, where they paved the way for the Revolution. Now
that this enclave has been given a face-lift it looks-rather like a Disneyland reenactment of history but, taken with a pinch of salt, it is fun, with its colourful
flags and shop signs, recreating pre-industrial street life. The cobblestones are
hard on the feet but add to the atmosphere.Jn cold weather you could take refuge

and sample the delicious pastry in a cosy British-style salon de thé, La Cour de
Rohan, to your right. On a warm afternoon or evening, you may prefer the outdoor terrace of a turn-of-a-century bistro to your left, cheerfully surrounded by
bright geraniums. There is also a ‘pub’ with a miscellany of ‘Revolutionary’ references and a British touch. Here history is celebrated by way of a cocktail drink
dubbed ‘the guillotine’ in a setting evocative of old tavern days. A guillotine, of
questionable humour, is displayed on its awning. If you are after history in a big
way, then the Procope is your place. It does not serve outstanding fare, but there ~
is an entire history lesson posted in its windows, recording that here Robespierre
and the Montagnards met on the eve of the Revolution, Benjamin Franklin draft-

ed the alliance between Louis XVI and the new American republic, playwright
Piron quarrelled with Voltaire and Voltaire conceived here Candide. Few passersby stop to read the information, as the street is full of other distractions — a
créperie to the right, savouries from Auvergne to the left, Nadaud’s splash contemporary furniture opposite and music-making on rue Saint-André-des-Arts.
Who has time to delve into history?
Yet the Cour-du-Commerce-Saint-André is history itself! All the more so, since

it was opened in 1776, when the feverish intellectual turmoil in Paris reached its
peak. The Boulevard Saint-Germain did not, of course, exist at the time, and the

passageway, lined with picturesque stalls and two long lanes for playing boules,
continued as far as the southern pavement of Boulevard Saint-Germain, now Carrefour de l’Odéon. Most of the houses still date back to that year and will be of
particular meaning to the American visitor, whose early history is so tied up with
that of France. A century later the famous writer and literary critic Sainte-Beuve
occupied two rooms on the first floor at n° 2, then a lodging hotel. On 28 May
1871, following a week of bloody fighting, which ended with the defeat of the
Commune, one of its famous leaders, Jules Vallés, took refuge in Sainte-Beuve’s

apartment disguised as a male nurse. A tower of the famous walls of PhilippeAuguste is encompassed within the premises of n° 4, rising all the way up to the
roof - a formidable construction indeed! N°s 8 and 9 particularly are connected
with the historic days of the Revolution. N° 8 was the printing-shop where Marat
published his paper /’Ami du Peuple, which, contrary to its benign name, was a
vindictive sheet advocating wholesale despoilment and executions and demanding the heads of 270,000 enemies of the homeland, above all the Girondins.


Marat and his companion Marie-Simone Evrard had sold all their possessions to
raise funds for their publication, while the Revolutionary authorities provided
them with the premises and secured them with a double gate. N° 9, the workshop
of the German carpenter Schmidt, was the place where in April 1792, Dr Louis
Guillotin first put into practice his theories about the guillotine by experimenting
on live sheep. For a while now he had been cogitating a decapitation device that
would speed up executions. In October 1789, at the National Assembly, Dr Guillotin had already suggested a new, more efficient mode of execution, a proposition rejected at the time. “The blade whistles,” he had told the Assembly, “the
head falls, the blood gushes forth, the man is no more - with my machine I shall

make your heads topple off in a flash and you will feel but a light breeze on your
necks.” His description was greeted by an uproar of laughter. But by 1792 mass
executions of the enemies of the patrie were envisaged and on 25 March Dr
Louis, the permanent secretary of the Academy of Surgery, was commissioned to
carry out Guillotin’s project. Things moved fast now: after its first experiment on
the Cour-du-Commerce-Saint-André,

which proved a success, the machine was

tried on three dead bodies at the hospital of Bicétre (in the 13th arr.) on 17 April.
By 25 April ‘Louison’ or ‘Louisette’ (the early name of the machine, which honoured Dr Louis, an injustice soon remecied), was ready for the first public execution on Place de Gréve. The victim was Jacques Pelletier, condemned for assault

and theft. Meanwhile a mechanic by the name of Guillot was working on a more
sophisticated machine, equipped with nine blades, that would allow the simultaneous decapitation of nine convicts, but his device, which was tried out the fol-

lowing year, was not quite ready to function. Thus, in an amateurish way, the
French Revolution was already working covertly on the use of science and technology for murderous ends on a mass scale. Like some Moloch, the guillotine
devoured indiscriminately the makers and the opponents of those dark days; even
the neck of Dr Guillotin was condemned to the philanthropic blade he had invented
and offered to France, and was spared only by the timely downfall of Robespierre.
Walk as far as Boulevard Saint-Germain and cross over. The statue of Danton
at Carrefour de !’Odéon marks the site of Danton’s home at what used to be n° 20
Cour-du-Commerce-Saint-André before the opening of Boulevard SaintGermain. Danton had been living there since 1789 when, on 30 March 1794, the
police burst into his large first-floor flat with a warrant for his arrest. Six days
later he stepped on to the guillotine. Across the street, where now is n° 20 rue de
l’Ecole-de-Médecine, stood the house of Marat, where he lived with his compan-

ion, Marie-Simone Evrard. It was a couple of minutes’ walk to his printing-shop
but of late, owing to some skin disease, he had been less active and spent several
hours a day in his bathtub. At noon on 11 July 1793 a 25-year-old woman, arriving by coach from Caen in Normandy, alighted in Paris and went straight away to


the Hétel de la Providence, now on rue Hérold south-east of Place des Victoires
(in the 1st arr.). Charlotte de Corday as she turned out to be, was a descendant of
a sister of the playwright Pierre Corneille and an admirer of the Girondins. On
July 13, she visited Marat’s house and left a letter requesting to be received on a
serious matter concerning France, after which she headed for Palais-Royal,
where, at 177 Galerie de Valois, she bought a carving knife from Monsieur Badin
for 2 francs. She then proceeded to her hotel, had dinner and then took a carriage
back to Marat’s house. Marie-Simone Evrard, however, would not let her in, but

the determined Charlotte would not take no for an answer and, having returned to
her hotel room, wrote Marat a second letter and returned to his house once more.

Again Simone barred her way and the voices rose. Marat could hear them from
his bathtub and interceded in favour of the visitor. Without a word, Charlotte
went into his room, walked straight towards the bathtub, stabbed Marat right _
through his neck and down into his lungs, then pulled out the knife, laid it on the
shelf and waited. She came to trial three days later, on 16 July, the day of Marat’s
funeral, when his embalmed body was carried through the streets of Paris alongside with his bathtub. Questioned about her deed, Charlotte Corday said: “I have
not killed a man but a ferocious beast.” The next day she was condemned to the
guillotine and accepted her fate calmly, thanking her lawyer Chauveau-Lagarde
(who was also to defend Marie-Antoinette) and asking him to pay her hotel bill.
Continue into rue de |’Ecole-de-Médecine, named after the school of surgery
that stood at n° 5. ‘The fraternity of surgeons in long robes’ and the ‘fraternity of
surgeons in short robes’ (i.e. barbers) were founded in the reign of Saint Louis
and took up residence here. Surgery, being a manual activity, was separated from
medicine till the middle of the 18th century. Indeed, although surgeons were educated members of society and barbers often illiterate, the two were considered of
the same essence and were actually merged into a single fraternity in 1656, a
merger that lasted nearly a hundred years. In 1691 they were given permission to
build their anatomy amphitheatre, which still exists today, though at present it is
used by the English department of the University of Paris III. When the school
expanded, it was transferred across the street to n° 12, where there was more
space. On 26 December 1774 Louis XVI laid the cornerstone of the new academy.
Across the street, inside the courtyard of n° 15-21 on your left (also part of the
present school of medicine), stands the Gothic 15th-century dining-hall of the
convent of the Cordoliers, the only vestige of that renowned order - or of any
other order for that matter - to have survived in these parts. The Cordoliers, so
called after the ropes they tied around their grey gowns, were founded in Italy by
Saint Francis of Assisi and were one of the four great begging orders, even
though they were in no want at all! Rather, they established a reputation as heavy,


merry drinkers, but also for scholastic excellence. Enjoying the support of both
the King and the Pope, they managed to hold their own against the rival University. Their church was one of the largest in the capital (100 by 30 metres) and
deemed prestigious enough to pay host to Jeanne de Navarre, wife of Philippe le
Bel. During the Revolution the convent was used as a gathering-place of the Club
des Cordoliers, founded by Camille Desmoulins and frequented by the likes of
Danton and Marat; here on 14 July 1791 these two were the first to demand the

deposition of the King. Today this attractive and historic building, although in
serious need of extensive restoration, is used for temporary exhibitions.

Cross over into rue Hautefeuille to your left. At n° 21, a charming 16th-century
turret at the corner of rue Pierre-Sarrazin, evokes the medieval past of the neighbourhood. Not a trace is left, however, of the Jewish cemetery that in the Middle

Ages occupied the site now bounded by Boulevard Saint-Germain, Boulevard
Saint-Michel, rue Pierre-Sarrazin and rue Hautefeuille. The cemetery was closed

down in 1306, when Philippe le Bel expelled the Jews, and its grounds were
given to the Dominican Order. During the construction of the bookshop on the
corner of Boulevard Saint-Germain and Boulevard Saint-Michel, in the middle of
the 19th century, some of its 12th- and 13th-century tombstones were unearthed,
which bore Hebrew inscriptions of the names of the deceased, sometimes also

their occupation and their date of birth and/or death. In all likelihood more tombstones are lying under the buildings of the Boulevards, carrying the secret of an
ancient community.
Retrace your steps and turn back into rue de |’Ecole-de-Médecine, left into rue
Dupuyrten and left again into rue Monsieur-le-Prince, once known as rue des
Fossés-Monsieur-le-Prince because it runs on the site of the old moat of PhilippeAuguste’s walls. If the door at n° 45 is not locked, you may walk through the
building to the back yard to see a chunk of the walls, now the back wall of the
yard. During the Revolution the street was renamed rue de la Liberté; Monsieur le
Prince, after all, was the great Prince de Condé, the staunch enemy of the Revolution. Note the magnificent Louis XV portal at n° 14, home, in the 19th century, to

the French composer Saint-Saéns and, closer to us, to the Black American writer
Richard Wright, who wrote Black Boy here and in 1959 was visited by Martin
Luther King, Jr. At n° 41, the Polidor restaurant, once a ‘canteen’ frequented by
James Joyce, still offers genuine, homely French cuisine served by genuine
French waitresses, in genuine, unpretentious surroundings, all for a reasonable
price. Most of the clients, however, are tourists avidly seeking local colour, while
their local fellow beings are likely to be in a Tex-Mex or other such establishment. Opposite Polidor, at n° 22, is a charming 18th-century courtyard, shaded by
a chestnut tree in the centre and surrounded by some artists’ studios. A couple of
sculptures add a further charming touch to this nook. There is another exquisite


courtyard at n° 48, this time with a cherry tree, a rarity in Paris, and a profusion
of ivy on the walls and busy lizzies on the ground. A charming, very narrow
Louis XVI facade at n° 65 displays three allegorical sculptures of the Seasons.
Spring, surprisingly rather than winter, was left out for lack of space.
Retrace your steps and turn right into rue de Vaugirard, which lay beyond
Philippe-Auguste’s city wall. A jeu de paume, Le Jeu de Paume de Bel-Air, was
situated at n° 7-13, but by 1672 the game had lost its popularity, which enabled
Lully to take over its vacant premises and move his opera here from rue
Mazarine. At a time of fierce rivalry between theatre troupes, Lully, more than

anyone, knew how to manoeuvre into prominence and gain a monopoly in his
field. The following year he succeeded in ousting his dangerous competitor, le
Théatre du Marais, which had been performing embryonic operas with spectacular machinery since 1647, and had been the craze of the town.
;
We now come to the beautiful Théatre de 1’Odéon at Place Paul-Claudel, over-

looking the Luxembourg Gardens, but best appreciated from the main entrance at
Place de l’Odéon, where it stands on its own in the middle of a semicircle, closing
the elegant vista of rue de l’Odéon - a rare example of regal town planning in this
part of Paris, surpassed only by the Palais du Luxembourg and the approach to it
from rue de Tournon. No medieval heritage obstructed the architects in this area,
which had been covered before 1774 by the magnificent grounds of the Prince de
Condé’s palace. The Place de |’Odéon is where the estate’s impeccably tended
garden a la francaise was then. Finding a permanent home for the Comédiens du
Roi had become a crucial issue. For generations they had been packing up and
transferring from one jeu de paume to the next because no church would have
them on its parish. Their main sin was, of course, that their entertainment
appealed to the parishioners more than anything the church could offer. As the
priest of Saint-Germain-l’ Auxerrois put it, “from the theatre one would have
heard the organs, and from the church the violins.” Eventually the troupe found
shelter on rue de I’ Ancienne-Comédie, where they stayed for nearly a century, but
by 1770 their dilapidated premises had become a menace and the construction of
a new building a necessity. Because the new theatre was erected in an unbuilt
neighbourhood, special attention could be paid to the layout of the streets leading
to the theatre, both to avoid congestion and on aesthetic grounds. The nature-loving Louis XVI, who came to the throne in 1774, deliberately chose a spot close to
the Luxembourg Gardens so that “our subjects, before entering or upon leaving
the show at the Comédie-Frangaise, will have a place of promenade nearby, in the
garden of Luxembourg.” Wishing it to be a prestigious place, the King insisted it
be built in the purest Classical style, emulating that of Greece, the cradle of Western theatre; it was also the largest theatre in the capital, holding 1913 seats, and


the first to be lit by oil lamps. Likewise its architectural environment was carefully worked out, notably the style of the facades and the height of the buildings
along the newly opened streets, so as to create an overall, elegant harmony. The
streets in their turn were named after the great playwrights of France - Corneille
and Moliére (now Routrou) on either side of the building, Racine, Voltaire (now
Casimir-Delavigne), Crébillon and Regnard fanning out on either side of the central artery, which itself was appropriately named rue du Théatre-Frangais (now
Odéon). This was a regal artery indeed, the first street in Paris to have pavements
and gutters. An archway was built on either side of the theatre, over rue Corneille
and rue Moliére, to protect spectators and actors on rainy nights. The theatre hall
was beautifully painted in light blue and white and, for the first time in France,
benches were put in so that the less affluent members of the audience no longer
had to stand through the performance.
The theatre was inaugurated on 9 April 1782 and two years later, on 26 April
1784, the subversive Marriage of Figaro, for which its author, Beaumarchais, had
been sent to prison a year earlier, brought the house down. The Théatre-Frangais
was heading for a long career, or so it seemed if one failed to make allowance for
the mounting progress of the Revolution, to which Beaumarchais himself had
contributed by questioning the validity and immutability of the social order. Thus
the Théatre Frangais lasted only seven years... The Revolution led to splits and to
the departure, among others, of the great Talma. Those actors and actresses who
remained faithful to the royal troupe found themselves in prison and the theatre
was closed down altogether between 1793 and 1794. A shaky period followed
and in 1797, it was renamed the Odéon, after the musical theatre of ancient
reece. In 1799, however, it burnt down altogether and remained an abandoned

ruin for eight entire years. By the time Chalgrin had restored the building in 1807,
France was ruled by an emperor and when the theatre opened the following year,
it was renamed after France’s empress. Partly damaged by another fire in 1818, it
was again reopened in 1819, restored to such glory that some considered it the
most beautiful theatre in Paris, and second in France only to the theatre Victor

Louis had built for Bordeaux.
The first half of the century was a time of hardship for the theatre despite the
collaboration it received from the greatest actors of the time, including Frédérick
Lemaitre, Mlle George, Marie Dorval and Agar. Twice it had to close down. In
1862, the arrival of Sarah Bernhardt, freshly out of the Conservatoire and breaking loose from conservative traditions, gave it a boost, which culminated in 1872
when she took the lead role of the Queen in Victor Hugo’s Ruy Blas. Ten years
later Paul Porel, the theatre’s director during the 1880s, also explored new paths
and made the Odéon one of the best theatres in Paris. In 1884/5 L’Arlésienne with
music by Bizet and libretto by Alphonse Daudet, brought the house down and


over the next15 years became the theatre’s ‘lifeline’. Poor Bizet, who died in

1875, was never to enjoy this triumph: both /’Arlésienne and his masterpiece
Carmen were total flops at their first performances in 1872 and 1875 respectively.
When the anti-conformist, avant-garde Antoine took over in 1906, he tried to
remove the dust from the dark, severe ‘antique vessel’ by introducing young writers, such as Jules Romains and Georges Duhamel. However, Antoine never overcame financial difficulties and despite very warm reception of Psyche in 1914, he
could not break even and submitted his resignation. In more recent years Samuel
Beckett’s Waiting for Godot, with the historic staging of Roger Blin and Beckett’s Oh, the Beautiful Days, with its heart-rending interpretations by Madeleine
Renaud

and Jean-Louis

Barrault, were unforgettable events. Having been

involved politically in the 1968 student revolt, these two great actors and their
troupe were exiled from the Latin Quarter and were allocated temporarily the old
railway station of Orsay. When the station was turned into a museum, the couple
packed up once more, crossed the Seine and settled near the Champs-Elysées in ~
what used to be the fashionable ice-rink of Paris. By knocking about like this,
they re-enacted the peripatetic life their colleagues led 300 years earlier. Today,
in keeping with the historical evolution of our continent, the theatre plays host to
visiting European troupes and has consequently been renamed Théatre d’ Europe.
The surroundings of the theatre are quiet these days, unlike in the 19th century
when they were cluttered with bookstalls and newspaper stands, where papers
could be rented for two hours to be read in the Luxembourg Gardens, and when
letter-writers sold their skills to the less literate. Opposite the theatre, at n° 2
Place de 1’Odéon, the terrace of the Méditerranée is an inviting setting for a fish
meal, especially at night, when the theatre is beautifully illuminated. The aesthete
Jean Cocteau appreciated the setting too and frequented the terrace in the 1950s.
In return, the grateful establishment has used his drawings as decorations for its

china. Camille Desmoulins had been living with his young wife Lucile on the second floor of the same building, when the emissaries of the Terror came to arrest
him on 30 March 1794. Both husband and wife ended up on the guillotine. Until
1956 the Café Voltaire stood at n° 1 Place de 1’Odéon, a stronghold of the intelligentsia in the 19th century, frequented among others by Eugéne Delacroix and
Alfred de Musset, later by political leaders such as Jules Vallés and Gambetta,
who could be seen here smoking his pipe, still later by Paul Gauguin, Auguste
Renoir, Paul Verlaine and Stéphane Mallarmé, and in due course André Gide,

Paul Valéry and Léon-Paul Fargue. Before leaving Place de l’Odéon, take a last
look towards rue Crébillon - named after a long-forgotten playwright - where an
exquisite rustic house at n° 6 now shelters a charming café.
Walk down rue de |’Odéon. At n° 7, in her bookshop ‘La Maison des Amis du
Livre’, Adrienne Monnier received and gave support to her writer friends Paul


Valéry, Paul Claudel and André Gide, among others. Emulating her French
friend, the American Sylvia Beach in 1921 opened a bookshop across the street,
at n° 12, the celebrated Shakespeare and Company. Here the ‘lost generation’ met
- T.S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, Scott Fitzgerald, Sinclair Lewis, Sherwood Anderson,

Hemingway - and of course James Joyce, whose Ulysses was first published here
in 1922 thanks to the faith and energy of Ms Beach. Ms Beach had to close down
during the Nazi occupation and in 1942 went into hiding in a students’ hostel at
n° 93 Boulevard Saint-Michel, (in the Sth arr.) which still exists.

Continue across Boulevard Saint-Germain and into rue de |’ AncienneComédie, on the site of the moat of the city walls, hence its previous name of rue

des Fossés-Saint-Germain. Its present name commemorates the seat of the
Comédie-Frangaise, which was at n° 14, where a plaque reads, Comédiens ordinaires du Roi de 1689 a 1770. Here too the troupe had taken over an old jeu de
paume, Le Jeu de Paume de 1|’Etoile, and replaced it with a magnificent theatre,
sloping up elegantly from the stalls like an amphitheatre and lit by chandeliers.
The drab facade of the present modern building corresponds roughly to the site of
the curtain, and the courtyard to the stalls. An inscription on top of the facade
reads, La Comédie Francaise. On the street facade is preserved Le Hongre’s hautrelief of Minerva, tracing what she can see in the mirror of truth, just as Moliére

held out a mirror to his spectators to reflect their flawed nature. For nearly a hundred years all the great playwrights of the 17th and 18th centuries were represented here - Moliére, Racine and Corneille, obviously, followed by Marivaux,
Beaumarchais, Voltaire, Crébillon, Piron, Regnard, Rousseau, Diderot. Their

works were performed by no less an impressive list of actresses and actors Madame Dancourt, Armande-Béjart, Adrienne Lecouvreur, and their male counterparts, Poisson, Quinault, Grandval and Le Kain. In 1759 Henri-Louis Le Kain

managed to get the three rows of benches encircling the stage removed: these had
been habitually occupied by insufferable members of the fashionable set,
pompous minor marquis who would exasperate the performers with their silly
commentaries and incessant chatter.
At n° 13 is the main entrance to the Procope: its location just across the street
from the Comédie-Francaise was the key to its fortune. Of course it had attractions of its own, the proximity of the jeu de paume (it was only replaced by the
theatre five years later), the boules lanes in its back yard (now Cour-duCommerce-Saint-André); but neither these nor the new sensational beverage
introduced by Monsieur Procope (i.e. coffee), would have sufficed to create such
long-standing success. When the troupe moved across the street, the Procope
became the meeting-place of actors and playwrights and the socialites who came
to see them, in other words, the showcase of the Comédie-Frangaise. It was also
the dreaded court of judgment where a playwright’s reputation was made or


ished. In the 18th century it became the laboratory of ideological experis that would lead to the French Revolution and the mean battlefield of personal confrontations (in which sharp-tongued Voltaire excelled in particular), the
verbal scandal sheet of Paris. Above all, it was here that the compilation of the
monumental Encyclopédie which was initiated by d’ Alembert and Diderot. With
the break up of the Revolution it was the turn of a new generation of men of
action to take over, a convenient place as they often lived around the corner. It
seems that some major assaults were launched by them from here in 1792, before
this branch of the Revolution was chopped off. It is also believed that the Phrygian cap of the sans-culottes, so called after the cap worn by the enfranchised
slaves of ancient Rome, made its first appearance here, worn by Citizen Julien.
In the 19th century the Procope remained the rendezvous of literati - Musset,
George Sand, Balzac, Théophile Gautier came here in the first half of the century,
Gambetta during the Second Empire, when he braved the law and began to smoke
here his eternal pipe! Later still, Verlaine would be seen here drinking absinth. By then, however, it had become a private literary circle. New centres of gatherings
had opened in the city, predominantly on the Right Bank, and the establishment
went out of fashion. In 1890 the Procope closed down and landed eventually in
the hands of the Assistance Publique. When it reopened timidly in 1952,
Voltaire’s table, which had served as a votive altar for the author’s own ashes,

and for the ashes of Marat and Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau, did not suffice to
restore the establishment its past prestige. After keeping afloat through several
decades a new management took it over in 1988: by sprinkling it with some
tourist kitsch, they have so far given it a new lease on life.

You will now arrive at the bustling, colourful Carrefour de Buci, bursting with
flower stalls, once the bustling site of the city gate, the Porte de Buci. Continue
into rue Mazarine, with its many bookshops and art galleries. Ahead is the lovely
dome of the Institut de France. Turn right into Passage Dauphine, a charming
haven paved with uneven cobblestones. A well-known language school has taken
up residence here, and also a cosy salon de thé which serves delicious pastry. Rue
Dauphine, at the end of the alley, commemorates the Dauphin and future Louis
XIII and was opened by Henri IV. It is a continuation of the bridge of Pont-Neuf
and Place Dauphine next to it. The Augustine monks protested that the new street |
would encroach on their grounds, but Henri IV was a man of vision in terms of
town planning and refused to bend, saying he would use his guns to carry his project through, if he had to. In any case, he argued, the monks would draw an
incomparably greater income from the houses along the new street than they did
from their cabbage-beds. History proved him right: on the eve of the Revolution
their order was one of the wealthiest in the capital. Rue Dauphine was one of the
most elegant arteries in the capital, especially after 1763 when it was the first to


substitute oil lamps to candles. Rue Christine, the continuation of Passage
Dauphine, was named after the second daughter of Henri IV and Marie de Medici
and is likewise lined with 17th-century houses. The one at n° 3 is now one of the
best hotels on the Left Bank, the splendid Relais Christine, with its elegant courtyard in front and beautiful garden at the back, according to the canons of those
days. Opposite the hotel is one of the best-known repertoire cinemas in the capital, magnet for lovers of classic films.
Retrace your steps into rue Mazarine and turn right. At the pretty corner of rue
Jacques-Callot is the colourful terrace of the Mazarine bistro on the site of Le Jeu
de Paume de la Bouteille, converted into a theatre in the 17th century, like so

many others. A plaque on the wall tells us that this was the cradle of the opera,
where the genre was first performed on 16 March 1671. The opera in question
was Pomone, composed by Lully. On 28 June 1669 the King had given Lully’s
partner, l’abbé Perrin, official permission to perform operas and the year 1669 is
still marked on the curtain of the opera house, although the Théatre du Marais had
already initiated the genre in the 1660s. Lully was soon to quarrel with Perrin and
oust him; on 15 November 1672, he moved the opera to the Jeu de Paume du Bel-

Air at 7-13 rue de Vaugirard, visited earlier. When Moliére died the following
year, the King ordered the merger of his troupe and that of the Marais on these
vacated premises, which now became known as the Théatre de Guénégaud. In
1680 the troupe of the Hétel de Bourgogne was ordered to join them. From then
on there was only one French troupe in Paris, La Comédie Francaise as it was
renamed, which makes this site its cradle too. However, in 1687 the troupe was

ordered to pack up yet again, this time under the pressure of the University, vexed
by their presence next to the newly-founded Collége des Quatre-Nations. Fortunately, they found a new home on the present rue de |’ Ancienne-Comédie. Rue
Jacques-Callot replaced the alley that led to the theatre. Today it is full of charm,
with slender lampposts and pleasant greenery. It is hard to believe that just over a
century ago it was a dingy slum, described by Emile Zola in Thérése Raquin as
“suant toujours d’une humidité acre” (“oozing with acrid dampness”), an aspect
confirmed in Henri Miirger’s La Vie de Bohéme. N° 28 rue Mazarine was the
home of Champollion where on 14 September 1822 he made his breakthrough
discovery of the principle of deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs. In 1944 the
famous poet Robert Desnos was living across the street, at n° 19, when he was

arrested and deported. He died in Theresienstadt (now Terezin in the Czech
Republic) in 1945, on the eve of the liberation of the camp. Another jeu de
paume, Les Métayers, was situated further up the street, on the site of n° 10/14.
This was where the 21-year-old actor Poquelin opened L’Illustre Théatre in 1643.
He had just assumed the name of Moliére by which he would become worldfamous. His modest troupe of amateurs included four members of the Béjart fam-


ily, Madeleine Béjart, who became his companion, being the only one of great
talent. The rectangular premises (12m x 31m), the conventional setting of a jeu de
paume were preserved and consequently the walls were painted black. The hall
was 18m long, the stage 9 and the backstage 4. As you approach the Seine, rue
Mazarine makes a sharp bend to the left, following the course of the counterscarp
path of the city walls, which had to skirt the Hétel de Nesle that stood alongside
the river, roughly on the site of the present Institut de France.
The medieval Hotel de Nesle was second to none, except perhaps to the Louvre
on the opposite bank, the home of Jean, Duc de Berry and of his fabulous illuminated manuscript, Les Trés Riches Heures du duc de Berry, his world-famous

Book of Hours. The original defence tower had been erected around 1220 by
Philippe Hamelin, the Provost of Paris, and was therefore known as the Tour
Hamelin. A gate was soon added to the walls, roughly 30 m to the south, on the
site of the present entrance to the Mazarine Library of the Institut de France (n° —
23 quai de Conti). A plan on the facade of the eastern wing of the Institut de
France indicates the precise location of the tower and gate. When later Simon de
Clermont, the Lord of Nesle, built a palace next to them, they became known
respectively as La Tour and La Porte de Nesle.
From 1308 on, when Philippe le Bel had bought the palace, it became the residence of various members of the royal family. Its waterside location, though
pleasing, made it vulnerable to flooding and it therefore was provided with the
first quai in the city (now quai de Conti), which was built in 1313 by Etienne
Barbette, the road surveyor of Paris. Philippe le Bel’s three sons, the future Louis X,

Philippe V and Charles IV, married respectively Marguerite, Jeanne and Blanche
de Bourgogne (the latter two were sisters and cousins of Marguerite). All three
resided in the palace and seem to have used its tower for their amorous liaisons.
One day, however, their sister-in-law Isabelle, Philippe le Bel’s daughter and wife
of Edward II of England, noticed three gentlemen wearing the three purses she
had given the three princesses as gifts. Needless to dwell on the scandal that
ensued, nor to enumerate the list the tortures inflicted on two of the lovers (which
included, of course, castration) before they were finally decapitated and hanged
by the armpits to be devoured by birds of prey. Marguerite and Blanche were
shaved and dispatched to languish at the Chateau-Gaillard of Andelys (on route to
Normandy), while Jeanne was locked up in the castle of Dourdan, south-west of
Paris. Blanche was later forced to take the veil, Marguerite was suffocated

between two mattresses by order of her husband Louis X, who wished to remarry,
but Jeanne was offered the beautiful Hdtel de Nesle by her loving husband,
Philippe V, who, moreover, generously passed away in 1322, leaving Jeanne free
to lead a life of merry widowhood for the next seven years. Was she the queen
who, as Brant6me wrote three centuries later, used to watch out from the tower


for passers-by and, having sent for them and exhausted their sexual potency,
had
them tied up in sacks and precipitated from the top of the tower into the water to
drown? Brantéme could not confirm this allegation but added that most Parisians
believed the story to be true. Which is already corroborated by Francois Villon
two centuries earlier who, in his moving poem Ballade des dames du temps jadis
(1461), evokes the queen who ordered Buridan tc be thrown in a sack into the
Seine:
Semblablement ou est la royne
Qui commanda que Buridan
Fust jecté en ung sacq en Seyne?
(Similarly where is the queen/Who ordered Buridan/To
be thrown in a sack into the Seine?)

Buridan, who is supposed to have been her lover during those seven years and
to have escaped death by falling on a boat loaded with hay, later became the rector of the University of Paris and outlived Jeanne by 30 years. The rival he
injured subsequently, when he was involved in another liaison, later became Pope
Clément VI.
From 1380 on, when Charles V’s brother, Jean, Duc de Berry, settled here, the

palace had its hour of glory, thanks entirely to the great culture and taste of the
Duke. Across a dead arm of the Seine to the west, he built a lovely bridge with

five harmonious arches, to link the hétel with a new dwelling, Le Séjour de Nesle
(on the site of today’s Square Honoré Champion), a bejewelled fairytale palace,
with four corner turrets topped with ‘pepper-box’ roofs, as witness old engravings. No wonder the victorious Duke of Bedford requisitioned it for his most eminent guests. Its fortunes declined in the course of the Hundred Years’ War and
Henri Ii ended up selling it. A century later, Mazarin’s Collége des QuatreNations stood on its site as reported earlier, as well as an impressive library,
where Mazarin’s private collection was kept and which was open to the public
twice a week. Louis Le Vau, to whom we owe most of the Ile Saint-Louis and
much of the renovation of the Louvre, made this a magnificent monument indeed,

with a chapel, topped by a dome, underneath which Mazarin’s tomb was placed,
and framed by two curving wings overlooking the Seine along the quai de Conti.
24 shops opened under the arcades, with astounding window displays of books,
engravings, paintings, silverware and objets d’art, making this a mecca for discerning visitors, both French and foreign (mainly English) up to the Revolution.
Among them Laurence Sterne who came to Paris in 1762 and 1765 and came to
the quai de Conti under guise of clergyman Yorick, to browse in a bookshop, as
he tells us in A Sentimental Journey. Four years later the Café Anglais opened at
n° 1 the quai de Conti in 1769 to cater for his fellow countrymen. A place of liter-


ary gatherings, its patrons would find here their English papers, such as the
London Evening Post, the Westminster Gazette or the Daily Adviser, sent over

from the homeland.
With the build-up of terror in 1793, the premises were converted into a prison,
where such respectable citizens as the historian Michaud, the painter David and
Dr Guillotin were locked up together with 650 other prisoners. Under the chapel’s
dome now gathered the members of the dreaded Comité du Salut Public, in
charge of the bloody purification of the patrie. Mazarin’s mausoleum was naturally removed from the site, but was rescued by the archaeologist Alexandre
Lenoir and transferred to his Musée des Monuments Frangais, where it went on
display as an example of the work of the sculptor Coysevox. In 1806 the five
Academies were transferred here from the Louvre to make up the Institut de
France, and the chapel now became

its hall. During its recent restoration,-

Mazarin’s mausoleum regained its place under the dome, where it unquestionably
belongs - partisan allegiance aside - if only for being the founder of the Institut’s
library, which now owns 350,000 volumes and thousands of manuscripts.
Next to the Institut de France, to the east, stands the elegant, stark building of

the Monnaie, stunningly beautiful from across the river, particularly when illuminated at night. Commissioned by Louis XV in 1768, it was the work of a yetunknown young mason and son of a carpenter, Jacques-Denis Antoine, who won
the competition for the best design. It was built on the site of Mansart’s Hotel
Guénégaud, said at the time to be the most splendid dwelling in the city. Unlike
the present building, it ran perpendicularly to the river, its main entrance overlooking the future Collége des Quatre-Nations. Behind was a garden extending all
the way to rue de Guénégaud, with fountains and beds of flower; in spring the air
was filled with the fragrance of orange blossoms. Henri de Guénégaud had supported Louis XIV and Mazarin during the Fronde and could therefore afford to
surround himself with luxury without giving offence to the King. In this splendid
setting, Boileau and Racine gave readings of their early works and the opera
Pomone was rehearsed here before its opening in the neighbouring Théatre de
Guénégaud in 1671. Mazarin’s niece, widow of the Prince de Conti, exchanged

her own mansion on quai Malaquais, further west, with the Hétel de Guénégaud
some time later, but the most illustrious member of the Conti family, who inherit-

ed it in the 18th century, had little interest in the place, especially after 1750 when
he was appointed Grand Prior of the Temple, where he led a life of independence;
so he sold it to the city’s authorities who intended to move there from the Hétel
de Ville but then decided otherwise. The royal authorities, attracted by its convenient location, bought it from the city in 1758 to build a new mint, urgently needed in a fast-growing economy. It took, however, nearly 20 years to carry through
the scheme. The present Mint is at Pessac near Bordeaux, but there is still very



valuable metal stored here and security thus remains tight. The workshop
s can be
visited on Mondays and Wednesdays between 2.15 and 3 pm only, but the
coin
museum, which has displays going back to the Merovingian kings in the 6th century, and the shop can be visited during normal daytime. The entrance to the
shop
is on rue Guénégaud.

SAINT-GERMAIN-DES-PRES
