lhe second half of the day will be devoted to the exploration of the MontagneSainte-Geneviéve and its surroundings. Make your way to rue Victor-Cousin,
the continuation of rue de la Sorbonne, and turn left into rue Soufflot. Ahead of
you is the colossal Panthéon, the sepulchral temple of France’s national heroes,

standing massively on the razed summit of the hill and overshadowing both the
parish church of Saint-Etienne-du-Mont and the Tour Clovis (on the opposite side
of rue Clovis), the latter being the only vestige of the medieval abbey church of
Sainte-Geneviéve. In 1744 Louis XV came down with the pox and vowed to erect
a new church for Saint Geneviéve should he recover, remembering that back in

the 5th century she had restored the health of some of her countrymen. The clergy, who saw in the King’s illness a divine retribution for his debauchery, urged
him to go further and vow to end his liaison with the Duchesse de Chateauroux,
the last of four sisters he had successively led astray. The King’s prayer was
answered and before long he was up and about, forgetful of his vows. He promptly resumed his amorous liaison with the Duchesse and would just as soon have
overlooked his pledge to build a new church, but the residents of the abbey of
Sainte-Geneviéve, whose personal interests were at stake, proved tenacious and

the King had to comply. A grand edifice of gigantic dimensions - 110 metres
long, 82 wide and 83 tall - was erected by architect Soufflot, crowning the top of


the hill, which had been levelled, and complemented by the new elegant building
of the law faculty (its matching town hall on the other side of rue Soufflot was not
added until a century later). A broad avenue (now rue Soufflot) ran westwards,
opening a new vista on to the gardens of the Palais du Luxembourg, adding a
final touch to this regal setting. However, for Soufflot the venture ended tragically: the subsoil having been riddled with pits by the potters of ancient Lutetia who
had extracted here their clay, he had difficulty reinforcing the foundations and
libellous accusations were showered on him. He died a broken man before the
monument was completed. The old abbey church was abandoned without compunction, its Gothic style having long since gone out of fashion; in 1790 it was
torn down and a few years later rue Clovis was opened on its site. Only old engravings remind us of its presence next to the parish church of Saint-Etienne-du-Mont.
The monumental new edifice now found better use as the eternal abode of
France’s recent heroes, to which end some alterations were made, not necessarily

for the better. Its 42 lateral windows were walled up, which gave the monument a
wholly dismal aspect. The front pediment, overlooking rue Soufflot, however,
was enlivened with patriotic fervour by the allegorical figures of La Patrie
crowning Virtue and Liberty and crushing Despotism, and by the uplifting
inscription, ‘AUX GRANDS HOMMES LA PATRIE RECONNAISSANTPE’,
shining in gold letters. As contrary forces shook France throughout the 19th century, the destiny of the Panthéon vacillated to accommodate her respective
regimes. Napoleon restored it to God, a decision solemnly sealed by the conservative Louis XVIII when he dedicated the church to Saint Geneviéve on 3 January
(the Saint’s holy day) 1822. However, the ‘citizen’ King, Louis-Philippe, returned
the monument to the Nation as soon as he acceded to the throne and had its front
pediment decorated with the patriotic allegories that are still there. His successor,
Napoleon III, following in the footsteps of his great-uncle, dedicated it once again
to the holy Genevieve, while the Third Republic replaced the cult of the holy
cross with that of patriotism and national grandeur, but needed an emblematic
hero for its consecration. It so happened that Victor Hugo, the embodiment of the
Republican ideal, died conveniently in 1885, providing the Republic with the perfect candidate. Even Voltaire’s funeral procession had not been as grand as his,
starting at the Arc de Triomphe and ending here. The elevating inscription Aux
Grands Hommes... (which for the past hundred years had been alternately put up
or taken down with each change of regime) was restored to its original position
on the front pediment, finally there to stay.
The monument’s tenants were also shuffled around during that agitated period.
When the great orator of the Revolution Mirabeau fell into disgrace in 1794 his
naked body was displayed in public before being thrown into a common grave.
His vacated place was given to Marat, whose body met with the same fate in


29,yp

NABETWH-auvNage “NOy

SE

IJNDINHDILAIOd
31053

JW IISMVINVZS : NDIHdVADOLYVD NOILVWSI1va

UY

|


qBHDIW-LS G8

a:

10144NOS ‘¥

NISNOD YOLDIA “SY

NOaina _y

IAs yy Bey ‘

:

Nidavr
S3G

SUINVId


1795. So did Voltaire and Rousseau in 1815 — this time at the hands of the Royalists
— who regained their place, however, with the fall of the Bourbon dynasty. They
have since been joined by dozens of other glorious figures, among them Emile
Zola, Bergson, Saint-Exupéry and Jean Jaurés, occupying the sizable crypt originally intended for the monks of the abbey. Saint Geneviéve herself would have
fallen into oblivion, had it not been for Puvis de Chavannes’s work depicting her
as the protector of Paris, and Gros’s mural of her apotheosis, which decorates the
dome and lightens the otherwise stark interior of this temple.
Following Republican traditions, Francois Mitterand also used the Panthéon for
a public relations gimmick after he had been elected President in 1981. The monument was after all the resting-place of Jean Jaurés, the spiritual father of socialism. Lured by the petals of the socialist rose and by the sound of Beethoven’s
Ode To Joy, the people of Paris thronged to the Panthéon - unwittingly rehearsing
for the Berlin Happening some years later. However, by the time the ashes of
Jean Monnet, Europe’s founding father, were brought to rest at the Panthéon in
1988, the patriotic surge had died down and they were greeted with indifference
by pedestrians and with downright fury by exasperated drivers trapped in gigantic
traffic jams. In March 1994, on the occasion of Women’s Day, President
Mitterand made the revolutionary suggestion that the remains of Marie Curie
should be laid here too, the first woman to be granted this honour.
History and emotions set apart, if you want a breath-taking view, climb to the
top of the Panthéon.
At n° 10 Place du Panthéon is the library of Sainte-Geneviéve, repository of
tens of thousands of volumes and manuscripts rescued from the abbey during the
Revolution. It was built at the time of Louis-Philippe, the first iron-frame building
in the city, before the railway stations and before Les Halles. The library stands
on the site of the famous Collége de Montaigu, founded in 1314 and notorious for
its filth and lack of hygiene - even for those days! - and for the harsh discipline
inflicted upon its pupils, the ‘capettes’. Rabelais referred to the place as the‘collége
de pouillerie’ (‘squalor’) and claimed that the slaves of the Tatars and the Moors
were treated better than its pupils. However, the college was world-renowned for
its academic excellence and numbered among its pupils Erasmus, Ignatius of
Loyola, Calvin and, in all likelihood, Rabelais himself. When the new church of

Sainte-Geneviéve was inaugurated by Louis XV, the ‘capettes’ were given an
exceptional week’s holiday so as to make up the numbers for the ceremony, from
which the people of Paris, having lost their respect for Louis XV, stayed away.

You now come to the church of Saint-Etienne-du-Mont. A first parish church
was built in the 13th century, when the adjacent abbey church became too small


for its congregation. By the end of the 15th century the area’s population had
increased dramatically, necessitating the construction of a new church. The flamboyant style of its architecture was characteristic of the time. The interior is striking for its asymmetrical structure, its magnificent chancel screen - the only one to
have survived in Paris - and the highly ornate 17th-century organ. Here lie the
remains of Pascal and Racine, and more important still, the remains of Saint

Geneviéve. These lie in a brass reliquary, a poor 19th-century substitute for the
historic, bejewelled one that vanished with the fury of the Revolution in 1793.
The stone underneath was rescued from the abbey’s crypt and is believed to be
part of the Saint’s original sarcophagus. On 6 September 1914 the Germans were
at the gates of Paris, just as the formidable Huns had been a millennium and a
half before. Parisians thronged here to pray that day and once again Paris was
spared. When the war was over many came back to thank their patron for having
helped them to survive the carnage and left plaques of gratitude affixed to the
walls of her chapel. Tucked among them is a plaque from a grateful student who
had done well in his examination back in 1890! Before leaving the church, do not
overlook the fabulous collection of 16th- and 17th-century stained glass, displayed in the cloister of the Chapelle des Catéchismes.
Across rue Clovis the tower of Clovis is the only remnant of the old abbey
church. It lost its spire in 1750 and is now altogether enclosed within the prestigious Lycée Henri IV, which was founded after the Revolution. Among its pupils
were Alfred de Musset, Viollet-le-Duc, the Ducs de Chartres, the Duc de
Nemours and the Duc d’Aumale, the Prince de Joinville, the Baron Haussmann

and all the sons of Louis-Philippe. Unfortunately, French schools are hermetically
sealed to outsiders and, unless by prior arrangement, you will not be able to see
the remains of the abbey, notably its library, now the dining-room of the school.
If you peep through the doorway, however, you will at least catch a glimpse of its
lovely courtyard bursting with flowers.
Retrace your steps and continue along rue Valette to your right. Another
famous college, the Collége de Fortet, stood at the corner of rue Valette and was
also attended by Jean Calvin. Its ramshackle old tower in the courtyard of n° 21 is
in fact known as the Tour Calvin because the Swiss rebel, who had defied estab-

lished theology, is said to have escaped from it when the authorities ordered his
arrest. Having climbed down the tower by a rope of knotted sheets, he vanished
from the Latin Quarter, never to return. The Collége de Frotet was also where, in

1585, the Duc de Guise assembled La Trés Sainte Ligue, which plotted to over- throw Henri III.
At n° 4 the Collége Sainte-Barbe is the only college in the Latin Quarter that
dates from the Ancien Régime, although the present buildings date from the 19th
century. The 16th-century poet and historian Buchanan taught here and Jean
iy

Calvin may have studied here too for a while. In more recent times the aviator
Louis Blériot and Gustave Eiffel were among its pupils. Turn right into rue
Laplace, an ancient, narrow, quiet street with medieval vaults at n°s 18, 20 and 22
that are said to date from the 12th century. The Collége des Grassins, once a prestigious college, was founded in the 16th century on the site of the present n° 12
and was shut down during the Revolution. At the end of the street, across a picturesque square, is the entrance to the former gardens of the Ecole Polytechnique,
which moved to the southern suburb of Palaiseau in 1977. The Ecole Polytechnique was founded in 1794, to meet an urgent need to provide the nascent French
Republic, threatened on all sides by monarchical states, with a highly competent
scientific élite. Its list of cadets is most impressive: Maréchal Foch and Maréchal
Joffre, the heroes of World War I, after whom two pavilions in the gardens are

named; the great mathematician Henri Poincaré; Haussmann’s landscape gardener Alphand, who designed Paris’s loveliest gardens; Fulgence Bienveniie, the
founding father of the Métro; and more recently, the President of the Republic,

Valéry Giscard-d’Estaing. Also attributable to the school’s alumni are such engineering achievements as the building of the circular road around Paris (le boulevard périphérique), of the Paris airports (both Orly and Roissy-Charles de Gaulle)
and of the Concorde aircraft.
The site of the Ecole Polytechnique had previously been occupied by the College de Navarre, founded in 1304 by Jeanne de Navarre, the wife of Philippe le
Bel. Except for the 100-year span of the Anglo-French war, when the Latin Quarter was in a sorry state, this had for centuries been the most prestigious establishment in the Latin Quarter, enjoying the patronage of the King, who made it a
substantial grant - which, however, the school chose to use to buy rods and canes!
The highest-ranking nobility, including the royal family and the Guise, sent their
children to the Collége de Navarre. For a while it was known as the Collége des
Trois Henri, after Henri III, Henri IV and Henri de Guise, who had all attended
this establishment, and were said to have had amorous rendezvous here with the

same mistress. Richelieu, Bossuet, the Prince de Savoie and Condorcet, among
others, were all pupils here. Around Christmas 1456 Francois Villon and two of
his companions supped at the tavern of La Mule, next to the church of SaintBenoit la Bistournée, mentioned above. They had not gathered to celebrate the
Nativity but to organize a burglary. Soon after the three accomplices broke into
the Collége de Navarre (which Villon had attended himself) and made off with

the takings of the till (the substantial sum of 500 écus). An imprisonment (with
sessions of questioning and torture) in the Chatelet followed, the first loop in a

downhill spiral that ended with the poet’s being sentenced to the gallows. All that
remains of yet another glorious institution annihilated by the Revolution is the
central part of the fagade of the Pavillon Foch.


Retrace your steps, turn left into rue Descartes and peep into rue Saint-Etiennedu-Mont on your right, a narrow alley leading back to the church of SaintEtienne-du-Mont: there is a charming pocket-sized garden on the right, shaded by
a clump of birch trees. Continue along rue Descartes. At n° 30 stands an elegant
18th-century hdtel, the former home of the Duc d’ Orléans, Louis le Pieux, the son

of the Regent. A man of virtue and culture, a sincere Jansenist*, knowledgeable in
Hebrew as well as in science, Louis was disgusted by the decadence at the court
and retired to this house after the death of his young wife, Jeanne de Bade, in

1726, so as to be close to the abbey of Sainte-Geneviéve. He remained here all his
life and died in his second floor bedroom in 1752, leaving a son, a virtuous cap-

tain named Louis-Philippe, the father of the illustrious Philippe Egalité and
grandfather of another Louis-Philippe, the future King of France. Before continuing down rue Descartes, take a look at the Tour Clovis standing against the dome
of the Panthéon - a beautiful picture from this angle. If you look down rue Clovis
to your left, you will see a section of Philippe-Auguste’s city walls. A dilapidated
room on the third floor of n° 39 rue Descartes was the home of Paul Verlaine.
After making an attempt on the life of his former friend, the poet Arthur
Rimbaud, he spent some time in jail, then tried to return to the fold of Christiani-

ty, but absinth got the better of him and he sank into a life of depravity. Verlaine
shared his seedy room with a wretched street girl and died here on 8 January 1896.
Rue Descartes, and its continuation rue Mouffetard, follow the course of the
ancient Roman way that led to the south. A city gate was built here in 1200, La
Porte Bourdelle, and rue Descartes was known as rue Bourdelle up to 1809.
Before continuing into rue Mouffetard, you may like to see where Ernest
Hemingway lived. If so, turn left into rue du Cardinal-Lemoine, where in 1922 he
and his young bride Hadley occupied a tiny flat on the fourth floor of n° 74: a
dingy, dark place with no running water and smelly toilets on the landing.
Hemingway also rented a tiny room to work in on the top floor of 39 rue
Descartes, claiming it to be the very one in which Verlaine had died. From June
to October 1921 James Joyce lived in a third floor flat at n° 71 across the street,

which belonged to the literary critic Valéry Larbaud. He was finishing Ulysses, a
task accompanied by plenty of drink, and often had to be escorted home. Before
you walk back, take a look at the countrified hotel at n° 75, Hotel des Grandes

Ecoles, a heavenly patch of provincial France, surrounded by a charming garden,
hidden from the din of urban life and very reasonably priced. Retrace your steps
and continue into Place de la Contrescarpe, the ‘village’ square of the neighbourhood, ‘Apache’ territory in Hemingway’s day and since time immemorial the
haunt of students, youths and humanity in all its variegated forms. Although the
*Austere followers of the Dutch theologian Jansen Cornelis (1585 - 1638) who believed
in predestination and denied free will.


square itself was not created until 1852, this had always been a very busy junction
- a jumble of sedan-chair carriers, horses, servants, and others, particularly those

on rowdy outings to taverns beyond the city walls, where wine was untaxed and
therefore cheaper. The most famous of those taverns was La Pomme de Pin, men-

tioned by Rabelais and frequented also by the Renaissance poets of La Pléaide
who had united to promote the French language. The tavern was not at n° | as the
inscription inaccurately states, but on the corner of the present rue Mouffetard
and rue Blainville, where there is now a Haéagen-Dasz ice-cream parlour - incongrously perhaps, but in keeping with the times.
Rue Mouffetard is the backbone of a picturesque neighbourhood of narrow
streets that criss-cross down the eastern slope of La Montagne Sainte-Geneviéve.
If you want to see its lush food stalls, do not come between 1 and 4 p.m., nor on
Sunday afternoons or at any time on Monday, when they are closed. This is one
of the colourful spots of Paris, albeit somewhat marred by an invading rag trade, ~
Balkan restaurants, Latin American night-life and American ice-cream parlours.
Unquestionably, this is no longer the genuine ‘village’ that catered to locals,
many of whom prefer to shop at the nearby market of Place Monge (open
Wednesday, Friday and Sunday mornings). However, the lower part of rue Mouffetard and such side streets as rue de |’ Arbaléte have kept their authenticity and
are full of charm - a riot of succulent food stalls through which a hotch-potch of
humanity elbows its way. Here leeks and potatoes can be bought from a friendly
Tunisian, Brazilian food from a native of the Ivory Coast, while three energetic

young Jews in their age-old black attire stride across the street for the evening
prayers in a nearby synagogue. Yet, despite this rich ethnic mosaic, somehow the
neighbourhood has remained essentially Parisian.
Not so long ago this used to be a poor man’s district, close to the oozing and
malodorous waters of the Biévre that had long lost their primeval purity. Before
the 15th century the borough of Saint-Médard lay by the happy river and took
pride in its vineyards and bucolic surroundings. Some of the most prominent
Parisians even built splendid country homes in these sunny parts. But when the
butchers, dyers and tanners came over, they ravaged the Biévre, which from then
on gave off a nauseating stench, ‘mouffettes’ or ‘moffettes’, possibly the origin of
the name rue Mouffetard. With the pollution of the river came social havoc, and
with the presence of hot-tempered butchers and rowdy youths inebriated with
cheap wine, brawls and scuffles were the daily and nightly lot of the area. In the
early 18th century the authorities sensibly stationed the gardes francaises at n°
36, down the street on your right. N° 61, where the garde républicaine is now stationed, on the other hand, was a humble convent, built in the middle of the 17th
century. By the early 18th century it was threatend with ruin and was rescued by
the devout Madame de Maintenon, who responded to the Mother Superior’s



/

7 —

BR |[oa
Sey
SS
<S

mS
=

SS
ss

S&S
SS

~~

SAS

rue Mouffetard

appeal by sending the Marquis d’Argenson, the head of the police, to supervise
the work. Alas, on one of his visits he met a young novice... The Mother Superior hearing that the lovers were plotting to elope, tried to stop them, but the wrathful d’Argenson refused to give way: if the Mother Superior wished to see her
convent restored, she would have to renounce the novice. Having little choice,
she complied.
The church of Saint-Médard, down rue Mouffetard on the left, was originally
the parish church of the borough of Saint-Médard. Lying prettily on the junction
of the road and the Biévre, it was built on the site of a 7th-century church, which
was destroyed by the Norsemen in the 9th century. Its remains were discovered
only in 1978, although its existence had been suspected for some time. Saint
Médard lived in the 6th century and was councillor to the Merovingian Kings. In
the year 545 he crowned a fair and virtuous village girl with a garland of white _
roses and gave her a dowry of 25 pounds, thus starting the village tradition of the
annual féte des Rosiéres, celebrating the chastity of one of the maidens.
Although there is mention of the church in Pope Alexander III’s bull, dating
from his visit to Paris in 1163, the earliest vestiges, notably its nave and facade,
are 15th-century, and typically so in their flamboyant style. The church of SaintMédard entered history on 1 May 1727 when its virtuous and humble deacon,
Paris, died. Despite his high social rank - his father had been councillor at the
Parliament - Paris refused the priesthood of the church and led an ascetic life of
self-renunciation and mortification, which wore him out and caused his premature
death at the age of 36. Like many parish priests and members of the Parliament,
Paris had been an ardent Jansenist, and at that time Louis XIV, encouraged by the
Jesuits, was persecuting Jansenists. More than any other form of opposition, religious dissension threatened the monarchy because it questioned the very notion
of absolutism by divine right. Following the deacon’s death a wave of mass hysteria swept through the capital. Convulsive fits, self-flagellation and delirium
were the symptoms noted among his friends and worshippers, the convulsionnaires, predominantly women. For five years they gathered at his grave, prancing,
barking and mewing, as though possessed and were therefore known as
sauteuses, aboyeuses and miaulantes. They would be nailed to crosses, trodden

on by heavy youths, swallow blazing charcoal, have their tongues pierced... and
beg for more. When eventually the alarmed authorities shut down the graveyard
in 1732, P@ris’s fanatical followers simply moved to private quarters. Only the
expulsion of the Jesuits in 1762, the deadly enemies of the Jansenists, put an end
to this frenzy which had lasted 35 years and had constituted a much greater political threat to the throne, according to the Marquis d’ Argenson (son of the previous
one and minister of Louis XV), than “English philosophy which affected at the
very most a hundred philosophes in France”. The graveyard has been replaced by


a pleasant public garden, but traces of the graveyard door can still be seen at n°
39 rue Daubenton. As you reach the bottom of rue Mouffetard, turn back for a
last picture-postcard view of the festive, colourful slope, with the old church of
Saint-Médard framed on the right by shady trees.
Walk alongside the garden of the church on rue Censier, turn left into Place
Bernard-Halpern and rue Monge beyond it, and on to rue Daubenton. On your left
is the Mosque of Paris, a gem of Moorish architecture, a slice of North Africa or

Andalusia. Inaugurated in great pomp by President Doumergues in 1926, when
France was anxious to honour her Muslim subjects for their contribution to the
war effort, the best Moroccan artists and craftsmen were summoned to decorate it
with magnificent tiles and mosaics and drape its walls with rich damask. The ceiling of its arcades was made of cedar from the Lebanon and its Turkish baths were
panelled with marble and steamed with the mist of the Orient. Its patio, decked
with rose beds and with a marble fountain, is still faintly filled with the scents of
Arabia. On Friday, before and after prayer time, swarms of colourfully dressed

Muslims gather at the main entrance on rue du Puits-de-l’Ermite. Visitors to the
salon de thé use the entrance on the corner of rue Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire and
Daubenton, where, on a hot day, it is pleasant to drink mint tea under a shady fig
tree, on the small patio with its trickling fountain.
Across the street, on the corner of rue Buffon to your right, is the main entrance

to the Jardin des Plantes. Next to it is a spacious 18th-century hdtel, bought by
Buffon in 1772 to serve as residence for the director of the gardens, a post he
himself then held. Thomas Jefferson, who was a dinner guest here several times,
both admired Buffon, “a man of extraordinary powers in conversation”, and was

warily deferential to him: “We saw Buffon in the garden but carefully avoided
him.” Buffon died here, fulfilled and happy, in 1788, aged 85, just in time to
avoid the storm of the Revolution. Under his supervision, and with the support of
King Louis XVI, himself a lover of nature, geography and science, the gardens
had reached their peak. The botanical gardens contain about 10,000 odd species
of piants, a tropical glasshouse, the trunk of a 2,000-year-old sequoia tree and a
cedar of Lebanon brought over by Jussieu in 1734 (apparently from England),
which was the main attraction of the gardens for some time. The Museum of Natural History has a collection of skeletons, shells and stuffed animals and a section

on paleontology and mineralogy. The gardens’ well-stocked menagerie started
out accidentally, when the city authorities decided to rid the streets of animaltamers and ruled that all animals be brought here. On 9 July 1826 Charles X was
offered a giraffe as a present from the Pasha of Egypt. The “King’s animal’, the
first giraffe to tread French soil, was paraded through the streets of the capital on
its way to the Jardin des Plantes, cheered by enthusiastic crowds. Before long

Paris was gripped by a craze for giraffe images - on brooches, combs, umbrellas,


anything one could lay hands on. In the winter of 1870/71, however, when Paris
was besieged by the Prussians, the starving people invaded the menagerie and
devoured all its animals. They did the same with the rats and cats of the capital.
However, despite the hardships of the times, they took the trouble to cook them
first with their innate culinary talent. Turned into succulent dishes, these animals

even found their way on to restaurnt menus.
Use the exit on the corner of rue Cuvier and rue Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire and
walk down rue Linné. The junction of rue Linné and rue Jussieu, a tree-studded

triangle, once full of charm, is now marred by the presence next to it of the ugly
premises of the University of Paris VI and VII, basically the scientific branch of
the University of Paris, a disastrous substitute for the magnificent abbey of SaintVictor that stood here earlier. The abbey was closed down during the Revolution
and demolished in 1811 to make room for the wine market of Paris, La Halle au_
Vin, which in 1812 Napoleon opened here, conveniently across the river from the

wine warehouses of Bercy (an earlier wine market was situated on the corner of
the quai Saint-Bernard and rue des Fossés-Saint-Bernard). The upsurge of protest
against the dismantlement of the market in the late 1950s / early 1960s was of no
avail: once again Paris charged recklessly into the future and replaced a chunk of
its past with one of its futuristic, jerry-built atrocities. It is a relief to turn left into
the steep, meandering rue des Arénes, dipped in greenery, a preserved territory
thanks to the presence of the ancient Roman arena. Like in ancient time the semicircular amphitheatre faces the east; during performances the stage was thus illumintated by the golden rays of the reclining sun against the pastoral backdrop of
the Biévre and its meadows.
Although a place called Les Arénes appears in a deed from 1284, and a late
18th-century map indicates le clos des Arénes, and a 13th-century account mentions imposing ancient ruins next to the abbey of Saint-Victor, nobody believed
the arena really existed until the 1860s, when some workmen came across it acci-

dentally, while building the rue Monge. Haussmann’s remodelling of Paris was
not of course to be hindered by such trifles and in 1870 the two thirds of the arena
that had thus been unearthed were demolished to make room for new blocks of
flats on rue Monge and for the depot and offices of the Compagnie des Omnibus.
The last third, which was dug up in 1883, was likewise meant to be destroyed, but
Victor Hugo and others intervened and thwarted the designs of technocrats. The
Roman arena that you can now see consists of the original section and a reconstruction of the demolished part, which was undertaken in 1918. There is no
accounting for man’s absurdity! The Arena’s tier faces the east as it did in ancient
times, when the Biévre and its meadows

served as a pastoral backdrop to the

podium, illuminated, like the performers, by the reclining rays of the sun.
Retrace your steps and continue along rue Linné. In the courtyard of n° 4 some


lancet arches are the only traces left of the magnificent abbey of Saint-Victor,
which was demolished in 1811. Its famous library contained 40,000 volumes,
including one of the most ancient books ever printed, Les Epitres de Saint Jérome
(1470). Naturally Rabelais’s hero Gargantua visited it during his educational journey to Paris. Only “gens d’étude’ could use this library, and only three times a
week, ‘three hours in the morning and four hours after dinner’. Today many of
France’s libraries are still obstinately shut to the layman.
Continue along rue Jussieu and turn right into rue des Fossés-Saint-Bernard,
which replaced the moat (fossé) dug alongside the city walls during the Hundred
Years’ War to consolidate the defences of the vulnerable city. Henri IV added to
the walls the defensive gate of Saint-Bernard, which was replaced, at the time of
Louis XIV, by a triumphal arch (similarly to the Portes Saint-Denis and SaintMartin that have survived). The gate was pulled down shortly before the Revolution. Turn right along the quai Saint-Bernard for a visit to the Institut du Monde
Arabe, designed by Jean Nouvel and inaugurated at the end of 1987 to mark a
new era of Franco-Arab cultural collaboration. It was one of those triumphant
“Grands Projets’ trumpeted by the media and which occasioned much rejoicing
during Mitterand’s first seven-year term of office, not to mention the usual dash
to see and experience the novelty — above all the roof restaurant, which has a
spectacular view over the Seine. Contrary to the Tour d’ Argent, a short way down
the river, it offers meals that are within the bounds of affordablility.
Continue along quai des Tournelles, so called after the round defence tower
erected by Philippe-Auguste on the easternmost edge of the Left Bank. A small,
square-turreted castle, known as the Chateau de la Tournelle, replaced it, probably at the time of Charles VI. The castle was rebuilt by Henri II and at the time of
Louis XIII became a depot for convicts awaiting the galleys; it remained so until
1790, by which time it was too dilapidated to be restored and was torn down. Its
inmates were then transferred to the neighbouring Collége des Bernardins. On 2
September 1792 the three-day massacre de Septembre began, when the bloodthirsty mob unleashed its fury on places of detention and exterminated anyone it
could lay hands on. When it was falsely rumoured that the inmates of the Collége
des Bernardins were clergymen in disguise, it stormed the depot and assaulted its
73 occupants, who put up a fierce resistance. Robust though they were, they could
do little with their bare hands to save themselves and all except three were
slaughtered.
The world-famous Tour d’ Argent occupies the top floor of n° 15 quai des Tournelles. Guests enjoy both gastronomic cuisine and a spectacular view of the Ile
Saint-Louis and Notre-Dame. However, even here some are more privileged than
others and the round table that offers the best view is reserved for the most privileged of them all. The first Tour d’ Argent, which opened in 1582, was a countri-


fied, one-storeyed inn, yet even then it was a gastronomic establishment, much
appreciated by the court of Henri III. It is believed that the fork was used here for
the first time in France during the reign of Henri IV, when the restaurant reached
its peak. The Revolution destroyed this symbol of lavish decadence, but once the
turmoil was over the feast resumed. Naturally, the establishment changed ownership many times in the course of its long life, but since 1913 it has been in the
hands of the Terrail family. If you are not among the happy few who can afford a
meal, you can nonetheless visit its food shop and museum across the street.

THE VAL-DE-GRACE
