TO THE HOTELS DE SENS ET D’AUMONT
lhe western part of the 4th arrondissement, lying on the edge of the central
market of Les Halles, was seldom graced by the distinguished members of
society. The Centre Georges Pompidou was never meant to be an elitist preserve
but a cultural centre for the people, and thus is appropriately situated here. Deliberately open to the street, its transparent architecture abolishes all barriers
between the street and the Centre. People on the esplanade therefore enjoy an _
exciting X-ray panorama of the escalator swarming with visitors, while those on
the escalator can see the receding and approaching crowds at their feet. Inside,
too, barriers have been abolished and partitions reduced to a minimum, so that an

atmosphere of a bustling but spacious street prevails. Admission to most of this
space is free of charge and in the Salle d’ Actualité you will find all the current
papers and magazines.
Just outside the building, on the northern edge of the esplanade, is a small
building, at present looking like a slum and covered with graffiti. This is the
recreated studio of the Romanian sculptor Brancusi, which well-meaning planners
believed they could bring to the street, but they have since had second thoughts.
Now that the Centre is to be renovated, the studio is to be transferred indoors. The
American photographer Man Ray, a pivotal figure in Paris’s artistic circles in the
first half of the 20th century, was not offered this privilege, although his widow,
Juliette, fought tooth and nail for his studio to be reconstructed here. When
France refused to help raise the money, the Smithsonian Institute came forward
with an offer to recreate Man Ray’s studio - but in Washington DC! Before you
visit the Centre Pompidou, it is a good idea to check on current events; once
there, just be guided by your instincts.
South of the Pompidou Centre, Tingley and Nicky de Sainte-Phalle have created a cheerful pop-art fountain with colourful, mobile sculptures that are nudged
about playfully by the water. Children love it and have integrated it into their
world of play, and adults, with or without reservations, have learnt to live with it.
Continue south into rue Saint-Martin, once the old Roman road on the northsouth axis of the cardo of ancient Lutetia, which led to the towns of Louvres and
Senlis. Since the road had to cross the marshy right bank, the Romans raised its
causeway so as to prevent it from being flooded. This stretch of rue Saint-Martin
is enlivened by shops selling an eclectic array of goods, from genteel traditional


needlework to brilliant ceramics from Britanny. The church of Saint-Merri, at n°
78, dates from 1520, which accounts for its flamboyant Gothic style. Over the
years, however, it has undergone many alterations and lost many of its Gothic
elements, including its Gothic pillars and vaults and its beautiful stained-glass
windows. (Its entrance facade was added in the 19th century.) Still, the fact that it
stands is a miracle in itself, since it served as a gunpowder factory during the
Revolution. The church has preserved a bell dating from the 14th century and in
the crypt is kept one of the oldest stoups in Paris, bearing the arms of Anne of
Austria. The crypt is situated on the probable site of a chapel built in the 6th century, Saint-Pierre-des-Bois, where the Abbot of Saint-Martin-d’Autan, Merry or
Médéric, was buried on 29 August 700. Like all holy men of early Christian
times, he was said to have performed miracles, even after his death. On 29

August 884 the Bishop of Paris, Gozlin, honoured his precious remains with a
marvellous reliquary. Legend has it that when the remains were brought out they
scintillated like gems, which determined Eude le Fauconnier, the priest of SaintMerri, to replace the modest chapel with an imposing church. Someone, however,
got the dates muddled up, since Eude le Fauconnier actually lived some two centuries later.
Turn left into rue de la Verrerie, a major street of old Paris on its east-west axis,

where a glassworks was located. Its presence attracted the guild of stained-glass
and enamel craftsmen who made it their stronghold between the 13th and 18th
centuries, when their art went out of fashion. Among the craftsmen of the 13th
century was a certain Jacquemin Grigonneur, who lived roughly on the site of n°
28. Having come across the game of cards which had just been introduced from
India via the Arabs, he set about painting three packs of cards, “da or et a diverses
couleurs pour l’esbattement du roy” (“in gold and various colours for the distraction of the king”). The King in question was Charles VI, who, having partially
lost his sanity, was in need of various occupations to replace that of government,
and it was he who served as a model to Jacquemin Grigonneur for his King of
Hearts. Later, the wife of Charles VII, Marie d’ Anjou, served as a model for the
Queen of Clubs and his favourite, Agnés Sorel, for the Queen of Diamonds.
Jeanne d’Arc joined the pack as the Queen of Spades. Whether the game pleased
His Majesty is not on record, but it became the rage, so much so that by 1397 it
was banned on workdays and by 1409 was forbidden to churchmen.
At n° 76 stands an 18th-century facade with two charming cupids, the entrance
to the presbytery. A small courtyard on the right leads to two turrets on either side
of the southern portal, through which the covered way of the church is reached
(not open to the public). Notice also the beautiful wrought-iron decorations at n°
74. Turn left into rue des Juges Consuls, an old alley, too narrow to have a pave-

ment. Le Tribunal des Juges Consuls, the nucleus of our Tribunal de Commerce,


had its back entrance in this street (at n° 2-4), and gave it its name. N° 3 boasts a

lovely 17th-century fagade. Behind its door (when it can be opened) are the apse
and the flying buttress of the church. A pretty view of the northern side of the
church can be had from rue du Cloitre-Saint-Merri.
Back on rue de la Verrerie, walk up to rue du Renard for a good view of the
eastern facade of the Centre Pompidou, which some witty journalist has nicknamed Notre-Dame-des-Tuyaux for its bright pop-art pipeworks. To the south are
Notre-Dame and the Hotel de Ville, majestic and beautiful from this angle. The
magnificent reception halls of the Hotel de Ville and the main staircase designed
by Philippe Delorme can be visited only during temporary exhibitions or on guided tours (Mondays at 10.30 am). Rodin’s bust of the Republic, the painted scenes
of Paris life by Willette and the murals by the official painter of the Republic,
Puvis de Chavannes, all testify to the determination of the bourgeois Third
Republic to demonstrate its victory over the proletarian Commune that had burnt
down the Renaissance town hall.
Opposite the Hotei de Ville the BHV (Bazar de I’Hétel de Ville) department
store is the Paris stronghold of do-it-yourself (bricolage) and as such is crammed
with suburbanites every Saturday afternoon, when it becomes a bedlam. During
the Second Empire, Xavier Ruel, a small shopkeeper, set up shop here, which he
called Bazar Napoléon and was the first to launch what today would be termed as
market survey: before choosing the site, he scattered pedlars in different areas of
Paris, supplying them with screws, nails and other trifles to sell, and watched to
see where they would be most successful. It turned out that screws and nails sold
best at the corner of rue des Archives and rue de Rivoli. When Napoleon III fell,
the shop became the Bazar de |’ Hotel de Ville, shortened into BHV in the last 30

years, to suit a new generation pressed for time. Retrace your steps and continue
along rue de la Verrerie, where 17th-century fagades have survived at n°s 48, 50
and 52, which belonged to prominent figures; n° 52 was the home in 1682 of the
Président des enquétes, the presiding judge of investigations.
Turn left into rue des Archives and cross over. At n° 22-24 stands the church of
Les Billettes, on the site of the house of the Jew Jonathas in the second half of the

13th century. In 1290 a woman to whom he had lent money spread the word that
he refused to give her back the clothes she had pawned unless she delivered him
the host received during Holy Communion on Easter Day, in the church of SaintMerri. Once in possession of the host, Jonathas, this enemy of Christianity,

hacked it with a knife and a flow of blood gushed forth. He then threw the host
into a cauldron of boiling water, which turned instantly red, while the host rose

out of the cauldron and hovered above the woman’s head. Panic-stricken, the
woman rushed out of the house, which was surely possessed by the Devil. She
told the entire neighbourhood her story, naturally much embellished, which


inevitably meant that Jonathas would die at the stake. The house was seized by
Philippe le Bel and soon after a chapel called la Chapelle du Miracle, was built
here and given to the Order of the Fréres Hospitaliers de la Charité de NotreDame, who were replaced in the 17th century by the Carmelite Order of Les Billettes. This church too became Protestant after the Revolution and has remained
so. It is normally closed except during chamber music concerts, which are
enhanced by its excellent acoustics. The highlight of the church, however, is its
monastery cloister, which miraculously survived the French Revolution and is
thus the only medieval cloister in Paris. It now houses temporary exhibitions,
sometimes of ethnic artefacts, which look wonderful against this background of
Gothic architecture.
Retrace your steps into rue de la Verrerie. A lovely house of beautiful pink
stone and wrought-iron decoration stands at n° 18, previously the warehouses of
the BHV department store and recently taken over by the Tunisian designer
Alaia. If the premises are open, walk inside to admire the impressive metalwork
and dream over the murals of faraway, sunny lands. Alaia grew up in Tunisia in
the small and modest concierge lodgings of his parents, where he discovered the
world of haute couture through fashion magazines. Inspired particularly by the
Spanish Balenciaga, he taught himself design and eventually ended up in Paris,
but in the up-and-coming Marais rather than in the traditional western parts,
which made sense for someone of the younger generation. Even now that he is
internationally established, Alaia has remained in the Marais, and while most

couturiers display their new creations on the catwalk by the Louvre (and since
1994 on their new premises beneath the Carrousel), Alaia prefers to unveil his
collections in the Marais.
Rue Bourg-Tibourg ahead opens into a lovely square to the right, lined with
trees and cafés. Beyond, on Place Baudoyer, the two tricolours of the Mairie of
the 4th arrondissement and of the police station face each other, respectively to
left and right, against the backdrop of the elegant, subdued facades of rue
Francois-Miron. Rising to the right is the charming old bell-tower of the church
of Saint-Gervais, surmounted by its slate roof. Rue du Bourg-Tibourg, to the left,
is lined with pot-bellied houses that give it an antiquated look, while its vista
closes on to a lovely 17th-century fagade of French classicism at its best.
Turn left into rue Cloche-Perce, a charming spot with its flight of steps on
either side of rue de Rivoli, its old street lamp and the tables and chairs sprinkled
on the pavement outside the café. Continue up to rue Frangois-Miron. On its
right-hand corner, at n°s 11 and 13, are the only two half-timbered houses of

Paris which can be securely dated to the 14th century (the one on rue Volta may
have been a restoration). With their slanting, gabled roofs facing the street, and
the old street sign Le Relais Saint-Gervais, they provide a tiny sample of

medieval Paris, when the gables of houses faced the street (see walks in the 2nd

arr.). Beautiful 18th-century dwellings line the other pavement, from n° 2 to n°
14. The Couperin family, of whom more later, lived at n° 4. At n° 30, at the back

of a little courtyard, which is reached through a corridor, are the vestiges of a
Renaissance mansion, the home of Marie Touchet, Charles IX’s favourite. Hers

was the only son he ever had, and, had he been legitimate, Henri IV would have
never acceded to the throne and the history of France would have taken a different course. After Charles IX’s death, Marie Touchet married Francois de Balzac
d’Entragues by whom she had two daughters. The elder, Henriette, Marquise de

Verneuil, became the mistress of Henri IV.
A century and a half later the notorious Cateau la Borgnesse lived at n° 68, in
the Hétel de Beauvais. Catherine Bellier by her real name, she became chambermaid to Anne of Austria, who must have confided to her about her love life with

Mazarin, and also her concern that her son Louis should not take after his frigid
father, Louis XIII. The chambermaid took the matter in her own hands and
promptly proceeded to initiate the young king in the facts of life, to the delight of
the Queen Mother, who consequently appointed her husband, Pierre Beauvais,
hitherto a mere mercer in the shopping arcade of the Grand Palais, Councillor to
the King and gave him the title of Baron. The new Baron and Baroness were also
granted enough money to build themselves a luxurious mansion and received permission to use the services of the King’s first architect, Antoine Lepautre. They
were even offered the stones that had been meant for the extension of the Louvre.
Mazarin objected, claiming this was going too far, but was overruled. Cateau’s
social climb was so meteoric that Louis XIV’s wedding procession stopped in
front of her hdtel on its way to the Louvre. All the balconies were decorated with
Persian rugs and crowded with members of the court. One was reserved for Anne
of Austria, Henrietta of England (Charles I’s widow) and her daughter Henrietta
of France, scintillating under a red velvet canopy, another for Mazarin and
Turenne, the hero who defeated the princely revolt known as la Fronde. Cateau

was derided by the upper-crust for letting out shops on the ground floor of her
hétel, a practice fit for a commoner only, but she was not bothered by the gossip
and led a dissolute life, attended by an impressive list of lovers, even though she
was said to be ugly and was blind in one eye.
Over a century later, in 1763/4, seven-year-old Mozart stayed at the Hétel de
Beauvais together with his father and sister Nannerl, the guests of the Ambassador of Bavaria, Count Van Eyck, who occupied the hétel at the time. On 1 January 1764, Mozart was introduced to Versailles and acclaimed as a child prodigy.
He for his part, was very frustrated because Madame de Pompadour did not kiss
him.
Retrace your steps and turn right into rue du Pont-Louis-Philippe. Beautiful


people like to gather in the corner Mexican café, La Perla. The street itself has
some very beautiful, expensive boutiques. Turn left into rue du Grenier-sur-l’
Eau,
enhanced by yet another graceful Wallace fountam. The street leads to rue Geoffroy-l’ Asnier, a weavers’ stronghold in the Middle Ages. Across the street, the
17th-century portal of the Hétel Chalons de Luxembourg is of exceptional beauty,
with its majestic lion’s head ensconced in a shell. The knocker with its finely
chiselled horses has also survived. In the 19th century the mansion was divided
into apartments, one of which was occupied by the writer Gabriele d’ Annunzio in
1914. Across the street, at n° 17, stands the Memorial to the unknown Jewish

Martyr. Archives about the calamities that befell the Jews throughout history are
preserved here and can be consulted, while a flame burns permanently in the
crypt, in memory of the 75,000 deportees who never returned from the death
camps during the last war.
Retrace your steps and continue along rue du Grenier-sur-l’Eau and up to the
back of the church of Saint-Gervais-Saint-Portalis, which stands on top of a
mound - a ravishing sight. As you turn left into rue des Barres you will see, to the
south, steps leading down to the river and café terraces, so welcoming in warm

weather. The mound rising above what was then marshland was picked out as the
site for the first church in this area, built in the 6th century to serve a population
of fishermen and boatmen. It was named after the twin brothers Gervais and Portalis, who had been martyred by Nero in Milan, but is nowadays commonly
referred to as Saint-Gervais. Like all the early churches in Paris, it was probably
destroyed by the Norsemen. Only when the new Paris became prosperous and
secure on its right bank was there need for a parish church. Construction began in
the late 15th century by the famous Chambiges but it was not officially completed
until 1657, partly because of the uneven soil, perhaps also for lack of funds.
Hence its various styles, from a post-medieval bell-tower to a typical 17th-century fagade (on the other side of the church), made up of three storeys, superimposing successively the Ionic, Doric and Corinthian styles. This was the first one of
its kind in Paris and elicited Voltaire’s remark, “this is a masterpiece, lacking
only a square to hold its admirers.” Being the only parish church in the area, it
also served the population of the Marais. Marie de Rabutin was married here to
the Marquis de Sévigné on 4 August 1644, at 2 in the morning as was customary
among the nobility, while both the poet Scarron and the painter Philippe de
Champaigne were buried here. The Revolution caused the church considerable
damage, but worse was to come on 29 March 1918, on Holy Friday, during mass,
when one of Big Bertha’s shells hit the church, killing 50 and injuring 200.
Above all the church of Saint-Gervais is associated with the great Couperin
dynasty, organists from 1656 to 1826. The first Couperin was Louis, an organist
and composer, who was succeeded at the organ by his brother Charles. Charles’s


son, Frangois, was the greatest of them all. Charles devoted a lot of time to the
musical education of his only child and took him to the church to listen to the
organ. So great was Frangois’s precocious talent that, when he was only 11, the
clergy of Saint-Gervais made an official pledge, signed before a notary, that he
would succeed to his father’s chair. His father died unexpectedly the same year,
however, and Frangois was deemed too young for the task. Michel-Richard Delalande offered to act as a regent out of sheer admiration for the young Couperin,
who for the time being became the organist of Saint-Jacques-la-Boucherie, which
stood along the pilgrimage route to Santiago de Compostela, in the butchers’
neighbourhood. (Its tower survived the Revolution and still stands on Boulevard
de Sébastopol, just north of Place du Chatelet. Pascal made use of its altitude in
1648 for his experiments on gravity.) When six years later, Delalande was called
upon for higher functions at La Chapelle Royale, Francois Couperin was given
the chair at Saint-Gervais, although he had to wait to be 21 before he could be

officially confirmed in the post. Francois died in 1733, neglected and ignored by
frivolous Paris, indifferent to such music as the Lecons des Ténébres. The present
organ of the church was built by Clicquot 25 years later and was played by his
son Nicolas, followed by Armand-Louis who was killed accidentally by a bolting
horse in 1789. At this crucial moment in French history, his successor, Pierre-

Louis, was required to compose variations for the revolutionary song Oh, ¢a ira!
which was performed at the time in Notre-Dame and has since been immortalized
by the vibrating voice of Edith Piaf. The last member of the Couperin dynasty
was Pierre-Louis’s daughter Céleste, who died in 1860.

As you walk round to the main entrance of the church, you will notice a shop
that sells monastic produce and artefacts, and some other buildings that belong to
the Compagnons du Devoir. (Their main office is at 82 rue de |’ Hétel-de-Ville,
which runs south of the church.) This guild traces its origin to King Solomon,
who, in legend, assisted by his two foremen Soubise and Maitre Jacques, built the
Temple of Jerusalem. More realistically, Les Compagnons du Devoir are probably descended from the cathedral builders of the Middle Ages. Back in the 16th
century they set up a pension and mutual aid scheme, which points to their precocious social awareness. Today, 4,000 youths throughout France are trained in 20
different branches of the building profession, in the spirit of brotherhood and with
a strong work ethic. Their workmanship is of the highest standard, worthy of the
missions entrusted ‘to them, such as the restoration of France’s most prestigious
historical monuments.
Retrace your steps along rue de |’H6tel-de-Ville. Ahead of you is the glorious
Hotel de Sens described earlier, a stunning sight from this angle too. Turn left and
walk along rue des Nonnains-d’ Hyénes. Ahead, on your left, behind a vast garden
a la francaise, is the extraordinary back fagade of the Hotel d’ Aumont, which


now houses the Tribunal Administratif, at n° 7 rue de Jouy. Designed by the
famous Le Vau for Michel-Antoine Scarron, the poet’s uncle, it was later transformed by Francois Mansart for its new proprietor, Antoine d’ Aumont, Marquis
de Villequier and governor of Paris. Decorated by Simon de Vouet and Charles
Le Brun (Le Brun’s magnificent ceiling has even survived), it was one of the
most superb dwellings in Paris, and housed d‘Aumont’s fabulous art collection.
You simply must return here after dark, when the illuminated Hotel de Sens on
your right and the illuminated Hétel d’ Aumont on your left will afford one of the
most magical sights in Paris.

THE ISLANDS
