hose with extra energy and time, and who like authenticity with little glamour
and no fuss, might visit the western part of the arrondissement, where few
fellow tourists are likely to cross their path.
Starting off from the Temple Métro station once more, make your way west
through rue Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth, the main artery of this small Jewish
enclave. Is it because of its pre-destined name that the street has a Middle Eastern
feel to it, with its cheap, wholesale clothing and fabric shops and its nonchalant
bustle? Its population now is made up predominantly of North African Jews, but
when its synagogue was built in the early 19th century, at n° 15, it was to accommodate the Ashkenazi, not the Sephardi community. Only about 500 Jews were
living in the capital when the Revolution broke out; in 1394 Charles VI had banished them, a ruling reiterated by Louis XIII in 1615 (which suggests that some
had meanwhile returned). In the early 19th century, however, after their laborious
emancipation, they were given equal rights and consequently allowed back into
the capital. Over 2,000 moved in during the First Empire. By 1840 8,000 Jews
were living in Paris; by 1853 there were 20,000. There were only two Ashkenazi
Synagogues in Paris at the time - on rue du Temple and rue des Archives - which
could barely accommodate the influx. Moreover, the one on rue du Temple closed
down in 1818, when the landlord sold the building that housed it. Sandrié de Jouy
was commissioned to build a synagogue on rue Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth, which
was inaugurated in 1822. Its construction, however, proved faulty and 30 years
later it was replaced, with financial aid of James de Rothschild, by the present
synagogue. With the ever-increasing number of Jews in Paris, it soon became
necessary to build an additional synagogue; this was built at rue de la Victoire (in

the 9th arr.) and became the main synagogue of Paris. By the end of the Second
Empire (c. 1870) there were 30,000 Jews in Paris and by the end of the century
40,000.
Turn right into Passage du Pont-aux-Biches; the trickling water of a lovely
Wallace fountain - so called after Sir Richard Wallace, who offered about
such fountains to the city of Paris - will encourage you up its steep flight of
steps.
In rue Meslay, ahead of you, a charming 18th-century fagade has survived
at n°
42 but at n° 46 an ordinary building replaces the house where the writer
George
Sand (Aurore Dupin by her real name) is presumed to have been born
on 1 July
1804. Retrace your steps and continue into rue Volta straight on, then
turn right

into rue Vertbois, evocative of the green woods of days of yore. In August
1814

the English poet Shelley is supposed to have stayed at the Hétel
de Vienne at n°

76 on his way to Switzerland. A kosher fast-food restaurant now stands
on the

site.
Across the street you can see a section of the 13th-century crenellat
ed wall of



PTE ST-MARTIN
! |

P. DU PONT
AUXBICHES
—_
R. NOTRE-DAME DE NAZARETH

REALISATION CARTOGRAPHIQUE : BOUBEKEUR K.


<5

the medieval priory of Saint-Martin-des-Champs and its watch-tower, now surmounted by a ‘pepper-box’ slate roof. The tower owes its miraculous survival to
the determination of Victor Hugo who, in 1882, wrote a letter of protest that
began, “Demolish the tower — no; the architect — yes! ” The tower was restored

the very year, along with the pretty 18th-century fountain next to it.
Like other early Christian shrines of Paris, the priory of Saint-Martin-desChamps originated in the 6th century, with a primitive oratory on the Ile de la
Cité. Like the others it too commemorated the site of a miracle performed by its
patron saint - in this case the healing of a leper by a kiss - in a distant past, and
therefore had more to do with legend than with historical accuracy. In the 8th
century a chapel replaced it north of the island, but this was torn down by the
Normans a century later, together with the rest of Paris. The priory was not built
until the 12th century. Situated some distance from the city, it was secured with a

rampart, four corner watch-towers and 18 turrets. It also had a gaol, the scene of a —
savage massacre of the Armagnacs by the Bourguignons during the Hundred
Years’ War. At the time of Louis XIV prostitutes captured on the neighbouring
streets were kept here to await deportation to New Orleans. In September 1719,
180 male prisoners were brought here from the prison of Bicétre in the 13th
arrondissement, to be married to 180 women. The couples were then chained to
one another and marched to La Rochelle on the Atlantic shores, from where they
embarked for Louisiana.
The monks of Saint-Martin played a major role in the development of this part
of the arrondissement and also gave the kingdom some renowned churchmen,
notably the Cardinal de Richelieu; but all this came to an end with the Revolution
and in 1798 the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers, which had been founded in
1794 like several other majour schools, was granted the premises (enter from n°
292 rue Saint-Martin).
Rue Saint-Martin lies on the ancient Roman road from Lutetia to the north and
is a continuation of the Roman cardo (main urban street), rue Saint-Jacques south

of the Seine. To the north is the Porte Saint-Martin, the triumphal arch built by

Louis XIV to celebrate his victories over the Franche-Comté, the Germans, the
Spanish and the Dutch. If you walk up close, you will see the sculpted figure of

the Sun King in the nude as the invincible, muscular Hercules, but bewigged as
always. Louis XV passed under this emblematic monument on his return from

Flanders, Napoleon on his return from Austerlitz and the Allies after the battle of

Waterloo... When the focal point of the city shifted to the west, the Arc de Triomphe on the Champs-Elysées replaced it as the symbolic ceremonial arch.

The priory church is one of the rare medieval churches still in existence in
Paris. Dating largely from the 12th and 13th centuries, it boasts the first example
of Gothic rib vaults in the capital, although the windows of its chapels, with their

semi-circular vaults, are Romanesque. The church tower is gone, except for its
Romanesque base, which can be seen from rue Réaumur. The highlight of the
building is the Gothic dining hall, now the library of the Conservatoire. This masterpiece of ethereal lightness is mercifully - unlike so many other treasures - not
officially closed to the public, but should be entered discreetly, as it is a reading
room. In the wall opposite the pulpit is the 13th-century door that used to lead to
its fine cloister, shamefully demolished in the early 18th century. On the premises
(n° 270) is also the Musée National des Techniques, part of which is located in
the old church of Saint-Martin. An impressive and enlightening display of inventions will enable the visitor to follow man’s technological adventure through the
centuries — from the sun dial to satellites from the first standard units for measures and weights to the early recordings and early cinema, from steam engines to
Blériot’s aircraft with which he was the first to cross the English Channel in
1909 — it is all there in neat, methodical order, yet exciting nonetheless.
At n° 254 the parish church of the borough of Saint-Martin, Saint-Nicolas-desChamps, provides a fine example of the evolution from the Gothic to the Renaissance style. It has preserved, notably, its Renaissance portal on the south side, and
most of its picturesque tower dates back to the early 15th century. Among the
parishioners buried here should be mentioned Mlle de Scudéry, who died in 1701
aged 94, Guillaume de Budé, the founder of the Collége de France who died in

1540, the father and uncle of La Bruyére, the author of the indispensable
Caractéres and some members of the Ormesson family. The renowned 18th-century actor, Talma, was baptized here.

Turn left into rue Réaumur and left into rue Turbigo for a view of the back of
the church. Continue along rue Turbigo to the junction of rue Volta and rue des
Fontaines-du-Temple. The area between rue Vertbois, rue Volta and rue des
Fontaines-de-Temple (up to n° 6) was the vast domain of the convent of the
Madelonnettes, of which the only surviving vestige is a section of the walls, visible at n° 6. The convent was built in 1618 for the purpose of saving the souls of
fallen women who, it was hoped, would follow the example of Mary Magdalen
after whom they were named. Women of all kinds were locked up here for various shades of misdemeanour, or for none. Madame de Lescalopier, for example,
was caught while riding on horseback to elope with her lover and was dispatched
to this “fatal tombeau des amourettes” (“fatal tomb of passing love affairs”) - as
reported by the contemporary poet, Loret. Ninon Lenclos, its most notorious
inmate, was locked up by Anne of Austria to put an end to the commotion she
created among the greats of the court and of the capital, despite protestations that
' she was “neither a whore nor repented”. When it was rumoured that her suitors,
languishing outside the walls, were planning to burn the place down, a patrol
went the rounds every night, until the authorities deemed it more prudent to


remove her from Paris, to a convent in Lagny, further east. Whereas ladies of

quality had their own private, heated rooms, plenty of food and the company of
visitors, life at the Madelonnettes for the lower orders was no picnic. When the
premises (a women’s prison since the Revolution) were being demolished in
1868, a number of skeletons were found under a trap-door behind one of the
church pillars, suggesting that some rebellious detainees had been kept there to
die.
:
Retrace your steps and turn left into rue Volta across rue Réaumur. The street
now narrows and passes through an area where the Chinese predominantly hold
sway, particularly on the right-hand side of the street; on the left-hand side the
North African Mustapha holds his own and serves couscous. An astonishing
anachronistic sight awaits you at n° 3 : a Chinese restaurant and a Chinese hairstylist share a medieval half-timbered house, some say the oldest house in Paris,
built several centuries before the reign of Louis XIV, when the first Chinaman

was introduced into France. At the end of the 13th century the house may have
belonged to the bailiff of the borough of Saint-Martin. This Chinese community
is the oldest in Paris, descended from immigrants who arrived during World
War I, and now as then are generally small traders, as you will notice on rues Le
Maire and Gravilliers. Most Parisians have never heard of this tiny Chinatown in
the 13th-century borough of Saint-Martin (rue au Maire, incidentally, refers to the
Mayor of the borough and rue des Vertus to its prostitution). The inhabitants cater
to their own people, in the way of food and Chinese video tapes, but also to outsiders, selling inexpensive leather goods and imitation jewellery, thereby perpetuating the traditional trades of the Temple. To finish your walk you could join
them for a no-nonsense meal in one of the Chinese restaurants.


—

