he last walk will take us to the two islands, the Ile de la Cité, at the foot of
Notre-Dame, and to the Ile Saint-Louis - the ultimate jewel. Cité Métro station, next to Boulevard du Palais, will be our starting point. Having wandered
through the flower market by way of rue de Lutéce, and enjoyed its riot of colours
(except on Sundays, when the flowers give way to birds, and on Mondays, when
it is closed), turn right into rue de la Cité which leads to the esplanade (parvis) of
Notre-Dame, enlarged to its present size in the 19th century by the Baron Haussmann and is now named Place du Parvis Notre-Dame. In the Middle Ages, when
it was only a sixth this size, the people of Paris were awestruck by the overwhelming height of its towers as they crowded at their feet. The equestrian statue
of Charlemagne stands imposingly in front of the cathedral to the right. Of particular interest is the underground museum that displays the finds of archaeological
digs undertaken here. These are beautifully illuminated and will enlighten you
about ancient Lutetia.
Bordering the esplanade to the north is the Hétel-Dieu, the oldest hospital in
Paris and for centuries its only hospital. When it was built in the 12th century, it
was situated on the southern side of the esplanade, from where it expanded gradually to occupy the whole area between the Petit Pont and the Pont au Double. The
Bishop of Paris, Maurice de Sully, undertook its construction, at the same time as

that of the cathedral of Notre-Dame. This enterprising man was born into a very
poor family in Sully-sur-Loire in 1120; in 1165 he baptized the Dauphin, the
future Philippe-Auguste. An earlier hospital and a chapel stood here back in the
9th century, both bearing the name of Saint-Christophe. They too must have been
swept away by the Norsemen. Maurice de Sully ordered each canon of NotreDame to contribute a bed to the hospital when he died, a welcome initiative at a
time when five patients shared one bed, as was the case well into the 18th centu-

ry. It was also only at this relatively recent date that patients were separated
according to sex and disease. The hospital enjoyed the protection of the Crown

E
g
e
i be
g

i

~

@

NiIS
Ley
roy

yz
E
:

—_

S


and, when Philippe-Auguste left for the Crusade, he magnanimously offered the
hospital the straw of the vacated horse stables as extra bedding. Saint Louis, and
his mother Blanche de Castille ruled that anyone in need be admitted, regardless
of sex, nationality or religion, except those afflicted by contagious diseases. By
this time, efforts were also being made to reduce the number of patients per bed
to three, hence the sarcastic observation, “each bed is shared by three — the ill, the

dying and the dead.” In the 17th century, the hospital expanded to the Left Bank,
connected by way of the Pont au Double. Bridges were often built on at the time,
and the Pont au Double had a glass gallery, which served as a promenade for the
patients. A narrow corridor for pedestrians ran along the hospital premises, allowing Parisians to cross the river for the price of a double farthing, hence the name
of the bridge. The hospital was moved to its present location during the radical
transformation of Paris at the time of the Baron Haussmann.
And now for Notre-Dame. The cathedral is all the more venerated by visitors as
they believe it to be one of the oldest standing vestiges of medieval Paris. However, most of what you see is the work of Viollet-le-Duc dating from the 19th century only. Many of the cathedral’s treasures were simply done away with because
they were no longer in vogue, notably the gorgeous chancel screen, the high altar
and the tombs, all of which disappeared in 1699. In the middle of the 18th century
the fabulous 13th-century stained-glass windows were replaced by plain glass so
as to bring in more light, but some of the original glass of the two rose windows
is still there. The one on the western fagade was studded with gold stars against
an azure background, providing a halo for a statue of Virgin and Child flanked by
two angels, each bearing a chandelier. On the night of Sexagesima, the chandeliers would be lighted with candles and all the priests of Notre-Dame in their cassocks would gather on the parvis to sing litanies throughout the night.
Whatever was spared over the generations hitherto, was looted and profaned
during the French Revolution. The bare, dilapidated edifice that remained standing was dedicated to Reason and the esplanade became known as le Parvis de la
Raison. When Napoleon chose this symbolic shrine for his coronation in 1804,
the walls had to be draped with hangings to make up for their bareness. That they
were standing at all was a miracle, for the cathedral had been earmarked for

demolition and put up for sale. A potential buyer had even been found, the
‘Citoyen Simon’, Claude-Henri de Rouvroi Saint-Simon by his previous name, a
member of the same family as the duke and writer of Memoirs, and who was later
to found the utopian Saint-Simonian sect. Fortunately circumstances prevented
the sale of Notre-Dame from proceeding.
By the early 19th century the Romantic movement had aroused a growing interest in medieval values and a revival in taste for the Gothic, which had been


spurned only recently. Victor Hugo undoubtedly deserves most of the credit for
bringing the plight of Notre-Dame to the attention of the public in 1831 through
his novel The Hunchback of Notre Dame. At his instigation a temporary restoration committee was set up by the poet Alfred de Vigny, the painter Ingres and the
Catholic politician Montalembert. A competition for a contract to restore the
cathedral was launched in 1844 and won jointly by Viollet-le-Duc and Lassus,
but the latter soon died and Viollet-le-Duc alone remained in charge of the colossal enterprise. A past master in the art of restoration, his conception, however,

was that restoring “does not mean maintaining a building. It has to be re-established in a complete state that could never have existed before.” Thus the southern side of the cathedral, with the sacristy and guard’s house, are typically
19th-century and the dainty steeple, together with its profusion of graceful floral
designs, was ‘homemade’ by Viollet-le-Duc. However, the gargoyles and the
other statues on the walls, all have a medieval appearance, as does the ‘Gothic’
furniture inside, most of it designed after old drawings. Restoration work finished
in 1864 and the cathedral was consecrated on 31 May. By May 1871 it was again
under threat. ‘The bloody week’, the climax of the civil war of the Commune,

began on 24 May: all the benches and barriers were piled up in the centre of the
nave and sprayed with petrol. The house doctors of the Hétel-Dieu were alerted
just in time to rush in and extinguish the fire. It seems that Adolf Hitler too
intended to destroy Notre-Dame to mark the end of his occupation of the coveted
city.
As you approach the western facade, try to picture the polychrome statues of
yore, standing out against a background of gold. 28 statues are lined up above the
three portals, representing the 28 Kings of Judah. These are reproductions of the
original medieval statues, smashed by the Revolutionaries who mistook them for
the Kings of France, an understandable confusion shared by the inhabitants of the
15th century. Indeed, an engraving from that time represents two passers-by
admiring what they take to be statues of Pépin le Bref and Charlemagne, while a
shrewd rogue takes advantage of their absent-mindedness to steal their purse. The
Kings of Judah are celebrated because Jesus descended from their dynasty; nevertheless, the church’s traditional animosity to the Jews is also evident: engraved on
the stone under this row of statues is the defeated Synagogue, characteristically
blindfolded, with the triumphant church standing on her right (on our left).
There is no doubt that Notre-Dame was meant to please the ear as well as the
eye, and its two medieval towers resounded to the peals of many bells. All the
seven bells of the northern tower were melted down during the Revolution. In the
- southern tower there were two huge bells - Marie, likewise gone, and Jacqueline,
which has survived, a gift to the Lord from Jean de Montagu for having blessed
his wife Jacqueline with a daughter. When the bell was brought down to be


alloyed with bronze, during the reign of Louis XIV, the ladies of the kingdom are
said to have brought along their own jewellery to be melted down at the same
time: this, according to some, accounts for the purity of Jacqueline’s peal. Inside
the cathedral a Cavaillé-Coll organ resounds on many occasions and has been
played by the greatest of French organists, notably Pierre Cochereau, its regular
organist until his death in 1984. Back in the late 15th century and the early 16th,
Léonin and Pérotin founded the polyphonic school here.
Running along the northern side of the cathedral, rue du Cloitre Notre-Dame is
full of tourist paraphernalia, its cafés inevitably commemorating Victor Hugo’s
heroes Casimodo and Esmeralda. But the street also boasts quaint old houses
along the alley at n° 16. At n° 10 is the cathedral’s museum, repository of documents, particularly from the 17th century. The cloister of Notre Dame was a veritable town surrounded by walls, inhabited by peaceful canons and canonesses,
who waited here serenely and in total seclusion to be called back to God for eternal rest. However, after 1354 no women were allowed in, except for matrons who

tended the ill. The canons were allotted 37 houses, as well as a pleasant garden on
the eastern tip of the island. When one of them departed, the family would have
to clear his belongings within a fortnight, after which the house was put in good
repair and sold to another canon. The canons were highly respected, learned
churchmen, and many top members of the ecclesiastical hierarchy came from
their ranks, including Popes Grégoire IX and X, Adrien V, Boniface VIII,
Clement VI, Innocent VI, 29 Cardinals and a great number of Bishops. Opposite
the present n° 18 was the church of Saint-Jean-le-Rond, on the threshold of which
an abandoned baby was found on 16 November 1717. The baby’s mother was
Madame Tencin, a one-time canoness, his father a chevalier named Destouches.

The baby himself grew up to be the illustrious Encyclopédiste, d’ Alembert. In her
younger days Madame Tencin had had numerous lovers including the Regent. As
she grew older, she opted for a more spiritual existence and presided over one of
the most prestigious literary salons in the capital.
Turn left into rue Chanoinesse, a serene and peaceful artery, of which tourists
who flock to the cathedral are, mercifully, unaware. Notice in particular the two
houses on the opposite sides of rue des Chantres - the countrified house at n° 10
with its picturesque shutters and its top terrace, bursting with green vegetation,
and the elegant 17th-century mansion with its beautiful wrought-iron decoration.
In the year 1118, the house that stood on the site of the present n° 10 was occupied by the canon Fulbert: it was a substantial property with grounds extending
along rue des Chantres, probably as far as the site of 9 quai aux Fleurs along the
river. In that fateful year Fulbert welcomed into his home both his niece, the 17year-old Héloise, who was related to the great Montmorency family, and Pierre
Abélard, then 39 years old. It made sense to the canon that his niece should bene-


fit from the remarkable knowledge and intelligence of this great master of
rhetoric and dialectics, a disciple of Guillaume de Champeaux, and he therefore

asked Abélard to take charge of her education. He omitted to take into consideration the forces of nature and the fact that Pierre Abélard had great charisma
(which is why throngs of students followed him to the Left Bank when he settled
there). Pierre was handsome, brilliant, a poet and an accomplished musician.
Master and pupil ended up in each other’s arms, and before long Héloise was
pregnant and had to be sent to Brittany to have her baby out of society’s sight.
Fulbert meanwhile awaited his opportunity for vengeance and, when it came,
took Abélard unawares and castrated him. From then on the love between
Abélard and Héloise became as mythical as that of Tristan and Isolde, an impossible love that was neither accepted by the establishment nor fulfilled and therefore
could not even become an act of defiance. Salvation could lie only in death,

except that in this case it was a true story:
It so happens that they both died at the age of 63. Just before Héloise died, she
secretly recovered the body of Abélard and brought it over to the oratory of Parclet, which she had founded near Nogent-sur-Seine. On her death, their bodies
were laid in the same coffin and remained so for two and a half centuries, until

1497, when the oratory of Parclet was threatened with ruin and the coffin was
moved to the church of Petit-Moustiers. Here a prudish nun separated their
remains and laid them in two separate tombs. The Revolutionary authorities united them again in a single coffin, in 1792, but fixed a lead partition between them,
then sent them back to Nogent-sur-Seine. Meanwhile Alexandre Lenoir was filling his newly created museum of French monuments with whatever he could rescue from the clutches of the Revolution and transferred the famous lovers to it. In
1817 they were deposited in the church of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, though not for
long. The new cemetery Le Pére Lachaise, on the eastern edge of Paris, was trying to enhance its prestige among the bourgeoisie of western Paris, as yet reluctant to lay its dead in those remote plebeian parts and was looking for illustrious
tenants. The monument was therefore transferred to Pére Lachaise the same year.
At last, the lovers found a permanent abode in what has since become the 7th
division of the cemetery, in the unlikely company of Paris’s 19th-century bourgeoisie. In 1844 two medallions representing the two lovers were fixed to the
door at n° 9 quai aux Fleurs.
Rue des Chantres is a silent, narrow, romantic alley, enchanting by night, when

lit up by the street lamps affixed to its houses. The flight of steps at the end of the
street, leading up to the river, and the church tower of Saint-Gervais, across the
“Seine, complete this exquisite picture. Next on your left is rue Massillon, with a
La
beautiful 18th-century house at n° 8, the home of the cathedral’s choir school,
present
the
with
replaced
and
1455
in
here
founded
first
,
Maitrise de Notre-Dame


premises in 1740. As you make your way back to rue Chanoinesse, take in the
picturesque view of slanting roofs and attic windows rising above a solid wall and
nestling among the branches of an old tree, filled with the song of birds. Continue
along rue Chanoinesse. N° 22 is an elongated, squat, rustic-looking house and the
restaurant La Lieutenance, with its colourful flags, tries to recreate the illusion of

medieval times. It is particularly lovely at night.
Retrace your steps on rue Chanoinesse, so pretty from this angle. Beyond rue
Massillon the street curves gently to the right and runs parallel to the bend of the
river. Beyond the curve, the back of Notre-Dame will appear in all its splendour,
framed with trees and enhanced by the brick building at n° 1, decorated with
colourful ceramic. Ahead, lying along the river, is the pleasant garden of NotreDame, Square Jean XXIII. This breath-taking cityscape is scandalously marred by
the lines of tourist coaches that are allowed to park along rue de 1’ Archevéché, _
and by the recent constructions that now clutter the skyline. Rue de 1’ Archevéché
is an insult in itself, having been carved into the garden to siphon off traffic. If
you can focus solely on rue des Bernardins (the continuation of rue de
l Archevéché that climbs up the hill on the Left Bank), you will comprehend the
compact nature of the medieval city, tightly huddled at the foot of Notre-Dame.
The garden continues beyond rue de 1’ Archevéché under the name Square de
l’Ile-de-France. To the west you will see the back of Notre-Dame and its graceful
spire, to the east is the timeless scenery of the Ile Saint-Louis with its weeping
willow bowing to meet the waters of the Seine. At the very tip of the garden and
thus of the island, facing the bejewelled Ile Saint-Louis and the rising sun, is the

crypt of the Memorial of the Deportation, washed by the lapping waters of the
Seine. It shelters the tomb of the Unknown Deportee. Respectfully austere, the
bare, raw stone that covers the walls matches the bare, raw wounds inflicted upon
the victims’ bodies and souls. Spear-like motifs in the black iron evoke the memory of those whose flesh was lacerated by the Nazi torturers. There is no superfluous pathos in this place, just a few lines engraved into the bare walls to sanctify
the innocent, often those of poet Robert Desnos, who died in Theresienstadt (now
in the Czech Republic), just when the Allies were liberating the camp.

The pedestrian bridge will take you to the tiny Ile Saint-Louis, our ultimate destination and Paris at its best: colourful food shops and eating places, boutiques in
impeccable taste, four gem-like hotels are united into this miniature world,
enhanced by an overall 17th-century architectural unity that would put the rest of
Paris to shame. Occasional scars and eyesores exist here too, but so much of the
old heritage has been preserved that they are not obvious to the untrained eye. In
the 17th century the two uninhabited islands were joined into the Ile Saint-Louis
and built up. The canons of Notre-Dame, who hitherto relaxed in the western


island, fought off development but were defeated by the urbanisation of Paris,
which accelerated during the latter peaceful part of the reign of Francois I and
exploded into a fever at the time of Louis XIII and Louis XIV:
Toute une ville entiére, avec pompe bdatie
Semble d’un vieux fossé par miracle sortie
(An entire city, built with pomp, seems miraculously
to have sprung out of an old ditch),
as Pierre Corneille wrote in Le Menteur in 1643, with the I’Ile Saint-Louis in
mind. Of course, a stretch of land in such a central location could not continue
forever to be a place of recreation, even though the loose soil was unsuitable for

construction and costly reclamation was necessary. Moreover, the two islands had
to be united and bridges erected. Hence the Pont-Marie, which commemorates the
first entrepreneur of the project, Christophe Marie (not Marie de Medici, the
Queen Mother, as is often believed, though she was indeed very much involved in
the development of the island). The saintly woman represented in the sculpture on
the Pont de la Tournelle, in the continuation of Pont-Marie, is not the Holy Virgin
either, as others deduce, but Geneviéve, patron of Paris.

The construction on the island was largely undertaken by the most prestigious
architects of the day, predominantly by Louis Le Vau, to suit the demands of the
prominent members of society who settled here. The houses had narrow facades
because of shortage of land on the island, but they made up for this by being quite
deep, as you can see when occasionally you come upon an unlocked door. The
most talented painters decorated these homes, but, unfortunately, little is left of
their magnificent work, and what remains is in private hands.
It took less than a century to complete the work and by the end of the 17th century the entire island was covered with hdtels of almost austere classical beauty,
which brought out the lovely texture of their stone and their graceful wroughtiron decorations. By the end of the 18th century Louis Sébastien Mercier could
write: “The island is a quarter hemmed in by the river and separated from the
Cité. It seems to have escaped the great corruption of the town, which has not yet
penetrated here. No girl of easy virtue can find lodgings here: no sooner is she
found out than she is expelled. The bourgeois keep an eye on each other [...] It
has been said accurately: the inhabitant of the Marais is an outsider on the
island.”
Turn left into quai de Bourbon and walk to the tip of the island — a romantic
haven with a ravishing view over the Ile de la Cité. All the houses from n° 53 to
“n° 41 were built by Francois Le Vau, brother of the great Louis (n° 53 and n° 43
were actually built by both), hence their homogeneous features. N° 43, built for
their sister Anne Le Vau, came to be known as La Maison du Centaure because a


bas-relief (now badly eroded) representing Hercules about to strike Nessus was
carved on its fagade. When the Ile Saint-Louis became popular with literati, Guillaume Apollinaire lived here for a while, and was visited by Marie Laurencin, his
companion, and by Francis Carco and Max Jacob among others. His apartment
window gave onto a spectacular panorama, encompassing the Louvre on the right
and the mound of the Latin Quarter, La Montagne Sainte-Geneviéve, on the left.

Francois Le Vau sold n° 51 next door to Jean-Baptiste de Champaigne, nephew
of the famous court painter Philippe de Champaigne. An artist in his own right,
Jean-Baptiste was in charge of the decoration of the island’s church of SaintLouis-en-I’Ile. The Hotel de Jassaud at n° 19, on the corner of rue Le Regrattier,

was the home of Nicolas de Jassaud, secretary to Louis XIV. Having received a
substantial inheritance from his uncle and a no less substantial dowry from his
wife, he could afford to build himself this masterpiece of equilibrium and grace,
undoubtedly the most beautiful héte/ on the quai de Bourbon. The fagade needs to be seen from a distance to be fully appreciated, and is also in need of a face-lift to
bring out the ochre of its stone and the fine wrought-iron balcony on the first
floor. Camille Claudel lived in a ground-floor studio at the back of the courtyard
from 1899 to 1913, when she was tragically interned in a mental home. The
wrought iron grilles fixed to the ground-floor windows of n° 15 date from the
early years when the island was not quite a safe place at night. You can see how
far the building has subsided, owing to the unstable quality of the soil. However,
the houses on the island are not in danger of collapsing because they are supported by one another. The painter Emile Bernard, the father of symbolism and an
important member of the group of Pont-Aven, lived here from the late 19th century until his death in 1941. N° 11 was built for the painter Philippe de Champaigne
but, since he was the court portrait painter and Marie de Medici’s first valet, he
lived most of the time in her palace, the Palais du Luxembourg (now in the 6th
arr.).

At the corner of rue des Deux-Ponts, the restaurant Au Franc Pinot prides itself
on its fare and on its long history, which began in the 17th century, when it
catered to passengers arriving by boat from Melun and to boatmen who dropped
in for a pint of red wine. The shop that stood at n° 3 closed down in 1913 and its
beautiful wooden panelling was transferred to the Metropolitan Museum in New
York, where it serves as a background to the 18th-century French silverware display. Rue des Deux-Ponts runs along the old moat that divided the island into two
in the 13th century. When it was filled up in the 17th century, a narrow street was
laid out and, as elsewhere, was lined with elegant houses. The street was ruined in

1930 when it was widened, allowing traffic to furrow through the island, and by
the late 1960s two drab blocks of flats trespassed on this former architectural
shrine.


Cross over and continue along the quai d’ Anjou, where you will find the two
most prestigious dwellings on the island, the Hétel de Lauzan at n° 17, with its
gilded wrought-iron balcony and the gilded fish-scale decorations on its water
spouts, and the Hétel Lambert, at n° 1. The Hétel de Lauzan is attributed to Louis

Le Vau and became the property of the Duc de Lauzan in 1682, although he hardly had time to live here, having fallen from favour along with Nicolas Fouquet
and likewise been consigned to the fortress of Vignerol. In the 19th century the
mansion was divided up into apartments and often let to artists and bohemians,
disrespectful of both premises and neighbours. Charles Baudelaire, Théophile
Gautier and other members of the Club des Haschichins surrendered here to the
artificial paradise of hashish. To one remonstrating neighbour Baudelaire wrote in
1840, “Sir, I chop up wood in my living-room, I drag my mistress about by her
hair; this is done in everybody’s home and you have no right to interfere.” Nevertheless, it was here that Baudelaire wrote the first poems of Les Fleurs du Mal. In
1928 the City of Paris purchased the mansion, thereby saving it from demolition,
and undertook its restoration, notably the allegorical paintings on the ceiling
above the monumental staircase and the dainty friezes above the doors with their
chubby, curly-headed cupids, all attributed to Charles Le Brun. True to the style
of the reign of Louis XIV, the profusion of luxury is stunning, reaching its peak
in the petit boudoir, where the judicious use of mirrors triggers off an endless
succession of reflections of polychrome exuberance. Unfortunately, the house is
open only to the guests of the City of Paris.
The quai d’ Anjou was in great demand among artists because of its tranquillity
and the beautiful architecture left by Louis Le Vau. The famous landscape painter
Daubigny lived at n° 13 from 1837 to 1845, followed later by his friend, the
sculptor Geoffroy Deschaume, who was working on the restoration of NotreDame with Viollet-le-Duc. Honoré Daumier lived at n° 9 from 1846 to 1863. A
century earlier the Marquis de Marigny, brother of the Pompadour, came to live
at n° 7, a beautiful, austere building of wonderfully textured stone, the facade of
which follows gracefully the bend of the quai. The original owner of the building
was an ironmonger, which again goes to show that even a rigid hierarchy has
occasionai lapses. Since 1843 this has been the headquarters of the bakers’ union.
The mansion at n° 3, which Louis Le Vau reserved for himself, also has a facade
that follows the curve of the quai, at its sharpest bend, where it adjoins the Hotel

Lambert, his masterpiece and the island’s best known landmark. The actress
Michéle Morgan once lived here, but it has belonged to the Rothschilds since
1976. Its glorious rotunda-shaped wrought-iron balcony is best admired from the
river as all those who have been on a boat ride know. The first Lambert to be connected with the mansion, Jean-Baptiste Lambert de Thorigny, died before it was


completed and the house went to his brother Nicolas. The greatest talents of the
day - Le Brun, Eustache Le Sueur, Patel - were brought in to create an extraordinary interior, which would have disappeared if Prince Adam Czartorisky had not
bought the house by auction in 1842 and maintained it respectfully, as have the
Rothschilds since. Unlike most of the mansions in Paris, which now house
offices, Hétel Lambert remains a private residence.
The Hétel de Bretonvilliers, by contrast, its neighbour on the quai de Béthune,

across rue Saint-Louis-en-l’Isle, did not survive at all. It was said by contemporaries to be beautiful beyond words and for 200 years the most splendid mansion
on the island. Engravings by shuch artists as Israé] Silvestre and Nicolas
Raguenet (now at the Musée Carnavalet) confirm Tallement des Réaux’s view
that “This hétel and its garden enjoyed the best location in the world after the
Seraglio of Byzantium.” The owner of the hétel was Claude Le Ragois de Bre- _
tonvilliers, secretary to the King’s Council, and Tallemant des Réaux went on to
report, with some glee, that his wife was “very beautiful, cuckolded him, even

beat him at times and shrieked a lot, although she had brought him no dowry.”
During the French Revolution the hétel was confiscated and awarded as first prize
in the national lottery organized by the Convention. Soon after it was divided up
and the magnificent decorations by Nicolas Poussin, Nicolas Mignard, Simon
Vouet and Sébastien Bourdon were dispersed. The garden survived until the
1860s, when Haussmann’s bulldozer was working to full capacity and swept it
away. A new bridge, the Pont de Sully, the Boulevard Henri IV and the Square
Barye, were integrated into the new landscape. Walk into rue de Bretonvilliers.
Whereas many streets of Paris were laid out after a property had been chopped
up, rue de Bretonvilliers was part of the property, serving the back of the hétel
and three of the houses across the street. These communicated with his mansion
by way of the three-storeyed house surmounting an arcade, in front of you. A less
happy sight will meet your eyes when you retrace your steps and notice that a
chunk of the Institut du Monde Arabe now blocks the horizon like some glass
rampart. Time and again in contemporary Paris overall aesthetics have been overlooked and vistas wrecked, thus destroying precisely those features that have
made Paris one of the most breath-taking cities in the world.
Quai de Béthune perpetuates the name of Maximilien de Béthune, Henri IV’s
minister, better known as the Duc de Sully. Both the King and his minister are
generously commemorated in this neighbourhood, because of its proximity to the
Arsenal, where Sully lived. The quai was originally known as quai des Balcons
because Louis Le Vau wanted a balcony on each facade. Although not everyone
followed this precept, there are certainly more balconies here than elsewhere. The
elegant n° 16/18 belonged to the gallant Duc de Richelieu or to his widow and
later to their descendants. It too was magnificently appointed but eventually parti-


tioned into apartments and for many years its second floor was occupied by the
writer Francis Carco, who died here in 1958, leaving behind invaluable accounts
of lower-class Paris in the first half of this century.
N®s 20 and 22 are further examples of 17th-century elegance, with grand staircases hidden behind locked doors. N° 20 has a magnificent ceiling, painted by
Mignard. More unforgivable damage was wrought in 1935, when Helena Rubinstein bought Louis Le Vau’s fabulous mansion at n° 24 and replaced it with the
present uninspiring block of flats. The beautiful door by Etienne Le Hongre was
retained at the entrance, by way of meagre consolation. President Pompidou lived
in one of these flats, where he and his wife amassed an excellent collection of
contemporary works of art. He died here in 1974. Between 1912 and 1934 Marie
Curie lived at n° 36, on the corner of rue des Deux-Ponts, and later René Cassin,

the 1968 Nobel Peace Prize winner. Beyond rue des Deux-Pont lies the fourth and
last of the quais, the quai d’ Orléans, a delightful stretch facing the back of NotreDame and its gardens. At n° 6 is the Polish museum named after the exiled poet
Adam Mickiewicz and founded by his son Ladislas in 1903. It is dedicated to the
Romantic period and houses many documents relating to Chopin. There is also a
reading library belonging to the Polish historical and literary society.
Make your way to our starting point and turn right into rue Saint-Louis-en-l’Ile,
the main artery of the island, which runs along its central axis from east to west.
This is the village high street, where the locals do their shopping, and a delightful
place in the first half of the morning, before the trickle of tourists turns, as the day
wears on, into a mass invasion. The huge and pre-medieval looking restaurant
Nos Ancétres les Gaulois, at n° 39, is full to capacity every night with tourist parties enjoying a country-style buffet, washed down with red wine from the barrel.
Their time, however, is allocated, so as to make room for other fellow-tourists in

the latter half of the evening. It is noisy, it is fun, it is kitsch, and everybody
seems to enjoy it.
:
Besides the wonderful shops, which are an attraction in themselves, the street
has four exquisite hotels, usually, it must be said, fully booked well in advance.

The first three are on your right-hand side and have a countrified feel. The fourth
is at n° 54 across the street, but you may first wish to see the island’s church,
which displays a unique spire with an openwork design and an original clock. The
church was designed by Louis Le Vau (yet again!), but, because it took over 50
years to complete, by the time it was finished in 1726, it had been excessively
decorated in the Jesuit style. The hotel at n° 54 is called Hétel du Jeu de Paume
because it occupies an old jeu de paume, the very popular ancestor of tennis and
squash, which gradually went out of fashion at the time of Louis XIV. The hotel
owners have preserved the old timber skeleton of the building and added a glasswalled lift, unfolding a panoramic view of the premises as the guests go up to


their rooms. Decorations are in impeccably good taste and the surroundings leafy
and tranquil. The visitor is guaranteed an unforgettable stay.
Whether you are a visitor or among the privileged few who reside here, the Ile
Saint-Louis should be savoured like a glass of good wine and must include a taste
of Bertillon’s ice-cream from one of its stands, preferably from the one on the
western tip of the island that faces the back of Notre-Dame. Here, on a hot sum-

mer day, you will join an endless queue of strollers, waiting patiently in the most
beautiful spot of Paris for a scoop or two of the city’s most delicious ice-cream.
Unless you prefer to do so sitting down on the sunny terrace of the Flore-en-l’lle,
next door.

6CACHS de ba Mikion Bert Lown,

Ao CRF

ae

UG Pipa on CH

OOP

OTT

OMB BIERE

AA

‘ CO
Yi

:I : ath |

\\ !
Sea

Tle Saint-Louis


nN
ie

