R* Montmartre was the social divide of the arrondissement. West of it lay the
pleasure quarters of the privileged. You enter the area by turning left into rue
Saint-Marc. To your right lies a maze of arcades - Galerie Montmartre, Galerie
Saint-Marc, Galerie des Variétés, Passage des Panoramas, Galerie Feydeau - all

reminiscent of that past. Passage des Panoramas was one of the highlights of Paris
in the last century, the first place in the city to be gaslit, in 1817. The fashionable
set frequented the elegant Café Véron, the pastry shop Félix and, above all, the
circular Panoramas, the dernier cri. Invented by the English painter Joseph Barker in 1787, they transported the spectator to bloody battlefields or peaceful foreign lands. Passage des Panoramas leads to Boulevard Montmartre. The Café des
Variétés, a stronghold of literati till 1870, was at n° 9 to your right. Next door, at
n° 7, Le Théatre des Variétés, where Hortense Schneider created a sensation with

Offenbach’s La Grande Duchesse in 1867, still stands.
Retrace your steps and continue along Boulevard Montmartre. Turn left into
rue Vivienne, the backbone of opulence in the 18th century, described by the
famous contemporary chronicler Louis-Sébastien Mercier as having “more
money in this single street than in the rest of the entire city. This is the purse of
the capital.” The area still abounds in banking establishments, not to mention the
Paris Stock Exchange further down rue Vivienne. Turn right into rue Feydeau and
left into rue des Colonnes, which once led to Théatre Feydeau. Its elegant archi-

tecture provided a pleasing backdrop to the scintillating spectators, who would
stream into the street during intervals, enjoying the fresh air in summer or taking
shelter under the arcades on rainy nights.
Turn left into rue du Quatre Septembre and proceed to Place de la Bourse. The
Paris Stock Exchange stands in its centre, on the site of the convent of Les Filles
de Saint-Thomas, which was closed down during the Revolution. At a time of

nascent capitalism, Napoleon had it razed to the ground and replaced it with this
more useful shrine, emulating a Greek temple in style. The Stock Exchange is
open to the public, although women were not admitted until 1967 ! Tours (conducted in French) start at 11, 11.30, 12 and 12.30 daily, except Saturdays and
Sundays.
At n° 2 Place de la Bourse is the head office of the Club Med, the leisure club
famous for its essentially French savoir faire, one of the successful French economic ventures. Every year 1.2 million GM (Gentils Membres) are looked after


by 24,000 young, beautiful, suntanned GO (Gentils Organisateurs) in 90 sunny
‘villages’ throughout the world.
Turn right into rue de la Banque, right again into Passage des Petits-Péres and
continue to Place des Petits-Péres, a picturesque nook, away from the din of the
city. The welcoming Republican Mairie, decked with a tricolour, and the serene
aspect of the basilica of Notre-Dame-des-Victoires create an unexpectedly
provincial touch. The illustrious architect of the Invalides, Libéral Bruant, collaborated in the construction of this church, an important pilgrimage shrine. The
painting above the high altar shows the Holy Virgin seated on a cloud: at her feet
is Louis XIII presenting her with a plan of the church in humble gratitude for having helped him defeat his enemies - hence the man on his right surrendering the
keys of the defeated town of La Rochelle, which can be seen in the background.
The King’s right-hand man, Richelieu, whose initiative it was to eliminate the
Huguenots and who in 1628 obtained their surrender at La Rochelle, can be seen
to his left. Among famous Parisians who were buried here was Louis XIV’s musician Lully. The church was looted and wrecked during the Revolution, then found
use as the Paris stock exchange between 1796 and 1809.
Continue along rue des Petits-Péres, rue des Petits-Champs and turn right into
rue de Richelieu, on which is the entrance to the Bibliothéque Nationale. This
monumental institution was initiated by Charles V in the 14th century, when he
concentrated his ancestors’ manuscripts in the tower of the Louvre. The collection
was scattered around during the Hundred Years’ War but was gathered again in
the 16th century by Louis XII and especially by the humanistic Francois I. In
1643 Mazarin rented a property at 8 rue des Petits-Champs, the Hétel Tubeuf,
close to Richelieu’s Palais-Royal, so as to keep up with his predecessor. Two
years later he owned all the area extending north as far as the present rue Colbert,
including a second mansion, the Hotel de Chivry (later known as Nevers), on rue

de Richelieu, a vast domain nearly as large as the Palais-Royal. In 1645 Francois
Mansart was commissioned to build a two-storeyed gallery between the two mansions, to house Mazarin’s art collection. Further construction was undertaken

along rue de Richelieu in 1649, this time to house his library of 40,000 volumes,
the most impressive library in Europe. Mazarin had sent his emissaries to all the
courts and kingdoms with instructions systematically to buy all the books that
were unavailable in Paris. As a result, between 30,000 and 35,000 volumes were

purchased in less than ten years!
After Mazarin’s death the property was divided between his two nephews and
subsequently changed hands and was greatly altered. Colbert transferred the

library to rue Vivienne in 1666, and several financial establishments took up residence here instead, including the stock exchange, which used the premises of the

H6tel Tubeuf from 1724 until the Revolution. In 1721 the Regent bought the

i
_A

faut

Lassnood-3dlA

SIL3IIWA

Cy

JaLYVWL
=
NOW


SIG

\

\si\!
HL

ue

Ga

a)
t

331V5

$34INO8@
SN3ISIYWd

~

“HL $30

¢ m a ce}= 9 m o


1939109
33 1W9

F,
,7

\z]

o

S3a3d“SLiL3d-S30 “Id

V8

Hotel de Nevers, where he permanently established the royal library, the Bibliothéque du Roi. The premises underwent major alterations in the 18th and 19th
centuries, to cope with the overwhelming expansion of the library, caused first by
the Revolution, when a prodigious flow of books confiscated from the aristocracy
and religious institutions were transferred here, and then, in the 19th century, by
the explosion of printing. the present buildings, designed by Labrouste during the
Second Empire, replaced the Hétel Tubeuf on the corner of rue de Richelieu and
rue des Petits-Champs, and the Hétel de Nevers, on the corner of rue de Richelieu
and rue Colbert. This most venerable institution of the 2nd arrondissement has
over the years acquired 12 million books, 6 million engravings, 800,000 coins
and medals, 400,000 records and an annual intake of about a million magazines
and newspapers. A victim of its own success, it is to be replaced by La Trés
Grande Bibliothéque, due to open in 1996 in the 13th arrondissement. Only the
art section, to be renamed La Bibliothéque Internationale d’ Art, will remain on

rue de Richelieu.
Before crossing into Square Louvois, continue along rue de Richelieu, turn
right into rue Colbert and right again into rue Vivienne. On your left are two
delightful hidden arcades - the highlight of the 2nd arrondissement - Galeries

Galerie Vivienne


Vivienne and Colbert, an ideal spot for a pause, especially on a wet day. While
the Galerie Vivienne, with its tasteful, arty boutiques and good bookshops has a
charming, antiquated feel, the Galerie Colbert has been renovated into a more formal, classical compound in true French style, enhanced by its pale pink stone.
Retrace your steps to Square Louvois which stands on the site of Paris’s ninth
opera house (there have been another four since). Most of them had been
destroyed by fire, but not this one. On 13 February 1820, the Duc de Berry, eldest
son of the future Charles X, was assassinated at the royal doorway of the theatre
(level with n° 5 rue Rameau) by a certain Louvel, as a first step in his scheme to
rid France of the entire House of Bourbon. Louvel, however, was caught and guillotined before he had time to do more harm and the opera house was razed to the
ground by order of the King, so as to obliterate the scene of the crime. The only
reminders of the lyrical past of the neighbourhood are its street names, Cherubini,
Rameau and Lully. Lully actually lived near by, in the corner house at n°s 45 rue
des Petits-Champs and 47 rue Sainte-Anne. You will notice its listed fagade, decorated with musical instruments and masks of Bacchantes and satyrs. At the
beginning of the 19th century, the idolized tenor Adolphe Nourrit, who premiered
all the masterpieces of the time, lived at n° 6 rue Rameau. During a performance
of Halévy’s La Juive in Marseille, he suddenly lost his voice and could never sing
again. In 1839 he threw himself out of a window in Naples. He was only 27.
Square Louvois provides the only green patch in this busy arrondissement, and a
pleasant one indeed, enhanced by Visconti’s graceful fountain and its allegorical
figures of the four biggest rivers of France that bear feminine names — which
explains why the Rhone is not among them.
Both the square and rue de Louvois commemorate Louis XIV’s minister, the
Marquis de Louvois, whose sumptuous home extended all the way from rue
Sainte-Anne to rue de Richelieu. After it was demolished in 1784, rue de Louvois

was opened across its site, the second street in Paris to be bordered with pavements, rue de 1’Odéon (in the 6th arr.) being the first one. On the other side of the
square, the Hétel Mirosmenil, built by Mansart and decorated by Le Brun,
matched it in splendour. It was demolished during the Revolution and rue
Rameau now runs on its site. Walk along rue Rameau and turn left into rue Chabanais, opened in 1776. Its 18th-century mansions with their wrought-iron decorations and broad carriage entrances, constitute a fine example of the architecture
of the time. But rue Chabanais was famous first and foremost for its international- ly renowned brothel at n° 12, which from 1878 to 1946 catered to the exclusive
clientele of the celebrated Jockey Club on Boulevard des Italiens. Most of the
crowned heads of Europe, frequented this impeccably tasteful establishment, as
did ministers and government leaders of the Third Republic. It is said that their


visits were described on their official timetable as ‘visit to the President of the
Sénat’. An absent-minded official is rumoured on one occasion to have entered a
visit to the brothel on the schedule of a queen of Spain, which created no small
scandal! The splendid furniture of the house was dispersed at an auction held at
Drouot (the Paris auction house in the 9th arr.) on 8 May 1951.
Turn right into rue des Petits-Champs and left into Passage de Choiseul, now a
noisy, uninspiring arcade, yet imbued with a cultural past. It was built in 1825 by
Tavernier and its architecture bears witness to travellers’ accounts of the orient
and its exotic bazaars. Until 1965 n° 23 was the site of a publishing house which
published the works of the Parnasse poets - Sully Prudomme, Leconte de Lisle,
Heredia and Francois Coppée, followed from 1864 onwards by Paul Verlaine. A
few years later Anatole France worked here as editor for roughly ten years. The
stage door to the winter Bouffes Parisiens still stands at n° 73. During the winter
seasons of 1855 to 1863, Jacques Offenbach, then director of this theatre, could

be seen walking through this door. The theatre was pulled down in 1863 and
replaced by the present one, which has undergone several face-lifts over the
years. The main entrance is on rue Monsigny. By the 1930s the arcade was taken
over by commerce and had forgotten about its writers and poets. People flocked
to Barlett at Passage Choiseul, where shoes were for sale at the fixed price of 69
francs, whatever the shape, colour or size.

Turn left into rue Saint-Augustin, then on to Place Gaillon, an attractive, peaceful nook, adorned with another of Visconti’s fountains, a major Parisian landmark. In the celebrated Drouant restaurant on the comer of 18 rue Gaillon, the

Goncourt Prize, the most prestigious of French literary prizes, is awarded every
third Monday of November. Monsieur Charles Drouant came up to Paris from
Alsace in 1880, as did many of his compatriots torn by the loss of their region to
the Germans. Like other Alsatians he began by opening a modest café-restaurant,
which soon acquired a reputation for solid quality at low prices. Artists and writers came to sample the deliciously fresh oysters and seafood he brought over
from Britanny, and before long the restaurant numbered Alphonse and Léon
Daudet, Rodin, Renoir, and Edmond de Goncourt among its regulars.
When the Goncourt Academy was founded in 1894 to administer the Prize,
however, it did the rounds of various restaurants in the Opéra area and settled at
Drouant’s only in 1914, when it had been enlarged and suitably refurbished. The
celebrated Ruhimann created a sumptuous Belle Epoque setting, complete with a
majestic staircase and wrought-iron railing, glittering mirrors and a painted ceiling. The ten prize-winners were invited to a gastronomic meal once a month in a

private salon, with oak panelling and an impressive chandelier. On their plated
silver forks were engraved the names of their succussive predecessors. In Paris
Vecu, Léon Daudet informs us that the prize money was 5,000 francs - a substan-


-

tial sum for those days. Above all, it helped'to launch the career of deserving
authors, unlike the elections to the Académie Francaise, behind which there was a
lot of wheeling and dealing. At the time the Academy Goncourt sat in December,
and Léon Daudet was elated on 10 December 1919, when he brought Proust the
letter informing him he had been awarded the prize for A l’ombre des Jeunes
Filles en fleurs. It was not such a triumph, though, Proust having received the
narrow margin of six votes. Four went to Dorgelés for his war novel Les Croix de
Bois, which, obviously, was much more topical. Nevertheless, Léon Daudet

claimed that Proust “owed his just renown to the Goncourt prize”.
Continue along rue Saint-Augustin to the Avenue de |’Opéra, an enchanting
vista by night when the old opera house, the Palais Garnier, is illuminated and the
avenue is lit up. Cross the avenue and continue into rue Daunou, a stronghold of
the American ‘expatriates’ in the 1920s, only a couple of blocks away from the
American Express on rue Scribe. At n° 5 the red neon sign of Harry’s Bar still
stands out in the night in the otherwise dark, deserted street, beckoning the passer-by in. This was a favourite hang-out of Hemingway, whose photograph hangs
on the wall. His friend Firzgerald was also a regular and dropped in from the Ritz,
just round the corner. Still warm and cosy bar, thanks to its wood panelling,
Harry’s New York Bar was also the birthplace of the Bloody Mary!
Turn left into rue de la Paix, also to be seen by night, for the sake of the illuminated Place Vend6me ahead. This was the most glamorous shopping street in
Paris in the 19th century and well into the 20th, once the site of the church of the
beautiful convent of the Capucines. The convent was closed down during the
Revolution and converted into a theatre. A popular funfair was held in its gardens
and the famous Franconi moved his circus there. In 1806 Napoleon razed the
buildings to the ground to make room for a glorious new thoroughfare to honour
his name and entrusted the project to his prestigious architects Percier and
Fontaine. After his defeat in 1814, however, the street was renamed rue de la Paix

to commemorate the signing of the Peace of Amiens. Members of the court and
the new Napoleonic aristocracy, and later their Republican heirs, were the chief
customers of the elegant shops and haute couture houses of rue de la Paix. The
establishment of Jacques Doucet, who was to train and shape Paul Poiret, was at
n° 23. A discerning art collector and a progressive mind, as well as a celebrated
couturier, Doucet collected such revolutionary works as Picasso’s Demoiselles
d’Avignon and other works rejected by most of his contemporaries. The milliner
_ Caroline Reboux, who had been launched by the Princesse de Metternich, was
also established at n° 23.
The head office of the jeweller Cartier is still at n° 13 rue de la Paix. The house
was founded in 1847 by Louis Ferdinand Cartier, who till then had been working


for another famous jeweller, Adolphe Picard. He first set up shop near the PalaisRoyal, on rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs (now rue des Petits-Champs), and then
moved to the fashionable Boulevard des Italiens, where his customers included

the Empress Eugénie and Napoleon III’s cousin, la Princesse Mathilde, the
‘queen’ of fashion. In 1899 his grandson Louis moved to rue de la Paix, by then
the centre of luxury of the capital. Cartier’s international clientele included
Edward VII of England, Alphonso XIII of Spain and the Duchess of Winsor.
Cartier also created such national symbols as the baton of Maréchal Foch and the

ceremonial swords of some of the members of the Institut de France, the venerable Académiciens.
Mellerio, another venerable jeweller’s, stood until recently at n° 9. Since he
was purveyor to the court, Queen Marie-Amélie allowed him to inscribe on the

shop front ‘Bijoutier de la Reine des Frangais’. At n° 7 was the house of Charles
Worth, rightly claimed to be the first haute couture designer, who raised the status of dressmaking from craft to art. When Charles Frederick Worth arrived from
England in 1845, aged 20, he had the meagre sum of 117 francs in his pocket and
knew not a word of French!

He had, however, been apprenticed for seven years

to the drapers Swan and Edgar, and had a short stay with the renowned silk purveyors Lewis and Allenby. After 12 years of hard constructive work, he opened
his own house on rue de la Paix in 1858. The timing was perfect, for this was the
heyday of the glamorous Second Empire, ruled by the fashion-conscious Empress
Eugénie. Multitudes of social upstarts, ready to squander unlimited sums of
money, rotated around the court, emulating its members. These provided an ideal
clientele who accepted Worth’s tyranny because they could not claim to be his
social betters. The reign of the haute couture designer thus began.
In 1892 the prosperous banker Paquin set up his wife at n° 5. If we exclude
Marie-Antoinette’s dressmaker, Rose Berin, Madame Paquin was the first woman
designer and also the first woman to be awarded the Légion d’honneur in 1913. A
prominent public figure, Madame Paquin chaired the 1900 Universal Exhibition.
2,700 employees worked for her establishment, which was located above
Robert’s chemist shop, opened in 1820 by Dr Roberts, chemist and surgeon to the
British Embassy. Now still standing among the travel agencies that line rue de la
Paix, the shop is the sole reminder of former glories.


_

