he exploration of the central part of the arrondissement will begin at the
Samaritaine department store, opposite the Pont-Neuf. To many greying
Parisians the store is associated with its deliberately eccentric commercials,
notably the one starring King Kong storming the shop through its top-floor windows. Its celebrated catch-phrase On trouve tout a la Samaritaine (‘One can find
everything at the Samaritaine’) has recently been changed into On trouve ToutParis a la Samaritaine, aiming to add a ‘showbiz’ touch to a store whose shoppers are notoriously provincial and outdated. But the Samaritaine is well worth a
visit for the spectacular view from its terrace and restaurant, as well as for its Art

Nouveau and Art Deco decorations.
When Ernest Cognacq, a former draper’s assistant at La Rochelle, first set up
shop on rue du Pont-Neuf in 1867, he called it La Samaritaine in memory of the
old water pump situated at the Pont-Neuf till the early 19th century. Thirty years
later he commissioned Frantz Jourdain to put up a building to house a full-size
department store, a structure of steel and glass in keeping with the progressive
spirit of the time. In 1926 Franz Jourdain and Henri Sauvage built the fagade on

oF

the quai du Louvre, one of the best examples of Art Deco in Paris. In 1930 a new
building was added on the corner of rue de Rivoli and rue Boucher, boasting an

interesting frieze around it and an impressive staircase inside. All these bear witness to the golden age of department stores, which enabled modest men of genius
to build small empires within a few decades. With the help of his dynamic wife,
Louise Jay, also a draper’s assistant, from rue Rambuteau, Cognacq used his
meteoric success to build up a fabulous art collection, now housed in the Musée
Cognacq-Jay in the Marais.
Walk along quai du Louvre and turn right into Place du Louvre. On your right
are the church of Saint-Germain-l’ Auxerrois and the Mairie of the 1st arrondissement. On 24 August 1572, at the stroke of midnight, began one of the bloodiest
pages in French history: the massacre of Saint-Bartholomew, ordered by Charles
IX but instigated by his mother Catherine de Medici, during which 3,000 Protestants perished. Of the three bells that had signalled the onset of the carnage Marie, Germain and Vincent, only Marie has survived. It dates from 1527 and is

one of the oldest bells in Paris.
Saint-Germain-l’ Auxerrois was the royal parish church, just opposite the Louvre, and the royal pew can still be seen inside. When Catherine de Medici was
told by her astrologer, Ruggieri, that she would die ‘by Saint-Germain’, she
moved out of the Palais des Tuileries, her newly built residence west of the Louvre, sO as to attend mass elsewhere. She settled in the Hétel de Soissons, on the

site of the present Bourse de Commerce, the round building on the western edge
of the Forum des Halles, adjoining the column from where Ruggieri scrutinized
the stars, which still stands. The queen never returned to her residence at SaintGermain-en-Laye either, but there is no escaping one’s destiny: while in Blois in
the Loire Valley, some 16 years later, she took ill, never to recover. A young
priest was called to her bedside on 15 January 1589 to give her the last sacrament.
The Queen asked his name: “Julien de Saint-Germain,” replied the holy stranger.
The original Saint Germain, the Bishop of Auxerre in Burgundy in the 6th century, is said to have journeyed all the way to England to combat heresy. At the
end of the 7th century a primitive church was in all likelihood erected on this site,
where the Saint had allegedly performed some extraordinary deed. It was probably demolished during the Norman invasions of the 9th century, like all the other
churches of Paris. A Merovingian cemetery discovered near by in the 19th century, supports this assumption. The present church was built in the 12th and 13th
centuries and the Saint’s supposedly preserved relics were laid within. Little is
left of this church, greatly altered over the years, particularly in the 18th century.
During the Revolution, it became the Temple de la Reconnaissance and after the
Revolution was used for storing fodder!
Napoleon’s arrival threatened to be more fatal than the Revolution: among his



spectacular projects was a regal thoroughfare from the Louvre to Place de la
Bastille and on to Place de la Nation. This would have opened a new vista from
the Louvre with an impregnable view of the Elephant of the Bastille, an extravagant, colossal statue he had intended for Place de la Bastille, the model of which
actually stood on the site of the present Opera House until 1847. Napoleon’s project would have entailed the demolition of the church, which fortunately he did
not have the time to do, but in 1831 there was question once more of demolishing
it and only the relentless efforts of the outraged writer Chateaubriand prevented
this disastrous outcome. Lassus and Baltard were called upon to undertake its
restoration and give it its present aspect. Inside can still be seen the 14th-century
chapel, the 15th-century wooden polychrome triptych and stained-glass windows,
the early 16th-century Flemish retable, the 17th-century organ case (brought over
from the Sainte-Chapelle) and the 18th-century wrought iron grille around the
choir. In front of it are two 15th-century polychrome statues of Saint Germain and
Saint Vincent, while a 13th-century statue of Saint Germain can be seen in the

chapel.
The adjacent Mairie of the 1st arrondissement is a mere pastiche, dating from
the Second Empire, designed to maintain the architectural unity of the place. The
flamboyant belfry tower, the work of Ballu (1860), had no other object than to fill
up the unsightly gap between the two edifices.
Continue along rue du Louvre beyond rue de Rivoli. On your right is the
Bourse de Commerce first built by Louis XVI for the trade of corn, flour and
sugar and known as La Halle au Blé. The present rotunda dates only from 1889.
The elegant buildings that line the northern curve of the circular rue des Viarmes
deserve special mention. The tower of Catherine de Medici’s residence was
sculpted with exquisite grace, as you can surmise from what has survived.
Ruggieri used the tower until the end of his life, and despite his unfavourable predictions, he never fell into disgrace. Before bringing the Queen unpleasant news
about her own fate, he had already predicted her husband’s mortal injury in single
combat. Indeed, Henri II was mortally injured by Montgomery during a friendly
tournament.

Cross Place des Ecus on your left and turn left into rue J.J. Rousseau. The
famous philosopher lived on the site of today’s n°s 52-54. N° 19 opens on to a
picturesque outdated arcade, overlooked by most contemporaries: la Galerie
Véro-Dodat which will carry you nearly two centuries back. Its beautiful glass
ceiling, its black-and-white chequered floor, its mahogany panelling, its brass
framings and handles served as backdrop to the promenade of fair ladies in crinolines and gentlemen in tail-coats and top hats, all the fashionable set who hastened to see this new attraction when it opened in 1826. The arcade’s gas lights
created quite a sensation and prices of property rocketed. But somehow,


Messieurs Verot and Dodat, the two charcutiers (pork butchers) who had built the

arcade, went bankrupt. In 1836 the celebrated actress Rachel moved to the 3rd
floor of n° 38. The ground floor of the house was occupied by the famous satirical paper Charivari, to which Daumier contributed his cartoons. It was in the
Charivari that the word ‘Impressionist’ was first coined by a journalist called
Leroy. He had borrowed it from Monet’s painting Impression, soleil levant and
applied it derogatorily to the entire group of painters who were striving in vain to
gain recognition from a stuffy, conformist public that considered them mentally
deranged. With the age of the stagecoach, the Messageries Générales opened
premises on rue du Bouloi, on the other side of the arcade. From then on, the
place became a convenient shortcut for travellers and its magical spell was broken. The beau-monde migrated elsewhere. What is left is an oasis of nostalgia,
charmingly antiquated shops, among them Robert Capia at n° 26, a worldrenowned dealer in antique dolls.
Turn right into rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs with the colossal building of the
Banque de France on your left. Founded in 1800 by a group of bankers on
Napoleon’s initiative, in 1812 the bank moved to the premises of the sumptuous
Hotel de la Vrilliére, the home Mansart had built in 1635 for the Marquis de la

Vrilliére. In 1713 the Comte de Toulouse, the legitimized son of Louis XIV and
of Madame de Montespan, bought it and totally transformed it, meanwhile adding

the stunning 50-metre long Galerie Dorée, which many prefer to the one in Versailles. Unfortunately, this magnificent example of French early 18th-century
interior decoration is rarely open to the public. The premises were largely
restored between 1870 and 1875 and only the original fagade at n°s 1-3 rue Vrilligre has survived. The bank also owns a fabulous collection of 18th-century
paintings, highlighted by Fragonard’s famous La Féte a Saint-Cloud, but these
too are usually closed to the public.
Ahead is the Place des Victoires, more famous today for its designer shops than
for the victories of the Sun King it commemorates. Frangois d’ Aubusson,
Maréchal and Duc de La Feuillade, idolized his King and decided to put up a statue in his honour on his own property and at his own expense. The statue was all
covered with gold and adorned with His Majesty’s court cloak. Its head was disproportionately large, overpowering the rest of the body and decorated with a laurel wreath.

On the pedestal, at his feet, four chained women

embodied

dramatically the King’s trampled enemies — Spain, Holland, Germany and
Franche-Comté. This done, the preposterous Maréchal proceeded to create a set-

ting worthy of the object of his worship, to which end he called upon the genius
of Jules Hardouin-Mansart. The result was the elegant Place des Victoires, whose
graceful and harmonious architecture has only partly been preserved. La Feuillade, by then the laughing stock of Paris, is said to have relieved the King when


he finally gave up the ghost! The statue was naturally melted down during the
Revolution, but was replaced by another one during the Restoration. This time the
sculptor Bosio seated the Sun King on a caracoling horse, dressed him up as a
Roman emperor, but kept his wig! This is the statue now standing in the centre of
Place des Victoires. During Napoleon’s Consulate a statue to the memory of General Desaix stood in its place, representing the hero of the battle of Marengo in his
natural attire, emulating the heroes of ancient times. But the population of Paris
was shocked by such indecent exposure and a fence was soon set up around the
General to keep him out of view.
Although designer Kenzo was not the first in his trade to have taken up residence here, his migration in 1976 signalled the rejuvenation of the area, its transformation into the stronghold of contemporary-minded créateurs, as opposed to
the traditional couturiers. A new age was inaugurated, when a Westernized
Japanese look was to meet with San Franciscan ecological freedom expressed by
Esprit; when Chevignon betrayed his native French origins and imprinted Wild
West designs on his celebrated bombers; and when Thierry Mugler created his
“destructured” glamorous designs, determinedly contemporary, yet French
nonetheless. Castelbajac, Ventilo... a fresh breeze was blowing from across the
Atlantic which resulted in spacious, airy, luminous premises, lined with wooden
parquets and wall panelling, discarding the muffled, cramped, padded atmosphere
of the old continent.
Rue La Feuillade, west of Place des Victoires, continues into rue des PetitsChamps. It will take you to rue de Beaujolais, by way of Passage des Pavillons on
your left, a charming spot. Turn left on rue de Beaujolais and left again to the
Galerie de Beaujolais, leading to the gardens of Palais-Royal. You will enter a
world of exquisite tranquillity where time has come to a standstill, a sleepy arcaded enclosure, shut off from the noisy streets around and graced with a Venetian
touch. Despite the playful children and the chatty diners of an outdoor restaurant,

a quiet secluded atmosphere prevails. Even Buren’s striped columns, which jar
with the surrounding architecture and stone, and draw here weekend crowds, do
not awaken it from its provincial drowsiness.
And yet, between 1784 and 1830 this was the bustling centre of both intellectual and dissolute Paris, lined with cafés and restaurants as well as game-houses and
brothels. The Mecca of prostitution, to which whores and courtesans came from
all over Paris ‘faire le Palais’, as the saying went. Witness Casanova, who rushed
here on his arrival in Paris.

When the palace was built for Richelieu it was known as le Palais-Cardinal.
Richelieu bequeathed it to Louis XIII and after the latter’s death the royal family
BP:

moved in. It was conveniently situated close to Mazarin’s home on the neighbouring rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs. To facilitate his rendezvous with Anne of
Austria, a door was fitted into the wall that surrounded the palace. It proved

handy in 1650, during the princely revolt of the Fronde, when the Queen and her
two sons, the future Louis XIV and Philippe d’Orléans, escaped to SaintGermain-en-Laye. Later Henrietta of France, the widow of Charles I of England,
came to live here with her daughter, Henrietta of England, who later. married
Philippe d’ Orléans. She died in 1661 and Philippe d’ Orléans married the princess
Palatine by whom he had one son, another Philippe Duc d’Orléans, who would
become the celebrated Régent after the death of Louis XIV in 1715. He ruled over
Paris till 1723, when Louis XV, aged 13 began to rule in effect. It was during the
Regent’s light-hearted reign that the Palais-Royal became notorious for its
‘soupers’ - veritable bacchanalia. His grandson Philippe, the Fifth Duc d’ Orléans
and father of the future King Louis-Philippe, was in deep debt when he took over
the Palais-Royal. He therefore built the arcades and their shops which he rented
out, turning the establishment into a profitable business. Gambling houses and
brothels opened up too, to ensure substantial profits. The Duke’s new line of
activities was not to the taste of Louis XVI: “Cousin,” he said disdainfully, “you
have turned shop-keeper and no doubt we shall see you only on Sundays.”
Philippe d’Orléans would have his revenge: in 1793, having sided with the Revolution, he became member of the Convention under the name of Philippe Egalité
and voted for the death of his royal cousin (whom some claim he had hoped to
replace). The guillotine, however, took charge of him too, only a few months
later.
The newly converted Palais-Royal was opened in 1784 to the satisfaction of all.
Among its shops was a cutlery establishment at n° 177 Galerie de Valois, which
belonged to Monsieur Badin. Here on 13 July 1793 Charlotte Corday bought the
knife with which she stabbed Marat in his bathtub the same day.
But the Palais-Royal was also the intellectual centre of the capital, studded with
cafés where such prominent figures as Diderot used to sup and where dangerous
new ideas were in progress. Diderot’s fictitious, beggarly, parasitical, yet so
worldly Neveu de Rameau tells us that the celebrated café La Régence (on the site
of the present n° 161 rue Saint-Honoré) was the Mecca of chess players. On wet
days, when he could not meditate on one of the benches in the garden, the musi-

cian Rameau’s nephew would step into La Régence and watch a good game of
chess. The chessboards were rented by the hour and cost more at night when a
candle had to be fixed on either side. “Paris is the place in the world, and the Café
de la Régence the place in Paris where the game is best played,” he tells us. Now
this was no fiction. In fact, Francois André Danican-Philidor, composer and co-

founder of the Opéra-Comique, and also world chess champion, would take on


the world’s best chess players simultaneously at La Régence, and beat them one
by one mercilessly. His Analyse du jeu des échecs that he published in London
when aged only 22, remains a classic. Diderot’s preference, however, went to
Légal ‘the deep’, as he expressed it via his hero. Philidor ‘the subtle’ annoyed
him with his chess activities. He thought he should develop his musical talent
rather than devote his time to simultaneous blind games, out of vainglory, “pushing little wooden pieces on a chessboard,” as he told him bluntly. In 1794
Napoleon, an excellent chess player too, shared a wretched existence between a
dump of a hotel in today’s rue d’ Aboukir (in the 2nd arr.), and Café de La
Régence where he spent hours moving pieces on a chessboard, rehearsing for the
strategic showdown soon to come.
During the Restoration of the monarchy that followed Napoleon’s downfall, the
Palais-Royal became the scene of bellicose duels. Having fought the rest of
Europe, the French now set about killing each other off wholeheartedly. The
Monarchists assembled in the Café de Valois, the Bonapartists and the Liberals in
the Café Lemblin. The slightest provocation ended up with a fatal confrontation.
An inhabitant of rue de Montpensier related how between the years 1815 and
1820 he had been woken up over 20 times by the groaning victims of these political clashes. In Paris it needn’t be only politics that triggers passionate, violent
arguments. At Le Caveau the heated conversations and verbal sparring centred
around music and gave way to impetuous confrontations between the partisans of
the Italian Piccini and those of the German Gluck!
However quarrelsome a Frenchman may be, his palate and stomach will always
bring him back to line, and good fare was to be found in plenty at the PalaisRoyal. Le Café de Chartres, at 79/82 Galerie de Beaujolais, another Monarchist
stronghold, served a set menu of vermicelle et poitrine de mouton aux haricots.

Today, its descendant Le Grand Véfour has abandoned homely fare: with its
wealth of decorations and choice dishes it is one of the best restaurants in the capital, and as such was targeted by Leftists to be blown up in December 1983. At n°
83 Le Véry created a sensation when it first opened, being the first Parisian establishment to offer meals at fixed prices, high enough nonetheless to ensure a select
clientele. Among them was the illustrious painter Fragonard, who actually
expired here while savouring a sorbet.
In 1830 the ‘bourgeois’ king Louis-Philippe ascended the throne. A ‘middleclass’ puritan, he decided to close down this seat of vice (and of political threat:
after all, the French Revolution had also been plotted here). Some Parisians held

on to the place for another generation, and at the time of Balzac it was still a popular promenade where art and vice mingled. The more fashionable Parisians had
migrated to the new axis of pleasure, les Grands Boulevards, further north; some

frequented both. By the time Colette was living at 9 rue de Beaujolais, and Jean

Cocteau at 36 rue de Montpensier, the Palais-Royal had become a closed world
and assumed its present aspect of outdated serenity, as described by Colette: “In
the mornings we went out for a breath of fresh air - cat, bulldog and me - on the
garden chairs, uncomfortable armchairs of venerable age [...] I like to think that a
magic spell preserves, at Palais-Royal, everything that collapses and lasts, everything that crumbles and doesn’t alter.” She goes on to describe its nameless, silent
citizens who followed a code of mysterious mutual courtesy: the elderly lady
leaning on her stick, the gentleman cultivating little cacti on his window sill, the
other gentleman in straw slippers on his early morning walk, or the earnest little
boy who might one day lay a marble in the palm of your hand. There was also a
venerable lady who might one day read out to you the ode she had written to Victor Hugo. Jean Cocteau was more than just a neighbour, even though he dropped
in on Colette ‘en voisin’. He was a friend and admirer who called her ‘an ink
fountain’. Today’s arcades are as peaceful as then, lined with ravishing outdated
shops, and the lovely gardens are still an oasis in the heart of a congested city,
“La campagne en plein centre de Paris,” to quote Cocteau once more.
Leave the gardens through the Cour d’Honneur on its southern edge. On your
right is the home of the prestigious Comédie-Frangaise, built between 1786 and
1790 by Victor Louis, the architect of the famous theatre of Bordeaux. Originally
destined to accommodate the opera, various other troupes followed before the
Comédiens-Francais took over in 1799. Their inauguration performance on 30
May 1799 was a double bill of Le Cid and L’Ecole des Maris, starring the great
Talma and the adulated Mlle Mars. At present the Comédie-Frangaise has lost
much of its glory and few productions merit your attendance (even if susceptible
locals claim to the contrary), except for the experience of being seated in these
magnificent historic premises where some traditions have been kept alive — the
baton beats announcing the curtain rise, the declamation of the Marseillaise on

Bastille Day, and the celebration of Moliére’s death every February. Despite its
conservative inclinations, the Comédie-Frangaise has of late followed modern

trends and opened a shop in the entrance hall where reference books and attractive gifts are to be found.
In the 17th century, another theatre stood on the corner of rue de Valois and rue
Saint-Honoré, built by Richelieu for his palace and named Le Petit Cardinal. It
was here that at 10 pm on 17 February 1673 Moliére was acting the part of
Argan, le Malade Imaginaire, when he collapsed on the stage and died of a heart
attack.
You will have now reached Place Colette and the adjacent Place André Malraux, a horrendously congested spot during the day, a blissful enchantment by
night, when the elegant square is highlighted by its romantic street lamps and its


sparkling fountain. In the distance, at the other end of the Avenue de 1’Opéra,
Charles Garnier’s floodlit Opera House scintillates in all its splendour, beguiling
you into forgetting that its golden age has long vanishéd.
Before winding up, we wish to point out that at n° 2 Place du Palais-Royal, east
of Place Colette now stands a compound of expensive antique shops known as Le
Louvre des Antiquaires. It has replaced the outdated Louvre department store, a
flourishing business in the last century, a model for Emile Zola’s novel Au Bon-

heur des Dames. When the Louvre des Antiquaires opened in 1978, at a time of
economic optimism, its rash, sanguine promoters meant it to become the world’s

largest such centre. The 250 dealers who opened up shop at this prestigious spot
had anticipated bustling business, not reckoning on the recession in years to
come: the smoked glass, lacquered painting and parquets diffuse a muffled atmosphere of luxury, but strollers are few and far between.

FROM THE LOUVRE WESTWARDS
lhe Louvre is an exploration in itself, beyond the scope of this walk. Head for
Pei’s world-renowned Pyramid in the centre of Cour Napoléon, today’s main
entrance to the museum. The fact that this hypercontemporary, airy structure is
the gateway to what used to be nearly a millennium ago a massive stronghold
exemplifies the eternal continuity of Paris throughout ceaseless change.
The original Louvre was just the keep of the stronghold built by PhilippeAuguste in 1190, on the site of the present Cour Carrée. The name ‘Louvre’ is
believed to have derived from Lupara or Lupera, because packs of wolves lurked
here. The kings of France kept their treasures in this tower, as specified in Louis
VIII's will, who left to his son, Louis IX, all the gold and silver kept ‘in our tower

in Paris near Saint-Thomas’.
When the Kings of France came to live here, they each left their stamp on the
palace. Whereas Charles V embellished the defensive Gothic construction,
Francois I, the enlightened Renaissance King, razed it to the ground and started
out its transformation into a Renaissance palace, on the south west corner of the

Cour Carrée. Henri II and III added the two lateral wings and Catherine de
Medici, finding it small and lacking in comfort, commissioned the great architect,
Philibert Delorme, to build her a new palace further west, perpendicularly to the
Seine. It was named the Palais des Tuileries after the two tile factories (tuile,
‘tile’) on the site of today’s gardens. Henri IV completed it and joined it to the
Louvre by way of the 470-metre-long Galerie du Bord de 1’Eau along the river.
The Pavillon de Flore joined the two. (The Pavillon Marsant on its northern edge
dates from Louis XIV.) The colossal monument expanded further in 1673, when

Claude Perrault, the brother of the story-teller Charles (Sleeping Beauty) built the



lst ARRONDISSEMENT
Galerie d’ Apollon and its spectacular grand colonnade. But with the departure of
Louis XIV for Versailles in 1682 works came to a halt and only picked up again
when Napoleon settled at the Tuileries and built a new wing, l’aile de Rohan,

north of the Carrousel Gardens.
It was Napoléon III who, at last, completed this gigantic, unsurpassable monument, by extending his uncle’s northern wing to the east (l’aile Richelieu) and
joining the Louvre and the Palais des Tuileries. But barely was the feat carried
out than Napoleon III was ousted. Soon Paris would be ignited by the bloody fury
of the Commune: a year after the completion of the ultimate Grand Louvre, the
Palais des Tuileries was aflame, and a three-century-old project had vanished into
thin air never to be undertaken again.
Parallel to its residential function, the artistic role of the Louvre goes back to
the Middle Ages, and its transformation into a museum is no mere historical coin- _
cidence. It was in the Louvre that Charles V’s library was situated, the first

attempt in France at building up a collection of man’s works. It was shortlived,
being dispersed during the Hundred Years’ War, but it had created a need for cultural preservation and a love of art which would flourish with the advent of the
Renaissance kings, particularly Frangois I and Henri IV, followed later by Louis
XIII and Louis XIV. By opening the Galerie du Bord de 1’Eau to artists, Henri IV
strengthened the ties between the Louvre and the arts, a tradition kept up by Louis
XIV, who opened the Louvre to an increasing number of artists. it was a great
honour to live in the Louvre, although many who were granted this privilege were
no more than flattering parasites.
On 10 August 1793 the Revolutionary authorities converted the Louvre into a
national museum. The monarchy had been abolished, Louis XVI had been dispatched to another world and his wife awaited the same fate at the Conciergerie.
Short of demolishing it, it seemed the only solution. The Louvre had been a
‘white elephant’ since the departure of the court to Versailles, and already in 1750
the Cardinal Dubois had suggested its demolition in order to fill the coffers of a
spendthrift state. The new museum profited amply from Napoleon’s campaigns,
the Emperor having filled it with the cultural heritage he had plundered from his
conquered bleeding lands, meanwhile renaming it le Musée Napoléon, a name
which did not outlive his ephemeral reign. In 1848, in keeping with the new revolutionary spirit, the museum was renamed Le Palais du Peuple.
For all its artistic wealth, the Louvre was ageing, the more so because of its
colossal dimensions. The exquisite Mona Lisa, the highlight of many an organized tour to Paris in the 1950s and 1960s, could not compete with the pop-art

brightly coloured pipes of the Centre Georges Pompidou when it opened in 1976
in the 4th arrondissement. It was quite different on the eve of World War I, when
her robbery constituted a national catastrophe, overshadowing all the debates


about the imminent declaration of war. On her return journey to Paris from Italy,
where she had been concealed by her Italian abductor, she was greeted with the
honours of a head of state: at every station a guard of honour was formed to salute
her.
The Louvre craved a face-lift and for new blood. Urged initially by the dynamic Minister of Culture, André Malraux, the archaeological excavation of the

medieval Louvre began in 1983 as the first step of a vast enterprise. President
Francois Mitterand, a lover of ‘grands projets’ (read building projects), continued
with the scheme wholeheartedly. Undoubtedly, the Grand Louvre has been his
most successful enterprise, the most prestigious and the least disputed. Overall
reconstruction was imperative, if its number of visitors was to be substantially
increased. Its new underground entrance in the centre of the Cour Napoléon provided an ingenious solution, allowing for ample space. Pei’s glass Pyramid was to
top it, perfect in proportions (21m high by 34 wide), a scintillating diamond by
night. Not everyone hails it: some dismiss it as too avant-garde; others, while not
condemning the Pyramid, object to its location, arguing that the historic site
should not have been tampered with. Its supporters, on the other hand, contend
that it blends harmoniously into the old environment, thanks to its geometrical
starkness and transparency. However, there is no denying the metal framework
that supports it inevitably obstructs the view of the facades of the Cour Napoléon.
The inauguration of the new Louvre was enthusiastically acclaimed and 5 million visitors swarmed into it within the first six months of its opening, in April
1989, beating all records. Apart from the sensational Pyramid, they could now see
- for the first time since the reign of Frangois I - vestiges of the medieval Louvre,
which only the 14th-century illuminated manuscript, the Duc de Berry’s Book of
Hours, Trés Riches Heures du duc de Berry, had brought to our attention occa-

sionally. In order to expand its exhibition space further, the Ministry of Finance,
hitherto located in the Richelieu wing, was transferred to new premises at Bercy
(in the 12th arr.), and feverish work began to have it ready in time for for the

bicentennial of the Museum, in 1993. When the Richelieu wing opened its doors
to the astounded public and officials of France in November 1993, the ambitious
project of the Grand Louvre had been completed to everyone’s satisfaction. To
celebrate the event the museum opened to the public free of charge the following
Sunday (the kings of yore on such occasions filled the fountains of Paris with
wine). The people of Paris bit at the bait and spent the afternoon queueing up in
the bitter cold air of a November day. Those near the end of the queue were
refused admission and a mild riot - French-style - ensued. But this was no time
for squabbling and free admission was conceded them again the next Sunday.
Today’s Louvre is also a business venture as we found out some time later.
Making our way underground, the transparent pyramid above our head displaying


an ever-changing silver-grey sky, we proceeded in the direction of the Carrousel
with enthusiastic anticipation to see Pei’s more recent reversed Pyramid, when we
discovered that just beyond it lay yet another shopping arcade! This had been
cautiously played down during the inaugurational publicity campaign. That the
world of haute couture should transfer its fashion shows here from the makeshift
structures on Cour Napoléon only seemed right, the area having been the birthplace of haute couture in the last century. But a shopping arcade that communicates directly with the Louvre is a different matter. “One day a MacDonald’s will
open under Notre-Dame,” someone next to me remarked.

Leave the Louvre through the Pyramid, turn right, then left into rue de Rivoli,
the second longest street in Paris. At n° 107/9 the Musée d’ Arts Décoratifs and
the Musée de la Mode often organize interesting exhibitions. Of late the Musée de
l’Affiche has moved here from the 10th arrondissement. Its exciting collection of
old posters delights nostalgic enthusiasts. Walk on to Place des Pyramides, named
after Napoleon’s 1798 victorious campaign in Egypt. Fremiet’s statue of Jeanne
d’Arc stands in its centre, although historically it should have been a little further
east: at 161 rue Saint-Honoré stood Charles V’s Porte Saint-Honoré, where the

Maiden arrived on 8 September 1429 from the village of Monceaulx (Monceau
now in the 17th arr.), at the head of 12,000 men, hoping to take the city. Injured
in action, she had to retreat. Her statue on Place des Pyramides became a shrine
for all endowed with patriotic fervour and has been singled out too by today’s
French extreme-right movements - royalists, ultra-traditionalists, ultra~Catholics
and ultra-nationalists, Le Pen’s heterogeneous followers, including ex-communists and ex-socialists, who under the name of Front National, have determined to
keep France ‘clean and French’; for which aim they gather here every Ist of May,
while dwindling numbers of ‘Reds‘ march up between the République, the
Bastille and Nation in eastern, proletarian Paris.
The famous arcades of rue de Rivoli were designed by Napoleon’s prominent
architects, Percier and Fontaine. Elegant shops followed to cater predominantly to
the wealthy British clientele of the neighbouring hotels, in the vicinity of the fashionable Tuileries Gardens. A few have managed to hold out and to resist the massive invasion of the usual tourist paraphernalia: at 224 the celebrated Galignani
bookshop; at n° 226 the fashionable salon de thé Angelina invites beautiful people to try its Mont Blanc pudding, among other delicacies, in a refined 1900 setting. At n° 228 is the discreet entrance to the celebrated Meurice where
Thackeray and Dickens once stayed and where penniless Orwell was worked to
the bone as a plongeur, “the slave of the slave”, as we learn in Down and Out in
London and Paris. The hotel, which he omits to name, is “a vast, grandiose place
with a classical fagade, and at one side a little, dark doorway like a rat hole,


which was the service entrance.” The kitchens are the kingdom of hell: “stifling
low-ceilinged inferno of a cellar, red-lit from the fires, and deafening with oaths
and clanging of pots and pans.” Only a double door separated the squalid scullery
from the posh dining-room. “There sat the customers in all their splendour and
spotless table-cloths, bowls of flowers, mirrors and gilt cornices and painted
cherubims; and here, just a few feet away we in our disgusting filth.” We wonder
whether the German High Command of the Paris garrison who, during the last
war, took up residence at the lavish Meurice had ever read George Orwell.
In 1720 a manége was built for young Louis XV on the site of n° 230, then the
edge of the Tuileries Gardens (rue de Rivoli being opened only in 1808). With his
departure for Versailles it became a riding school for upper class youths, who
were meanwhile trained in fencing, dancing and mathematics as befitted the gentlemanly ideal of the time. In the early stages of the Revolution the National
Assembly sat here, followed by the Convention. Thus it was here that the first
Republic was proclaimed on 21 September 1792 by Danton and that Louis XVI
was brought to trial and sentenced to death. At n° 248 WH Smith and at n° 252
the British shirt-makers Hilditch and Key are a remnant of English omnipresence
here a century ago. The house standing at n° 258 is crying out for repair, but was
once the home of the great statesman Talleyrand, the only one to have wormed
his way through all the shaky regimes of the time, and who died here of old age
on 17 May 1838, aged 86. His home is believed to have been the most sumptuous
palatial mansion in the capital, overlooking the Tuileries.
Retrace your steps and turn left into rue de Castiglione, reminiscent of the glorious past of this neighbourhood. It leads to the fabulous Place Vendéme and the
legendary Ritz, the headquarters of the golden couple the Fitzgeralds in the
1920s. They made it their home, but moved about Paris for the fun. Hemingway,
quite the reverse, could only afford to come for a drink at its bar, still a worthwhile experience. The Ritz has adjusted to modern demands and opened a cordon
bleu school, and a health club in its basement. When it opened in 1898, it was the
first hotel to install private bathtubs. The shirt-maker Charvet, another old-timer

still holds its own at n° 28 and in recent times Giorgio Armani has settled at n° 6,
a suitable setting for his refined designs of understated, impeccable good taste.
Place Vend6me is a work of art in its own right, a masterpiece of French classi-

cal architecture. It also sums up in a nutshell the switchback history of 19th century France: Girardon’s original equestrian statue of the Sun King having been
disposed of during the Revolution, Napoleon’s Colonne d’Austerlitz came to
replace it in 1810. With the Restoration of the monarchy, it was replaced in its
turn by the equestrian statue of Henri IV, le Vert Galant; but soon the bourgeois
Orléanais Louis-Philippe was put on the throne of France, ousting definitively the
Bourbon branch of the dynasty — the Vert Galant was dispatched to the Pont-Neuf


and a bourgeois Napoleon in a frock coat and low hat was set up in its stead, to
which his nephew Napoleon III substituted an imperial Napoleon in the guise of a
Roman

Caesar. But in 1871 the Commune,

temporarily victorious on Place

Vendéme and led by the enthusiastic painter Courbet, would have none of it thousands of patriots struck up the Marsaillaise and le Chant de la Patrie, to the
sound of the triumphant fanfare, as the monument came tumbling down. The
Emperor, however, regained his lofty position the following year, when the victorious bourgeois National Assembly of the Versaillais sent him back to the top of
the column. He has been dominating this mecca of luxury ever since.
Turn left into rue Saint-Honoré. On this western luxurious section of the street
can still be seen some hétels particuliers (townhouses), reminders of its aristocratic past, close to the Louvre, then conveniently situated on the road to Versailles. Among its illustrious inhabitants at the time was Madame Geoffrin, who

held her famous literary salon at n° 374. The greatest artists and writers frequented her salon - Boucher, La Tour, Vernet and the Encyclopédistes, as well as
renowned foreigners such as Horace Walpole.
Turn left into rue du Marché-Saint-Honoré and continue to the square by the
same name. Lined with eating-places, it makes for a charming stopping-place, in
somewhat of a resort atmosphere. A hideous concrete garage, several storeys
high, used to stand in the middle of the square, but the square had charm and an
unpretentious atmosphere, much appreciated by old-timers. Now, yet another
shopping centre has been entrusted to the Spanish architect Ricardo Bofill, who
has planned to replace the garage with a glass structure, the latest fad. Once more
a genuine corner of Paris is in danger of losing its soul.
Back on rue Saint-Honoré, at n° 286 the church of Saint-Roch commemorates
the man from Montpellier who dedicated his life to the victims of the plague in
Italy and ended by contracting the disease himself. But the unseen hand of God
cured him, and subsequently all around him recovered. There was great need for

his assistance in these pestilence-ridden parts during the 16th century, when the
original church was built and dedicated to him, and also in previous centuries, as

confirmed by the existence on this site of an earlier chapel dedicated to Saint
Roch. The present church was begun at the time of Louis XIV but took nearly a
century to complete for lack of funds. It would have taken much longer if the
financier Law had not donated 100,000 pounds towards its completion, not for
any spiritual motivation, but so as to be appointed contréleur général. To that end
he also converted to Catholicism, and it was at Saint-Roch that he received his
first Holy Communion.
Saint-Roch being the fashionable church of Paris, many illustrious Parisians
were buried here - Pierre Corneille, Diderot, d’Holbach, Madame Geoffrin (who
had also married here), André Le Notre, as well as Marie-Anne de Bourbon, the


daughter of Louis XIV and of his first mistress, Louise de la Valliére. The funeral
celebration of the great Bossuet, the Bishop of Meaux, was also celebrated here,
from where he was carried for burial to Meaux, east of Paris. The Dauphin’s tutor
and the King’s right arm in religious matters, Bossuet was also an eloquent
writer, famous, among others, for the heart-heaving, somewhat pompous
Oraisons funébres he had written for the great figures of his time, ten the
Prince de Condé and Henrietta of England.
The church was deprived of its dilapidated bell tower in 1875, when, rather
than undertake its costly restoration, the authorities decided to demolish it so as to
give access to rue des Pyramides. Its bell was donated to the Sacre-Coeur then
under construction. At the beginning of the Revolution the entire church was
threatened by the suggestion to open a street through its nave and convert the side
aisles into shops! But the church still stands and has among its treasures an 18thcentury organ, one of the most beautiful in France. The Christ of the Sacristy was
deposited here during the 1848 Revolution by students from the Ecole Polytechnique, who had rescued it from the Palais des Tuileries. It has remained at Saint-

Roch ever since.
Back at the junction of Palais-Royal turn right into rue de Rohan towards the
Seine, across rue de Rivoli to the Arc du Carrousel. In the 19th century this spacious esplanade was cluttered with an unsightly maze of alleys. “...These houses
are wrapped in the eternal shadow projected by the high galleries of the Louvre,
blackened on this side by the northern wind [...] One wonders who can live here,
what must happen here at night, when this alley turns into a haven for cutthroats,
and when the vices of Paris, wrapped in the mantle of night, are given free rein,”
Balzac wrote in La Cousine Bette in 1838.
Balzac’s contemporaries - Gérard de Nerval, Théophile Gauthier, Gavarni -

liked the place and gathered in one of its tatty houses for their revelry. Yet originally these were sumptuous hétels, erected in the immediate vicinity of the Louvre. The most famous was the Hétel de Rambouillet, an elegant mansion of red
brick and white stone, still in the style of Henri ITV and Louis XIII. It stood on rue

Saint-Thomas-du-Louvre, which ran parallel to the Tuileries Palace, level with the
entrance to the Palais-Royal. Its fame was due to its landlady, la Marquise de
Rambouillet, who in the 17th century held her prestigious salon littéraire in her
chambre bleue. All the literary set attended her gatherings - Descartes, Scarron,

Corneille, Madame de Sévigné, Madame de La Fayette, Mlle de Scudéry - and also
the greatest aristocrats and statesmen, including Richelieu and Condé. This is where
the French language, hitherto as crude as the manners of the uncouth society that
spoke it, was purified and polished, where conversation developed into an art, even
an affectation, in short, where French society finally shed its medieval remnants and
was initiated into an urbane lifestyle which was to dominate the next two centuries.


The enclave having deteriorated over the years, Napoleon III had it cleared and
replaced by a garden a la francaise, enhancing the beauty of the arc de triomphe
du Carrousel. The original Carrousel and Tuileries Gardens were laid out for
Catherine de Medici in 1564 by Pierre Le Notre and were Italian in style, to suit
her native tastes. Lying to the east was Le Petit-Jardin, today’s Jardin du Carrousel. To its north, the royal stables (now rue de Rivoli) stretched as far as rue
des Pyramides. (the northern wings of the Louvre did not exist at the time.)
Charles V’s rampart walled off the garden to the east, 5 metres east of today’s
Arc du Carrousel. Le Grand-Jardin west of the Palace (now the Tuileries Gardens) was out of the way and seldom used. In order to secure the Queen’s privacy
in the Petit-Jardin, access to the rampart was forbidden. The wars of religion left
the gardens in a pitiful state and Henri IV had them restored by Jean Le Notre, the
son of Pierre. This done, the King spent many a leisurely moment in their midst.
Driven also by economic considerations, he planted mulberry trees for the cultivation of silkworms, hoping to develop his own silk industry so as not to depend
on expensive imports from Milan.
The birth of Louis XIV’s first son in 1662 was no small event and Louis XIV
meant to celebrate it with all the appropriate dazzling pomp, which included
sumptuous equestrian evolutions known as carousel. 15,000 spectators gathered
on the grandstand built for the occasion, to watch this brilliantly colourful spectacle on 2 and 3 June 1662. Dressed as a Roman Emperor, the Sun King took part
in all the games of dexterity, caracoling and strutting about in order to impress his
recent object of desire and future favourite, Louise de la Valliére. The impact of
the carousel was such that the garden has been known as Le Jardin du Carrousel
ever since. And yet, today’s visitor associates the name with Napoleon, who, in
several other places too, has dethroned his predecessor in our consciousness. The
Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel is responsible for the confusion, since it commemorates Napoleon’s 1805 victories. Emulating the Septimus Severus Arch of
Rome, Percier and Fontaine erected it in 1806-1808,

as a magnificent main

entrance to the Palais des Tuileries.
In 1664 André Le Notre, the grandson of Pierre, was commissioned by Louis

XIV’s Minister, Colbert, to redesign the gardens lying west of the palace. Le
Notre had already distinguished himself at Vaux-le-Vicomte, the splendid home
of Nicolas Fouquet, the King’s treasurer, which had aroused the envy of the
monarch and eventually brought about the downfall of Fouquet. Following the
example of Vaux-le-Vicomte, Le N6tre reshaped the gardens into a perfect model
of a jardin a la frangaise, in strict geometrical order, gaining full control over
nature. In order to remedy the drawback of an uneven surface sloping down to the
river, Le N6étre framed the gardens by two long terraces, La Terrasse des Feuil-


lants to the north and, La Terrasse du Bord de |’Eau along the river, where the
royal princes used to play. A monumental gate, la Porte de la Conférence, stood
there by the river, part of the city walls Louis XIII had built further out of the centre as the city expanded, a section of which ran through the gardens. It was
demolished at the time of Louis XV.
Beyond the gardens, Le Notre began the conquest of the rural countryside by
way of a long straight alley in the axis of the central alley of the gardens, climbing westwards up the hill of Chaillot and vanishing into the infinite horizon, the
future Champs-Elysées. But these belong to the 8th arrondissement.
The Tuileries Gardens were opened to the public in the 17th century, at the
happy instigation of Charles Perrault; lackeys, soldiers and paupers, however,
were not admitted. In 1780 public toilets were installed - a total novelty!
The central pool was the departure point of the revolutionary ceremony for ‘the
Supreme Being’, orchestrated by a thickly powdered Robespierre dressed in blue,
a bouquet of flowers in one hand, a torch in the other, haranguing the crowds. The
master of ceremony, the painter David, fretted about at the head of a red-painted
float drawn by eight oxen, surmounted by a Liberty figure. 2,400 singers and
1,000 musicians accompanied the huge procession into the Place de la Révolution
(Concorde), where they skirted the guillotine before heading for the Champs-deMars, in today’s 7th arrondissement, for more celebration. Meanwhile a monster

_ emerged from the pool in the shape of a pyramid (!), representing atheism, egoism, false modesty, discord and ambition. Once set on fire, the monster was
reduced to ashes and Wisdom appeared in all her splendour. All that is now left of
this inflamed idealism are some marble benches disposed in a semicircle on either
side of the entrance to the central alley: they had been placed by the well-intentioned Robespierre to accommodate the aged participants. On 10 October 1794,
the remains of J.J. Rousseau, wrapped in a gold-studded azure flag, were deposited by the central pool, on their way from Ermenonville (where he had died in
1778) to the new sanctuary of the nation’s heroes, the Pantheon, in the 5th
arrondissement. This time Robespierre was not present: the guillotine had disposed of him too, a couple of months before.
Intent on preserving both head and throne, Louis-Philippe decided to live
‘bourgeoisement’ and not to rub his subjects up the wrong way. He nonetheless
fenced off the part of the gardens that lay east of the central pool for his own pri-

vate use. With the downfall of the Second Empire the Palais des Tuileries was
gone and the gardens belonged to the people and were open to all and sundry.
Since then the Arc du Carrousel has been standing in the middle of a spacious
esplanade, its stone of delicate pink hue glowing against the backdrop of the most
famous urban vista in the world.
Make your way through the Tuileries Gardens, which were redesigned and


spruced up in 1994, after two decades of neglect. You will delight in their position overlooking the Musée d’Orsay and the National Assembly across the river.
On either side of the exit, overlooking Place de la Concorde, are the Musée de I’
Orangerie by the river and the Musée du Jeu de Paume by rue de Rivoli. Built in
1853, both museums now exhibit interesting works of art of the more recent
schools. At the Orangerie these span from the Impressionists well into the 20th
(1930), at the Jeu de Paume they are even more recent. The inadequate premises
of the latter, where the Impressionists were housed prior to their transfer to the
Musée d’Orsay, have been redesigned by Antoine Stinco into a spacious, luminous museum, a perfect setting for contemporary art. Thanks to their new large
windows, they become one with a most glorious cityscape, as can be appreciated
from the cafeteria.


