Oz next walk leads us through the streets that lay west of the medieval city
walls: modern Saint-Germain-des-Prés, undoubtedly one of the most desirable neighbourhoods in Paris, combining the charm of secluded nooks with a
stunning proliferation of art galleries, interior decorators’ shops, antique shops,
ethnic arts and crafts shops, specialized and antiquarian bookshops, designers’
clothes shops and others still, always on the arty side, always stylish and tasteful.
Begin on rue de Seine, behind the Institut de France. The attractive fountain at

the junction of the two streets was designed by Evariste Fragonard, son of the
famous painter. Across the street from the Institut de France was situated Queen
Margot’s early 17th-century palace, the entrance of which was at the present n° 6
tue de Seine. The refined, ravishing and highly cultivated Queen had been married against her will, aged 19, to her poor, provincial cousin, the loud-mouthed,
coarse Henri, King of Navarre and soon to become Henri IV of France. It was a
marriage she could tolerate only because they each went their own way.
However, whereas the King’s tumultuous love life was accepted, especially in his
younger days, her own (which had begun when she was 11) created a scandal.
Her mother, Catherine de Medici, used to say that “heaven had given her Margot
to atone for her sins”, and her brothers - three successive kings of France Frangois II, Charles [X and Henri III - were downright outraged. In 1583 Henri
III created a scandal in the middle of a ball at the Louvre, when he showered
insults on his sister and loudly recited the list of her lovers, after which he had her
arrested and searched. In 1587, under the pressure of the court, Henri IV banished
her to a chateau in the heart of France, an exile that lasted 18 years, during which

time she consoled herself in the arms of those available. She also used her time to
write her exciting Memoirs. Margot agreed to the annulment of her marriage so
long as she could retain the title of Queen, even though it left Henri IV free to
marry his favourite, Gabrielle d’Estrées (“that determined whore”). Fortunately
the marriage was averted by Gabrielle’s premature death in 1599, thus sparing the
court a scandal (the royal code of ethics forbade outsiders in the nuptial bed) and
another civil war, inevitable in the light of the number of illegitimate sons Henri
IV had already scattered around the kingdom. The people of Paris saw in the
death of Gabrielle d’Estrées the hand of God and the following year, despite cer-

(217

tain rumblings of opposition, the marriage of Henri and Margot was annulled and
Henri IV married Marie de Medici, by whom he had a legitimate heir to the

throne, the future Louis XIII, who would perpetuate the nascent Bourbon dynasty.
Margot remained Queen.
In 1605, she celebrated her 52nd birthday and her family thought it was safe to
allow her back into the capital; but where would she reside? She had bought from
the University a stretch of land along the Seine, all the way to rue des SaintsPéres, on the medieval enclave of the Pré-aux-Clercs, opposite her beloved Louvre, where she had spent her childhood. She had also bought the land beyond rue
des Saints-Péres (now in the 7th arr.), and turned it into an exquisite garden, le
jardin de la Reine Marguerite, which she graciously opened to the public. The
palace itself was under construction and would not be ready for occupation for
some time, so the Archbishop of Sens offered her the magnificent H6étel de Sens
in the Marais as a temporary home. Margot moved here from the in 1606, after a
spectacular double love affair - proving her family wrong - which ended with the
bloody death of both suitors. She spent here the last nine years of her life, a time
of intermingled love, entertainment, culture and religious devotion, which left her

riddled with debts. Louis XIII, to whom she had bequeathed her estate, had to sell
it in order to pay them off. The estate was sliced up, altered and reconstructed
over the years, which accounts for the presence of a 17th-century hétel at the
back of the courtyard of n° 6, postdating her death.
This end of rue de Seine and the streets that run out of it are lined with art galleries because of the proximity of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. The painter Rosa
Bonheur opened an art school for girls, at n° 10 bis rue de Seine, which still existed in 1910, ten years after her death. Across the street, at n° 13, was another

entrance to the Jeu de Paume des Métayers. Turn right into rue des Beaux-Arts,
created in 1824 on the former estate of Queen Margot to give access to the
Beaux-Arts school ahead. This street too has many art galleries, the most famous
being Albert Loeb’s at n° 12; his father, Pierre, was one of the most renowned art
dealers in Paris before World War I. Another famous dealer, Claude Bernard, at

n° 9, sells the works of top-flight artists such as Giacometti, Bacon, Balthus and
Hockney. The artists of the 1950s are represented by Patrice Trigano at n° 4. In
the 19th century the sculptor Pradier lived at n° 4, writer Gérard de Nerval at n° 5
and the editor Frangois Buloz at n° 6. Buloz’s name is little known but his Revue
des Deux-Mondes, with its characteristic salmon-coloured binding, was the most

important literary magazine of the 19th century. Anatole France, in his autobiography, mentions this “hive of ideas” situated “in an out-of-the-way nook of
faubourg Saint-Germain”, where “everyone wrote, sang, philosophized and discoursed haphazardly, some for the glory of it, the greater number for pleasure.” Buloz
had flair for sensing talent and brought budding writers such as Alfred de Musset


SS

S===

)

fs~

SSSs

—_.

and Alexandre Dumas to the attention of the public. When Buloz moved with his
wife to more spacious premises at n° 10, his collaborators would drop in and confide in his wife, an impressive list of callers which included Victor Hugo, Heinrich Heine, Louis-Adolphe Thiers and Prosper Mérimée (who happened to live in
the same house); she listened to them in her drawing-room while doing her
embroidery and they found her more approachable than her gruff husband.
However, Buloz’s gruffness concealed a sensitivity that came out in his corre-

spondence with George Sand, his most faithful friend. Painter Corot and the
physicist Ampére also lived at n° 10. N° 13 is one of the few luxury hotels of the
Left Bank, simply called L’hétel. In 1900, when poverty-stricken Oscar Wilde
stayed here, it was a run-down, cheap place with appalling plumbing, called Hotel
Alsace. The writer lived here ‘beyond his means’ as he put it, and also died here,

on 30 November of the same year. His grave is in the eastern cemetery of PéreLachaise. His room in this hotel has been recreated, and constitutes a second
Parisian shrine for the brilliant exile whom Britain had repudiated.
The Beaux-Arts school ahead, at 14 rue Bonaparte, occupies part of the convent
built by Marguerite de Valois in 1608 on her estate. Being a truly devout person
she had vowed to erect a temple to the Patriarch Jacob, whom she cherished for
having been chosen by God. La Chapelle des Louanges was added, where 14
fathers of the Order of the Augustins-déchaussés sang the praises of Jacob, in
relays of two, by night and day, to music composed by herself. However,
annoyed that they sang out of tune, she evicted them after five years and replaced
them with the apparently more musical Order of the Petits-Augustins, who gave
their name to the convent. The enterprising archaeologist Alexandre Lenoir converted it into a museum, the Musée des Monuments Frangais, which allowed the
chapel to survive the Revolution. The Ecole des Beaux-Arts settled here during
the Restoration, annexing a couple of neighbouring mansions along the Seine to
allow for expansion. Parts of the convent have survived to this day, as well as the
cloister and the chapel.
Retrace your steps on rue des Beaux-Arts, turn right and continue along rue de
Seine. At n°s 14 to 18 the Hdtel de La Rochefoucauld was the home of the La
Rochefoucauld family, to which belonged Frangois VI (1613-80), author of the
Maximes. The intelligentsia of the time - La Fontaine, Comeille, Moliére, Scarron

- gathered here, sometimes to give readings of their works. This too was a grand
estate extending all the way to rue Bonaparte. A plaque at n° 26 rue de Seine, on
the corner house of rue Visconti, says that the writer Saint-Amant died here on 29
December 1621. This is essentially true but hardly the whole story, for SaintAmant died not in his bed, as would be plausibly deduced, but in the cabaret Le

Petit-Maure on this site, and it was not a natural death. Le Petit-Maure was the
hangout of some of the famous writers of the day, who came to revel here over a


pint of wine in good company. Its back yard was sometimes used for duels. The
owner of the place was a personal friend of Saint-Amant. Saint-Amant was a
highly-regarded writer, one of the first Académiciens, but when he rashly targeted
the great Condé in a satirical verse, the latter had him dragged to the Pont-Neuf
and thrashed vigorously, then dragged back to the cabaret, where he was dumped
and left to die two days later, aged 67.
Across the street, at n° 31, an understated, elegant facade conceals a lovely
courtyard. This was where Aurore Dupin first settled on her own, aged 27, after
separating from her husband. In order to assert herself, she sported men’s clothes
and adopted the pen-name of George (with a British spelling) Sand. On this site a
century later, in 1920, Raymond Duncan, the brother of the dancer Isadora
Duncan, set up his academy dedicated to the revival of Ancient Greek culture.
Apart from lectures on philosophy and Greek civilization, Greek arts and crafts,
such as weaving and sandal-making, were also taught here. Raymond Duncan
went around in a Greek-style robe and sandals and wore a wreath of leaves on his head.
Turn right into rue Visconti, a very narrow alley and still comparatively free of
traffic. There was even less traffic in 1928, when Henry Miller brought his wife
June here from his nearby hotel at 24 rue Bonaparte, to teach her how to ride a
bicycle, so that they could go cycling in the south of France. There are several art
galleries here today, among them, the one at n° 3 specializes in the theme of
dancing. Rue Visconti opened in the 16th century, and situated in what was then a
remote and therefore safer area, became the home of the Huguenots, and dubbed

‘Little Geneva’. Here in 1559 their first synod was held, attended by delegates of
72 churches. When they convened again a few months later, they were surprised
by the police, but all except four managed somehow to escape. Among these
Huguenots was the famous architect Jean-Baptiste Androuet du Cerceau, who
built the Pont-Neuf and was a friend of Henri IV’s. His palatial home extended
from the other end of rue Visconti, along rue Bonaparte, all the way to rue Jacob.
A sincere Protestant, he preferred “to part with the friendship of the King, than to
go to mass.” The house that stands on its site today is an impressive 18th-century
hétel, where the Princesse de Rohan-Rochefort is said to have lived. Only three
houses from the early period still exist - n°s 5, 7 and 9.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, when this part of the Left Bank became desirable, prominent figures lived in the street, too many to enumerate, but one was
Adrienne Lecouvreur, a much idolized actresses of the Comédie-Frangaise, who

lived at n° 16 in the early 18th century. This was a glorious time for the aristocratic faubourgs on both banks of the Seine, when, thanks to the sophisticated,
free-spirited Regent, who had turned his back on Versailles, Paris was again on

the map. Adrienne Lecouvreur was certainly one of its stars, and had a long list of
famous lovers, among them the great Maréchal Maurice de Saxe, the glorious

hero of the battle of Fontenoy, and also the great-grandfather of George Sand. He
may have been a great soldier, but his manners were unpolished, his education
limited, and his spelling appalling. When he was offered a seat at the Académie,
in recognition of his military feats, de Saxe refused the offer in writing, aware
that he would be out of place among venerable Académiciens. His letter certainly
corroborated his claim, scattered as it was with the most extravagant spelling mistakes. Mlle Lecouvreur, however, also frequented the most educated circles and

Voltaire was among her close friends. He was on the first floor by her side on 23
March 1730 and closed her eyes when she died. No-one knew the exact cause of
her death. Some said it was for love of the Maréchal, others that she was poisoned
by one of her rivals. A century later, in 1826/7, at n° 17/19 across the street,
Balzac lived in the early days of his career, trying his hand at different business
ventures. He opened a printing-house, which brought in no money and which he
handed over to the son of his much older friend and mentor Madame de Berny, in
whose hands the business fared much better. This was probably where Stendhal’s~
masterpiece Le Rouge et le Noir was first printed. Later Delacroix painted some
of his great works in this building, notably L’Entrée des Croisés a
Constantinople, Hamlet and La Noce juive, as well as portraits of some of his
friends, such as George Sand and Chopin. Another famous actress from the

Comédie-Frangaise, Mlle Duclos, a generation older than Adrienne Lecouvreur,
lived at n° 20. So did the writer Prosper Mérimée, when he wrote his famous La
Vénus d’Ille. Racine spent the last seven years of his life at n° 24. Having led a
peripatetic existence, mainly on the Left Bank, he settled here at the age of 53 in
poor health and out of favour with Louis XIV, partly because the King had lost
interest in the theatre, but also because he was a Jansenist at a time when they
were outlawed. At least he did not die in destitution like Corneille but had a spacious apartment and a staff of 14 servants. He also had a carriage, two horses and
a small post-chaise. Both he and his wife were devoted Christians and out of their
seven children four intended to become nuns.
Retrace your steps and turn right again into rue de Seine. At n° 43, on the corner of rue Jacques-Callot, La Palette, a couple of minutes’ walk from the Ecole
des Beaux-Arts, is a stronghold of arty bohemia. The café has some exquisite
ceramic decorations (signed Fouji: is it Fujita?) and it certainly has atmosphere,
but it should be visited only by those who can tolerate a heavy veil of cigarette
smoke and a surly welcome. Rue Jacques-Callot, named after the great
Renaissance artist, is lined with trees and galleries and also celebrates art by way
of an allegorical piece of sculpture on the pavement next to the Palette. Here, at
n° 16, Man Ray’s first exhibition, of photographs, paintings and sculptures,
opened on 26 March 1926, in what was then known as La Galerie Surréaliste.
Continue along rue de Seine and turn diagonally right into rue de l’Echaudé, a


picturesque spot, where ancient narrow streets converge on a little patch of garden, with a decorative trellis climbing up a wall, some poplars, rose bushes and a
little fountain. There are also some wonderful artistic shops. Rue de l’Echaudé
was built along the ditch of the defence walls of the abbey of Saint-Germain and
led to its gate (on the present n° 26). Charles V, aware of the impending English
threat, ordered the abbey to be fortified. The walls, like those on the Right Bank,
were pulled down only at the time of Louis XIV, when the victorious Sun King
no longer felt the need to protect his city.
Turn right into rue Jacob, called after the Patriarch Jacob. This street too ran
along the ditch of the abbey walls and beyond it, across the Pré-aux-Clercs. The
beautiful shops and boutiques are enough to distract you from your historical
exploration, but turn left into rue de Fiirstemberg, named after Egon de Fiirstemberg, the abbot who in 1691 reconstructed the abbey’s brick-and-stone
Renaissance palace. What is left of it now serves as a ravishing pink backdrop to
the exquisite Place de Fiirstemberg ahead, a bewitching gem by night, when its
central street-lamp diffuses gentle light over the paving and over the four trees
that cluster around it - one of the highlights of romantic Paris. Henry Miller
thought differently, describing it as “A deserted spot, bleak, spectral at night, containing in the centre four black trees [...]; these four bare trees have the poetry of
T.S. Eliot.” Of course, in Henry Miller’s time this was not yet the stronghold of
luxury upholstery fabrics it is today, which would have filled him, presumably,
with even greater horror! It must be said, however, that the showrooms’ displays
are in such impeccable taste that they only enhance the beauty of the place. When
occasionally a busker will show up, he is sure to be inspired by the setting and
play subdued music.
Place de Fiirstemberg is on the site of the palace’s main courtyard, which was
turned into a square in the 18th century. The bright pink house, at n° 6/8 on the
right-hand side, painted to look like bricks (brick was very expensive), served as
stables and sheds for the palace’s horses and carriages. In the courtyard of n° 6
are some vestiges of their early use. This charming courtyard, with its arched
entrance, uneven cobblestones and creepers rambling out of windows, leads to the
Musée (or atelier) Delacroix, located in the last home of the painter, where he
died in 1863 at the age of 60.
Over 50 years later, in 1929, some prominent artists, Bonnard and Signac
among them, founded a society to promote the memory of Delacroix and his work
- La Société des amis de Delacroix - and the next year they rented the dilapidated
premises, had them restored, and began to organize temporary exhibitions. In
1963 the Society managed to persuade the State to buy the premises to ensure
their survival, and to turn them into a permanent museum, where drawings,
sketches, studies and other documents chart the development of the artistic genius


of one of the greatest - and often misunderstood - painters of France.
In January 1857 Delacroix was living in the artists’ quarter of La NouvelleAthénes (in the 9th arr) when, after seven rejections, he was at long last elected to
the Académie des Beaux-Arts. Having contracted very serious laryngitis in
December, he had to remain indoors for three months and could not pay the traditional visits expected from a new Académicien. Nor until May could he teach or
paint. He therefore threw himself wholly into writing and began his fascinating
Dictionary of the Fine Arts, which he never was to complete.
On 16 March he was able to go out for the first time. The walk was an effort
but it did him good. Because he now had to go to the Académie regularly and was
also working on his murals for the church of Saint-Sulpice, on the other side of
Boulevard Saint-Germain, he decided to return to the Left Bank, to avoid crossing

Paris when in such poor health. But it was not simple to find available and suitable accommodation, although he thought his dealer Haro’s place on the charming, somewhat shabby, provincial Place de Fiirstemberg, might do for a studio.
When he visited it ten days later, Haro was not very enthusiastic about the idea,

believing it would be very difficult to convert the place into a studio. Haro was
not the only obstacle - Dr Bégin, the tenant of the apartment next door also had to
be persuaded to give it up: “I went to Paris, on tenter-hooks,” he writes in his
Journal, “to know whether M. Bégin would give me possession of the house so
that we can begin the alterations.”
Madame Bégin was also a problem: “My first anxiety was to meet him or his
wife, and I cursed the driver for going slowly.” When that obstacle was removed,
Delacroix “rushed off in a great state of excitement to find Haro”, soon to realize
that the venture would be the devil’s own job: “the builders are being diabolical;
some of them are utterly unreliable, and the rest are either lazy or too expensive.”
He would also realize that Haro’s apprehensions concerning the alterations of the
premises were justified, since they caused “an immense amount of worry”. Leaving his studio on rue Notre-Dame-de-Lorette the following December, was not
easy either: “Even now that it’s all bare and deserted, I still love this place [...] I

cannot leave this humble place, these rooms, where for so many years I have been
alternately melancholy and happy, without feeling deeply moved.” But he adopted a positive attitude: “My new home is really charming. I felt rather depressed,
after dinner, at finding myself transplanted, but I gradually became reconciled
and went to bed quite happy.”
Jenny Le Guillou, his tenacious Breton housekeeper, had naturally moved with
him and as his health deteriorated, she increasingly took over, making short shrift
of visitors, in particular of women. A portrait by Delacroix of the wilful Jenny is
exhibited in the museum. Delacroix’s atelier takes you back to that past, recreat-

ing a world now gone: the charming decorations of his apartment, the fire-place,


the painter’s personal belongings, documents and letters, his studio and all his
painting materials make a visit here a moving and nostalgic experience. Outside,
the green branches of old trees, filled with the song of birds, offer the kind of
view you are so often denied because most Paris courtyards are kept locked by
security-conscious residents in these days of mutual mistrust. These used to be
the gardens of the abbey’s infirmary and are now sliced up and belong to the different houses that were once the outbuildings of the palace. If you can make it
early, on a fine morning, you will even share Delacroix’s experience on his first
morning here, on 29 December: “I awoke next morning to find the sun shining in
the most welcoming way on the houses opposite my window. The view on to the
little garden, and the cheerful look of the studio continue to give me great pleasure.”
Rue Cardinale runs into rue de Fiirstemberg on your left, a lovely picture with
its tiny quaint wrought-iron balcony just where it makes a sharp bend. Walk into
this old, narrow street with its assortment of picturesque old buildings. Some
exciting shop windows have managed to infiltrate into this hidden nook, and by
night the old street-lamps affixed to the houses create a wonderfully romantic
atmosphere. Back in the 1920s, the wealthy Harry and Caresse Crosby, had spotted out the street and set up the Black Sun Press (named after a poem by
Archibald MacLeish) at n° 2, in the shabby shop of an excellent printer, Lescaret,
who provided very tasteful, quality work. They published a substantial number of
letters by Henry James and Marcel Proust, which Harry Crosby happened to
inherit from a cousin; and an early story by D.H. Lawrence and some works of
James Joyce. At the junction of rue Cardinale, Passage de la Petite-Boucherie, rue
de Bourbon-le-Chateau and rue de 1’ Abbaye, two rustic, Montmartre-style, pale

pink houses on your left make another lovely, quaint picture. So does the roof terrace on the corner of rue de |’Abbaye and rue de Fiirstemberg on your right, with
its riot of brightly coloured laurel bushes. Walk into rue de 1’Abbaye. On your left
is the brick palace of the abbey, a pale reminder of one of the city’s most magnificent edifices at the time. Today, it is all partitioned, housing the classrooms and
offices of the Catholic University, the Institut Catholique, and other establish-

ments.
Originally built in 1589 by the Abbot Charles I de Bourbon, this was the second
brick-and-stone building to have been erected in Paris (the first, the palatial mansion of the wealthy Italian, Scipion Sardini, on the eastern edge of the Sth, has

long since disappeared), two decades before the Place des Vosges. Charles I de
Bourbon was the Bishop of Rouen, the Abbot of Saint-Germain and the uncle of
Henri IV, all of which points to the enormous political power wielded by some
clergymen. Indeed, after the murder of Henri III in 1589, the Catholic Confederation (La Ligue) appointed him King of France, under the name of Charles X, a


decision that was ratified by Parliament and remained in effect for two months.
The Ligue had been commanded by the famous Duc de Guise, Henri le Balafré,
whose family was second in power only to the King’s - precisely the situation the
Guise wished to reverse by supplanting the King. But Henri III tricked the Balafré
into coming to Blois where he had him murdered in 1588; for this he paid with
his own life at Saint-Cloud the following year. Meanwhile, having no direct
descendants, he had appointed his brother-in-law, Henri de Navarre, heir to the
throne, a decision rejected by the Ligue. In order to strengthen his position
Charles de Bourbon, who was 67 at the time, asked the Pope for a dispensation to
marry the widow of the Balafré and provide France with a dynasty in extremis.
But before he could do so, he was taken prisoner by his nephew Henri de
Navarre, whom he had fought at Fontenoy. Though treated well, he died in captivity. His appointment as King was annulled, which explains that the next
Charles, over two centuries later, became Charles X rather than XI.
i
The abbey of Saint-Germain had always been a place of artistic splendour, of
which nothing is left. Its 13th-century chapel, la Chapelle de la Vierge (level with
today’s n° 6 bis rue de |’ Abbaye), a masterpiece of Gothic art, was wrecked during the French Revolution and finished off by the construction of rue de
I’ Abbaye. As the chapel was built by the same Pierre de Montreuil who designed
the Sainte-Chapelle, one can measure the immense loss its destruction represented. Just beyond it was a beautiful cloister with an exquisite garden. Level with the
present n° 12/14 was the 13th-century dining-hall, also the work of Pierre de
Montreuil. His brilliant design of a vault unsupported by a pillar, created an
uplifting, ethereal feel. Fifteen stained-glass windows completed the edifice, glorious when lit up by the sun. During the Revolution 15,000 tons of gunpowder
were stored here, side by side with a huge stock of coal. No wonder it all ended
up in a stupendous explosion and a gigantic fire! The flames devoured nearly
everything, including the abbey’s library above the dining-hall with its 50,000
volumes. Yet miraculously, most of its 7,000 manuscripts, 1,000 of which dated
from before the 7th century, were saved and are now kept in the Bibliothéque

Nationale. Among them was the original manuscript of Pascal’s Pensées. Some
fragments of the chapel’s stained glass were also rescued and set into a modern
stained-glass window inside the church, on your left. The little garden, just before
the church, lies on the site of a 19th-century house where Alphonse Daudet lived
when he wrote Le Petit Chose, in which he described these parts in detail. In the
days of the abbey this was the south-west part of the cloister’s garden. Some vestiges of the arcades of the medieval chapel are displayed here.
Turn left into the Place Saint-Germain-des-Prés. On your left is the entrance to
the church, on your right, the terrace of the Deux Magots, overflowing with people in fine weather. Saint-Germain-des-Prés may have been put on the map of


contemporary Paris in 1945, or to a lesser extent a decade or so earlier, but in
fact, it entered the real history of Paris with its first foreign invasion. For this is
where the Gauls assembled in 52 BC to defend the city against the invading
Roman legions who were camping across the river. When the Revolution broke
out, about 10,000 people were living around the abbey, a city within a city, and a
wealthy one indeed, its domains reaching well into the present 15th arrondissement. Furthermore, for many centuries it remained under the direct tutelage of the
Pope, which ensured its political independence. With the destruction of the abbey
Haussmann was free to construct the present network of streets. The fact that the
church was spared is extraordinary, it being the oldest church in Paris. It even
retains some small columns from the first 6th-century basilica, the one that had

honoured Saint Vincent before Saint Germain took over. They now decorate the
second chancel.
The church was built between 990 and 1014 AD in the Romanesque style.
When a new and larger choir was built in 1163, to accommodate the growing
number of monks, together with a bell-tower (restored several times since) and a

majestic portal, a magnificent ceremony took place, presided over by Pope
Alexandre III, who had come up to Paris for the laying, a few weeks later, of the

cornerstone of the cathedral of Notre-Dame. Maurice de Sully, the founder of
Notre-Dame and Bishop of Paris, who had been expelled from the ceremony at
Saint-Germain on 21 April, as described earlier, now had his revenge. During the
Revolution the church was used as a refinery for saltpetre, which left it in a sorry
state. Victor Baltard undertook its restoration, while Hippolyte Flandrin contributed the murals.
Before turning left into Boulevard Saint-Germain, you may wish to recapture
the atmosphere of the post-war era, perhaps from the terrace of the Deux Magots.
On the Boulevard Saint-Germain, to the right, is the celebrated Flore, haunt of

Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir during the dark years; across the street,
the Drugstore Publicis replaces the Royal Saint-Germain. On the same pavement
to the right is the Brasserie Lipp, whose setting has remained unchanged. To your
left, the corner café on rue Bonaparte has modernized its furnishings but kept its
name.
Continue on Boulevard Saint-Germain along the church and the little garden,
Square Félix Desruelles. A spectacular enamelled sandstone portico is affixed to
its eastern wall, manufactured by the celebrated Sévres workshops for the 1900
Universal Exposition. The laying out of the Boulevard Saint-Germain transformed this section of Paris beyond recognition. It would take a great deal of
imagination to picture the forbidding, massive prison of the abbey that stood
across it (level with today’s n°s 135 and 166) as recently as in 1857, when Haussmann had it razed to the ground. It was in this prison that the bloody massacres of


2, 3 and 4 September 1792 were triggered. Whoever masterminded the operation,
it was cleverly handled by the Revolutionary authorities, who spread the rumour
of a plot against ‘the good people’ of Paris, exciting ‘the good people’, goading
them on, giving the alarm, ringing bells, distributing pamphlets... After a preliminary slaughter of 13 new detainees, who were grabbed by the mob on their way to
the prison, 100 prisoners, among them many priests, were executed on the first
day of the massacre, after a semblance of a trial. By the third day over 300 people
had been executed, at or near the junction of the present rue Bonaparte and rue de
l’Abbaye, then piled up in the abbey’s gardens. Among them was one of Louis
XVI's ministers and his first valet. The writer Beaumarchais, whose Mariage de
Figaro had certainly contributed to the violent turn French history had taken, was
lucky to have escaped the same fate, having been taken prisoner here during the
mass arrests that had preceded the massacres, and released after four days, for a

ransom of 30,000 francs.

Carried away by the smell of blood, the barbaric assailants continued their murderous deeds into the night, by torch light, and then on the following day, and yet
again the following - an unspeakable savagery, stopped only when the number of
300 had been exceeded. Were they at last chilled by their deed? They certainly set
out energetically to efface all traces of it, and a circular was sent to the prisons’
concierges instructing them, “with water and vinegar, to wash the places in your
prison that may be covered with blood and sand them over [...] Above all, hasten
in the execution of this order, so that no trace of blood should be seen.” The per-

sonal belongings of the victims were disposed of and the bodies transported in
long lines of carts beyond the city walls, many of them to the Catacombs at Denfert-Rochereau (now in the 14th arr.). Wild bacchantes, an eye-witness reported,
sitting or dancing on the heap of mutilated bodies, beat the rhythm on the bodies,
shrieking ‘Vive la Nation!”
Retrace your steps to rue de |’ Abbaye and continue, past rue Bonaparte, to rue

Saint-Benoit, whose name commemorates

the Benedictine Order of the Abbey.

Laid out on the site of its western ditch, the remains of a 14th-century tower are
still hidden behind n° 15. Many poor Germanopratins lived in this street in the
post-war years, often at the Montana or Crystal hotels. Marguerite Duras, author

of L’Amant, also lived here and was the pivot of the communist clique. The Petit
Saint-Bénoit, at n° 4 to your right, was their ‘canteen’ as also of Simone de Beauvoir and her friends. It has not changed an iota: the same furniture, the same
handwritten menu, the same traditional dishes, the same low prices will welcome

you... and credit cards, of course, are not accepted. Have a meal at the Petit
Saint-Bénoit while you can: it may not be here on your next visit.
Turn left into rue Jacob and cross over. The street had already several hotels in
the 18th century, where many foreign visitors stayed. Washington Irving stayed at


;

Hotel d’ Angleterre at n° 44 in 1804. The lovely 18th-century building now has a
patio, where guests can have breakfast on fine days, and has been upgraded to a
three-star hétel de charme (the neighbourhood abounds in them). By contrast, in
1921, Sherwood Anderson paid 75 cents per night for a double room, and therefore recommended it to the newly-wed Hemingways when they arrived in Paris in
December. N° 46 next door has a typical Directoire (end 18th-century) facade
with its elegant niches housing Neo-classical allegorical figures. There is no hotel
here at present, but it is possible that the early 18th-century house that stood here
before was the Hétel Modéne that Laurence Sterne recorded in his Sentimental
Journey. In 1777 Benjamin Franklin stayed for a month at the Hétel de Hambourg at n° 52, while waiting for a permanent home. He then moved to Passy
(now in the 16th arr.), where he remained for the seven-year duration of his stay.

N° 56 at the time was the Hotel d’ York, where the peace treaty between England
and the United States of America was signed at 9 am, on 3 September 1783, by
the English representative, David Hartley, and his American counterparts, Benjamin Franklin, John Jay and John Adams. Adams actually came back with his
family to stay here for a few days the following September, while looking for a
permanent home. He too would move out west, to Auteuil, also in the future 16th.
Retrace your steps on rue Jacob and cross over. N° 35 opens into an exquisite
alley, full of flowers and bushes, enhanced by quaint roof tops that huddle against
one another above. This is the Galerie Triff, an oasis where magnificent kilims
are for sale, displayed around a soothing pool. There is no obligation to buy, so
just wander around and enjoy the sights and the tranquillity. On the corner of rue
Bonaparte, the café-restaurant Au Pré aux Clercs commemorates

the stretch of

land that belonged to the University, through which rue Jacob was opened. Hemingway and Hadley used to eat here when they stayed at the Hotel d’ Angleterre
and had a full meal a Ja carte for 6 francs. Today this is still an unpretentious
place that offers decent fare at reasonable prices.
Unfortunately you cannot gain entrance to n° 28, Colette’s home, which she
described endearingly as dark and stuffy. You can, on the other hand, enter n° 20
during the day, but a fence bars you from the garden on your right, once the
‘sanctuary’ of Natalie Barney, the glamorous Amazon who used to ride in the
Bois de Boulogne wearing a bowler hat and black bow tie. Weather permitting,
French and American literati would gather in the shady courtyard, with its profusion of creeping ivy on the walls. A mock Greek temple, Le Temple de I’Amitié,
created a hedonistic atmosphere and also provided shelter from the cold and rain.
When Natalie first moved here in 1909, tea with cake and sandwiches were the
rule, but when the ‘expatriates’ turned up in the 1920s, she had to resign herself

reluctantly to serving champagne, and later whisky and gin. Paul Valéry used to
read his works here but was quick to drop her once he was elected an Académi-


cien. Virgil Thomson and Georges Antheil performed their music here, and
Antheil actually used Miss Barney’s ‘Greek’ temple to rehearse his Ballet
mécanique. The piece combined notes played on a piano with the sounds of
machines and a ventilator, recreating in musical form the spirit of Dada, and pro-

voked an immense scandal when it was performed in the strait-laced concert hall
of the Paris Conservatoire, the stronghold of conservatism. Apart from her turbulent, Lesbian love affairs, literature was the main purpose of Natalie’s life, 60

years of which she spent here. She founded an Académie des Femmes, as a reaction to the all-male Académie Frangaise, but it did not come to much; nor did her

other projects to help needy writers, notably T.S. Eliot.
Turn right into rue de Seine, which leads to the junction of rue de Buci and to
another world. Here is the most exciting and most colourful market in the
arrondissement. Along rue de Buci to your right are also some mouth-watering _
bakery and pastry shops. At the time of Henri IV this was already the most
bustling spot on the Left Bank. On 2 September 1792 it was a fine recruitingground for volunteers for the defence of the motherland - ‘la défense de la Patrie
en danger’ - that is, for the three-day slaughter that was about to commence. The
first four victims, four new detainees on their way to the prison of the abbey,
were slain at this street junction by the delirious mob. Likewise, a barricade was
erected here on the first day of the 1848 Revolution, to the fervent cries of ‘Vive
la République!’ Today this is a place of peace and fun, especially if the jazz musicians are about. The Hotel La Louisiane, the home of Simone de Beauvoir during
the heyday of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, holds its own in the midst of the colourful
fun, at n° 60 rue de Seine.

TO SAINT-SULPICE AND THE LUXEMBOURG
