THE 7th ARRONDISSEMENT
very year 2.5 million people converge on the 7th arrondissement to climb
HB: the Eiffel Tower and over 125 million have done so since it was inaugurated in 1889. Parisians make up only 5% of the visitors and often under
pressure from their children. Most turn their noses up at this emblem of touristy
kitsch, as do quite a number of worldly foreigners. A hundred years ago, by contrast, people responded to the Tower with childlike spontaneity. On 31 March
1889, the second anniversary of the beginning of its construction, a 60-strong tailcoated, top-hatted and monocled party made the first official ascent. Prime Minister Gustave Tirard gave up at the first floor, followed by most of the others, but Gustave Eiffel persevered, urging the last 10 breathless participants on to the top,
where, with Paris spreading at his feet, he was awarded the Légion d’honneur by
the Minister of Trade, Gustave Lockroy. The honour, however, should have been

shared by the two original designers, Koechkin and Nouguier, who were engineers in Eiffel’s company and whose project had won the competition to build a
striking monument for the 1889 Universal Exhibition. Officially, the Exhibition
was to commemorate the centenary of the French Revolution and among the projects in competition was a gigantic guillotine in honour of the victims of the
Terror. But, above all, by organizing the Exhibition, the Third Republic, beleaguered by anarchists, revisionists and Boulangistes, sought to boost patriotic feelings and achieve political cohesion. The Exhibition was to mark the recovery of
the Republic and hail France’s spectacular entry into modernity. It was to bestow
upon her international prestige and dazzle the world with France’s technological
wizardry. Magnitude reigned supreme, superlatives were on every lip. The gigantic Galérie des Machines, but especially the Eiffel Tower, nicknamed

‘La

Colossale’, was naturally the highlight of the Fair. Rising 318 metres above the
ground, it was twice the height of the tallest construction hitherto ever built by
man. Only in 1930 would the Chrysler building in New York challenge it and put
an end to its supremacy, though never to its status as an emblem. Despite its
gigantic dimensions, the Tower weighed only 7,000 tons, an awesome technical
feat in itself. Yet, on 7 May 1889, the day of its solemn inauguration, none of the
lifts worked!
Not everyone had greeted the project favourably - there was a lot of apprehension and harsh criticism against it. Some Parisians, endowed with exuberant
imagination and too panic-stricken to worry about mathematical accuracy, were
terrified that the 300-metre tower would sway and collapse, crushing the city all
the way to Montmartre! But the main campaign against the Eiffel Tower was


based on aesthetic grounds. Guy de Maupassant, after an impulse to pack up and

move out of the capital, decided instead to eat in the second-floor restaurant, the

only spot in Paris from where it could not be seen. He and 50 other celebrities
from the world of arts and letters - Charles Gounod, Leconte de Lisle, Francois
Coppée, Alexandre Dumas, Charles Garnier - signed a petition in the name of Art
and Civilisation, against the ‘monstrous construction’, and showered on her mul-

tiple metaphors such as ‘hollow candlestick’, ‘solitary riddled suppository’, ‘bald
umbrella’ and ‘skeleton’. The more progressive members of the intelligentsia,
thought differently. The painter Robert Delaunay, one of the champions of
modernity, preferred the Tower to any other model, to judge by the number of
paintings he devoted to her. As part of the World Fair, the Eiffel Tower was
meant to be an ephemeral structure and only Eiffel’s influential position enabled
him to obtain a 20-year concession to exploit it. In 1909 the enemies of the Tower
intensified their protest campaign, claiming that ‘in any case she is useless’ (the
use of the female gender puzzled Irwin Shaw who saw it rather as a phallic symbol). Such an argument carried weight in those utilitarian days. Fortunately, its
height was its salvation: wireless was beginning to be used to transmit messages,
and the tall iron tower proved to be a marvellous antenna. The first news bulletin
was broadcast from the Eiffel Tower in 1925 and in 1935 a score of excited
enthusiasts picked up its first television broadcast, thrilled at the sight of a black
disc bouncing on the screen!

The presence of this futuristic structure in the most backward-looking
arrondissement may seem incongruous. Indeed, 150 families of the old nobility

are still firmly established in their sanctuary of Faubourg Saint-Germain - the Duc
and Duchesse de Harcourt on rue Vaneau, the Prince Guy de Polignac on rue Barbet-de-Jouy, the Duc and Duchesse de Noailles on the quai d’Orsay, the Prince

and Princesse de la Tour d’ Auvergne on Place du Palais-Bourbon, the Duc and
Duchesse d’Orléans on Place Vauban... Walled within their magnificent 18thcentury hdtels, entre cour et jardin (between a courtyard in front and a garden at
the back), they still live in splendid seclusion, side by side, however, with the
Republic that has usurped their rights and has robbed them of many of their
splendid homes. Over 40 institutions and ministries, including the Prime Minister’s headquarters at the H6tel Matignon, now occupy the nobility’s dwellings. As
well as the Republic’s tricolours, 24 foreign flags of embassies also fly over the
arrondissement. These too are established in the nobility’s former mansions and,
like the Republican institutions, enjoy the heavy protection of the police. The
presence of the police has turned the 7th into the safest arrondissement of Paris
for the benefit of all its residents, aristocrats and commoners

alike. For there is

plenty to protect in this territory of top-ranking politicians and army officers (De


Gaulle’s Paris base was on avenue de Breteuil), of diplomats, of successful writers and of haute couture designers, some of whom accumulate immense wealth
behind the discreet facades, sometimes even extravagant luxury. One residence is
said to have a bamboo forest inside, another a full-sized elephant carved in boxwood, another yet a dreamlike setting of Beauty and the Beast. This is also the
centre of antique dealers most of whom are based in ‘Le Carré Rive Gauche’ in
the heart of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, a rectangle bounded by quai Voltaire,
rue de |’Université, rue des Saints-Péres and rue du Bac, where the greatest con-

centration of antique shops in Paris is to be found.
It all began in 543 with the foundation by Childebert of the early Christian
shrine that from the 10th century on, was to become the formidable abbey of
Saint-Germain (see chapter on the 6th arr.) The area around the abbey developed
as a result of its presence and by the 13th century became a separate borough. It
did not have aristocratic connotations until the 17th century, when Marguerite de
Valois (also known as Queen Margot), forced out of the Louvre because of her
uncertain social position, moved to her new palace on the corner of the present
rue de Seine and the quai Malaquais. Its magnificent gardens extended north into
what is now the 7th arrondissement, beyond rue de Bellechasse. When the estate

was sold after the Queen’s death to pay off her debts, local people mourned the
gardens to which Queen Margot had generously allowed them access, but the
real-estate developer Monsieur Barbier rubbed his hands with pleasure: within 14
years (1606-20) he had sliced up the entire property, opened new streets, erected
new buildings and brought its value up twentyfold, not unlike his fellow developers in the Marais and on the Ile Saint-Louis (now in the 3rd and 4th arr.).
Among the first noble families to settle here were the Saint-Simon. The Duc de
Saint-Simon, father of the writer of the Mémoires, took up residence at the Hétel

de Plessis-Chatillon on rue Saint-Dominique in 1650. Ten years later the
Duchesse de Chevreuse, the famous heroine of the Fronde, moved to the Hétel de
Luynes, also on rue Saint-Dominique. At the same time, after the Counter-Refor-

mation in the first half of the 17th century, there was a rapid development of
monastic life and many religious institutions settled in the area, attracted by the
large expanses of available land outside the city walls and hoping to enjoy the
protection of the abbey of Saint-Germain. Among them was the Foreign Missions
on the corner of rue du Bac and rue de La Fresnay, the only religious institution
in the arrondissement to have remained on the same premises for over 300 years.
The second half of the 17th century was a favourable time for the future 7th
because, for one thing, the abbey, anxious to increase its income, was selling off

parts of its huge domain, at reasonable prices. This happened to coincide with the
decline of the Marais, by now too noisy and crowded and quite a distance from
the Louvre. The court’s move to Versailles in 1682 sounded the Marais’s death-


knell. The centre of gravity of the privileged inevitably shifted west, notably to
the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, close to the Louvre and on the way to Versailles.
Many families would have willingly opted for the more countrified and therefore
more appealing Faubourg Saint-Germain, had it been connected with the Right
Bank by a proper bridge. At the beginning of the 17th century the two banks were
connected only by a ferryboat, which had been put into service in 1564 to transport blocks of stones extracted from the quarries south-west of Paris to the building site of the Tuileries Palace. A country road was opened between the quarries
and the river - now rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, rue Saint-Placide, rue Dupin
and, finally, rue du Bac which led to the ferry (bac) - allowing the transport to
skirt the city. Not until 1632 was a bridge - the red painted Pont Rouge - thrown
over this part of the Seine, just east of the old ferry, in line with the present rue de
Beaune. It was a primitive, rickety bridge, unfit for vehicles, and often damaged
or flooded. “The Pont Rouge has been washed away to Saint-Cloud,” wrote
Madame de Sévigné mockingly of its final doom. To cross the river one had to go
all the way to the Pont-Neuf and, that being a place of ill repute, wary ladies such
as Madame de Sablé would travel in their carriages as far as Notre-Dame in order
to avoid it.
However, in 1689, when Jules Hardouin-Mansart’s beautiful Pont Royal was

completed on the site of the old ferry, the Faubourg Saint-Germain and the Tuileries were brought together. From then on it took only a couple of minutes to
‘cross the waters’, as the expression went, and a new era began for the Faubourg.
Admittedly by now the centre of gravity of aristocratic life had shifted west to
Versailles, but many believed this would be temporary. Besides, the more independent-spirited members of the nobility did not follow the King to Versailles,
where he kept the courtiers in check, but preferred the intellectual freedom of the
salons littéraires held in the town’s sumptuous hétels particuliers. Towards the
close of the reign of Louis XIV, when the frivolous atmosphere in Versailles had
been dampened by the King’s illness and bereavements, as well as by the influence of the austere Madame de Maintenon, many courtiers, feeling increasingly
constrained by the pomp and etiquette of court life, were eager to join their peers
in the city.
The great migration back to Paris began during the Regency, which followed
the death of the Sun King in 1715, when even the government left Versailles and
resettled in the capital for a while. With the economic boom brought about by La
Compagnie de |’Inde and the Louisiana adventure, Paris became a new Eldorado
blessed with easy money and feverish speculation, which benefitted first and foremost the Faubourg Saint-Germain, the new stronghold of the fashionable set.
Magnificent mansions sprang up throughout the neighbourhood, such as the
Palais de Bourbon (now the National Assembly), built for the dowager Duchesse


de Bourbon/Condé, the legitimized daughter of Louis XIV and Madame de
Montespan, and the neighbouring Hétel de Lassay, built at the same time by her
lover, the Marquis de Lassay (now the residence of the National Assembly‘s president). The building spree slackened in the second half of the 18th century owing
both to the increasing scarcity of land and to the Seven Year War; only a quarter
of the houses in the Faubourg were built at the time of Louis XVI.
Meanwhile, the old nobility was shedding the last vestiges of its feudal veneer,
whilst perpetuating its wealth by arranging marriages with nouveau riche families, which was already the case in the Marais in the 17th century: “JI faut bien
fumer ses terres” (“One does have to manure one’s land”), Madame de Sévigné
had written at the time. A score of small ‘courts’ (salons) replaced the royal one,
presided over by such clever ladies as the great rivals Madame Geoffrin, on
Faubourg Saint-Honoré, and Madame du Deffand, on Faubourg Saint-Germain.

Though by this time old and blind, the Marquise du Deffand had been powerful ~
and compelling in her younger days and is said to have been the mistress of the
Regent, Philippe d’Orléans. After her husband’s death she retired to the convent
of Saint-Joseph on rue Saint-Dominique, where she opened her celebrated salon,
lavishly covered with buttercup-coloured moire. Princes and dukes were among
her guests, as well as Montesquieu, Voltaire, d’ Alembert and Fontenelle. Before

his final return to the capital, the decrepit Voltaire wrote to Madame du Deffand,
“T am coming back dead but I want to be resuscitated in order to throw myself at
the feet of Madame la Marquise du Deffand.”
Influential visitors came also from across the Channel - David Hume, Lord
Shelburn, Gibbon and, above all, Horace Walpole, for whom the 70-year-old

Marquise felt a burning passion. Walpole, 20 years her junior, did not return her
passion, but he felt a sincere friendship towards her and was greatly appreciative
of her salon, which, he believed, as other foreigners did, embodied the essence of
French spirit and intellect for which he had left the salon of her rival, Madame
Geoffrin.
The politest society, however, according to contemporaries, gathered in the
home of Julie de Lespinasse. Julie had been lady’s companion to the old
Marquise du Deffand but the latter threw her out when she discovered that she
was the centre of attraction during the day, when the Marquise used to sleep (the
Marquise’s gatherings took place at night). Julie’s friends, especially d’ Alembert,
helped her set up her own salon on the corner of rue de Bellechasse and rue SaintDominique.
While the discussions in the 17th-century salons were restricted to intellectual
exchanges, in the 18th century new ideas were put forth and independent opinions
debated around beautiful dinner tables in dining-halls, which were themselves an
innovation. Thus, unknowingly, amidst the extravagant luxury of the Faubourg


Saint-Germain, a carefree, spoilt aristocracy was paving the way for its imminent
downfall.
Ironically, it was in this area that the French Revolution actually preluded on
the morning of 14 July, when the Hotel des Invalides, the home Louis XIV had
built for the war invalids in 1670, was raided for 32,000 guns, used to storm the
Bastille a few hours later. Moreover, the Champ-de-Mars, the parade-ground of
the royal Ecole Militaire, on the western edge of the present 7th arrondissement,
was chosen by the new Republic for the celebration of the first Bastille Day in
1790, as well as for such revolutionary rituals as La Féte de l’Etre Supréme on 8
June 1794, a substitute for the day of Pentecost, by means of which Robespierre
attempted to dispose of over 1,500 years of Christianity.
Somehow, none of the above actually altered the aristocratic character of the

7th; on the contrary, Napoleon, the ambivalent heir of the Revolution, ultimately
preserved it. His modest social origins had left Napoleon with complex feelings
towards the old nobility, a fascination tinted with jealousy. A child of Republican,
egalitarian ideals, he had no sooner grabbed the reigns of power than he proceeded to create a new nobility whom he encouraged to settle in the aristocratic
Faubourg, as also some of his closest relations, including his stepson Eugéne de
Beauharnais at the Hotel de Torcy and his own brother Lucien Bonaparte at the
Hotel de Brienne. It did not take these people long to settle into the property of
the dispossessed nobility, but they lacked pedigree and therefore sought the
friendship of the surviving old families who had retrieved their homes during the
First Empire and were now trickling back to the Faubourg. On one occasion the
Duc de Luynes was visiting Lucien de Bonaparte in his newly acquired Hotel de
Brienne, when he remarked on two of his old paintings hanging on one of the
walls. Whether out of deference for the Duke or out of sheer indifference to art,
the same evening Lucien Bonaparte had the paintings returned to their original
owner at the Hotel de Luynes.
in view of the above, it is hardly a coincidence that Napoleon is associated with
the 7th arrondissement more than any other French ruler. Knowing more than
anyone, how to integrate old values into new, he made this the area for the celebration of his military achievements, on which his modern state rested. His victorious armies and their heroes were honoured in the prestigious military
establishments founded by his predecessors, the Invalides by Louis XIV and the
Ecole Militaire (for. the training of officers from a poor background) by Louis
XV. Military ceremonies took place on the Champ-de-Mars, and the lion that
Napoleon had plundered from Piazza San Marco in Venice now surmounted the
spectacular fountain of the vast Esplanade des Invalides. (The lion was restored to
Venice in 1815, after Napoleon’s defeat.) Similarly, the guns captured in Vienna
in 1803 were set up here and used in salutes. The famous order of the Légion


d’honneur was founded at the Invalides in 1802 but moved to its present location
at the Hétel de Salm opposite Musée d’Orsay two years later. Above all, the
chapel of the Invalides was to become the ‘Elyseum of the brave’, the final abode
of France’s war heroes, first and foremost of Napoleon himself, whose remains
were brought here from Saint-Helena in great pomp on 15 December 1840, thus
fulfilling the Emperor’s wish to be buried “by the Seine, among the French people whom I have loved so.” Thus the 7th arrondissement remains associated in the
mind with Napoleon and with the military. The Hétel des Invalides now houses
the Musée des Armées and the Ministry of Defence occupies the Hétel de Brienne, Napoleon’s gift to his brother.
Napoleon, however, mingled with few members of the old nobility, nearly all
of whom remained in exile until the Restoration. When the émigrés finally
returned, times had changed and many had to renounce the luxury and glamour of
their former lifestyles; some had to share or let out part of their homes and some
ladies even had to make their own clothes... Unable to adjust to the rise of capitalism during the Second Empire, the Faubourg turned its back stoically on the
court life of the Tuileries and retreated into its shell. But Haussmann’s transformation of Paris, which accelerated during the Third Republic, was now reaching
the 7th arrondissement. Most of the changes, fortunately, were in areas that had

hitherto not been developed, predominantly west of the Esplanade des Invalides.
Miraculously, neither the disastrous breach created by the opening of the Boulevard Saint-Germain, nor the damage caused by the Civil War of the Commune
(when some beautiful mansions were burnt down, notably La Cour des Comptes,
where the Musée d’Orsay now stands, and the Hétel de Salm opposite, now the
Musée de la Légion d’Honneur) were fatal to the arrondissement. But the social
make-up of its population was bound to change, as most of the elegant blocks of
flats along the new avenues were built for the well-to-do bourgeoisie.
With the arrival of the bourgeoisie the 7th was to enter the modern age, after
all. The successive Universal Exhibitions held on the Champ-de-Mars - and
beyond as they grew in size - were meant to trumpet France’s economic and technical achievements to the world, not least to England! They were also meant to
honour the new moneyed bourgeoisie. On the other hand, the large influx of visitors threatened to disfigure the subdued, outdated, elegant arrondissement and to
disturb its serenity, but traditions die hard in the 7th and when the pavilions were
dismantled, the crowds vanished and the 7th was restored unscathed to its privileged residents.
And they are certainly privileged. No other arrondissement enjoys such a central position in an uncongested area of broad avenues and greenery. As much as a
third of it is covered with parks, gardens and squares, some, often the larger ones,
being private, and the river is never too far away. Ironically, of the industrial


intruders into this arrondissement, the most controversial is the only one to have

survived. Somehow, as it rises conspicuously against the Paris sky, the Eiffel
Tower remains in harmony with the perfect symmetry and the beautiful vista of
the Champ-de-Mars and the Jardins du Trocadéro that roll down towards it on the
opposite bank of the Seine. It took French genius for town planning to integrate
this gigantic piece of Meccano into the landscape of an arrondissement that, more
than any other, embodies the Ancien Régime.

WHERE TO WALK...
FAUBOURG SAINT-GERMAIN (THE EAST)
he 7th arrondissement covers a much larger area than the previous ones, but it
is mainly the old Faubourg Saint-Germain that is of interest to the pedestrian.
Its exploration should end with a climb to the top of the Tour Montparnasse (in
the 15th arr.), which offers a spectacular aerial view of the Faubourg and an indication of how much of its area is still covered with gardens.
The opening of the Musée d’Orsay in 1987 brought the old Faubourg into the
limelight and to the attention of 3 million visitors per year, but somehow it
remains an area of discreet and refined dignity, impermeable to this crude age. On
this walk, start from the corner of Boulevard Saint-Germain and rue des SaintsPéres. This is where rue Saint-Dominique began until 1866, when Haussmann
opened the Boulevard Saint-Germain and destroyed the magnificent hdtels that
stood in the way. Such was the fate of the Hétel de Salvois (on the site of the present n° 188 Boulevard Saint-Germain and n° 48 rue des Saints-Péres), the home
of the Saint-Simon family who were among the early settlers in the Faubourg.
- The Duc de Saint Simon, author of the justly famous and informative Mémoires,
was born here in 1675.
Rue des Saints-Péres marks the eastern border of the arrondissement (the odd

numbers belong to the 6th) and the eastern edge of the ‘Carré Rive Gauche’, the
enclave of fabulous antique shops that extends between the river and the Boulevard Saint-Germain, as far as rue du Bac to the west. It also has leafy, hidden

courtyards, architectural gems and a profusion of gorgeous, 18th-century,
wrought-iron staircases. One such courtyard is situated at n° 16, the home of an
antique dealer. Soon after you will cross rue de |’Université, reminiscent of the
days when the University owned the strip of land between the abbey of SaintGermain-des-Prés and the present National Assembly, known as the Pré-auxClercs. It was given to the University by Louis VII in the 12th century, but was a
constant source of grievance to the abbey ever since, because of the students who
came over from the Latin Quarter to cause a rumpus.
Turn left into rue de Verneuil, a haven of provincial drowsiness. Don’t let the



Sp

FONTAINE

DES 4 SAISONS

g
¢| Vshoes

ae

OMY
SQRE DE LA ROCHEFOUCAULDS
pm}

a


%
PSQRE DES MISSIONS ETRANGERES
ABYLONE

LE BON March) 4SQRE BOUCICAULT
A

Ns

REALISATION CARTOGRAPHIQUE : BATISTA E.


excellent antique shops, with their beautiful old china, ceramic tiles and the wonderful smell of old wood that wafts from the harpsichord dealer’s, distract you
from the architectural beauty above - notably the elegant, curving profile of the
old houses on the left-hand side of the street. Notice the original circular staircase
at n° 13 and the picturesque corner of rue Allent, level with n° 15 - somewhat
evocative of a sleepy village in Provence. Stroll into the peaceful rue Allent
before continuing on rue de Verneuil. Beyond rue du Bac, rue de Verneuil is lined
with succulent food shops and has been dubbed

‘le hameau

(‘hamlet’) de

Verneuil’ for its village atmosphere. Hitherto it has catered to French locals, but a
Vietnamese and an Indian restaurant have already started to change its Vieille
France character. At n° 58 stands an extravagant-looking building, uncanningly
resembling a war memorial, dedicated to the memory of a little-known 18th-century figure, the Maréchal de Bercheny, also a Hungarian baron and Count. The
18th-century Hotel d’Avejean across the street at n° 53/55 is prettier; it is named
after its first landlord, the Marquis d’ Avejean, who was a musketeer. During the
Revolution, it was sold off in a lottery for 50 francs! Today this is La Maison des
Ecrivains, which supports writers and organizes literary activities. There is a very
pretty coffee shop in the flowery old courtyard, which is open to all and sundry.
The next-door corner house of rue de Poitiers has an elegant facade with Italianate busts, a splendid staircase and a beautiful paved courtyard. The magnificent hdtel at n° 12 rue de Poitiers is now home to Ecole Polytechnique alumni
(there are roughly 15,000 Polytechniciens working in France), whose status can
also be measured by the menu posted in the archway!
Turn right into rue de Poitiers and right into rue de Lille. The brasserie Le Télégraphe at n° 41 was the home of the female employees of the post office in the
19th century. Though not renowned for its cooking, its spectacular Belle Epoque
setting makes it a very popular restaurant.
Retrace your steps by way of rue de Lille, lined with old mansions all the way.
Turn left into rue des Saints-Péres and turn left into the quai Voltaire, undoubtedly one of the beauty-spots of Paris: to your left is Hardouin-Mansart’s elegant
Pont Royal, and across the river, the Tuileries Gardens, Place du Carrousel and

the Louvre. A beauty further enhanced by the fabulous antique shops and art galleries of world repute located in the magnificent hdtels of the quai. Balzac’s hero,
cousin Pons, already browsed here in the last century. On the other side of the
quai, by the water, are the more humble, picturesque bouquinistes, where Rudyard Kipling liked to browse, like so many other writers and artists. Quite a number even took up residence here.
At n° 1, the Hotel de Tessé, an 18th-century mansion with a wrought-iron balcony, was built for the widowed Comtesse de Tessé and her son, on the site of a
previous hétel which had burnt down in 1760, at the same time as the landlord,


the 80-year-old Marquis de Bacqueville. This eccentric gentleman had gone off to
the Opera, knowing full well that a fire had broken out in his house. When he
returned from the show, he found the house in flames, but, wishing to rescue

some papers, he walked straight inside and never came out again! Eighteen years
earlier, emulating Icarus, he had taken off from the roof of his house, fitted with

two pairs of wings, hoping to soar off to the skies. His brief flight ended on a
wash-shed on the Seine, and he with a broken leg. The mansion next door was

occupied at one time by Louise-Renée de Penacoét de Kéroualle, the artful mistress of Charles II of England, who had used her charms to climb the social ladder

and become Duchess of Portsmouth. Louis XIV knew her strength, which came
in handy in his dealings with England. After the death of Charles II the greedy
Duchess removed as many works of art as she could handle from his magnificent
collection and crammed them into her residence on quai Voltaire.
Anatole France spent much of his childhood in his father’s bookshop at n° 9,
where he claimed to have acquired his taste for the arts. Between 1829 and 1835
Delacroix lived on the 5th floor at n° 13, in an artist’s studio advantageously fac-

ing the north, where the idea of his renowned painting La Liberté Guidant le Peuple may have germinated. Delacroix took over the studio from Horace Vernet, the
famous battle-scene painter, when the latter was appointed director of the Villa
Medici academy in Rome. Several years later, the painter Corot came to live here,
while Ingres occupied a studio at n° 17. N° 19 was already a lodging-house when
Baudelaire stayed in room n° 47 (which can still be seen) between 1856 and
1858, absorbed in his collection of poems, Les Fleurs du Mal. In the winter of
1861-2, Richard Wagner completed his Die Meistersingers at this hotel, where
the Finnish composer Sibelius and the writer Oscar Wilde also stayed for a while.
Between 1839 and 1849 Alfred de Musset stayed at n° 25. The best known house
on the quai, however, is n° 27, the home of the Marquis Charles de Villette,

where Voltaire died on 30 May 1778, at the age of 84. Voltaire had left the quai
in 1723, finding it too noisy, but on 10th February 1778, he came back here to
terminate his life, and Villette, his host and admirer, made sure he was given a

room overlooking the quiet courtyard. In March his play Jréne created a sensation
at the Théatre Francais (The troupe was performing at the Palais des Tuileries at

the time, their theatre on rue des Fossés-Saint-Germain, now Ancienne Comédie

in the 6th arr., having closed down for safety reasons). A huge crowd pressed
around Voltaire’s triumphant coach on the quai, then called quai des Théatins,
after the Order founded here by Mazarin in 1647. The Marquis de Villette had the
quai illuminated for the occasion, and had the street sign quai des Théatins
replaced by a plaque that read quai Voltaire. The authorities did not share the
people’s enthusiasm and the next morning the police were sent to remove the
plaque. Nor was Voltaire appreciated by the church for that matter: when he died


the priest of Saint-Sulpice refused to accept his body, which had to be transferred
to Romilly, east of Paris. As for the Marquis de Villette’s initiative to rename the
quai after his admired friend, it only came into effect after the brutal fall of the
Ancien Régime, on 11 July 1791, when Voltaire’s remains were transferred to the

Panthéon. On that occasion, “500,000 over-emotional Parisians” were reportedly
gathered on the quai Voltaire, “weeping and rejoicing at the same time.” The quai
was strewn with flowers, while young girls, clad in white and adorned with garlands of roses, posed at n° 27. At their head stood the Marquise de Villette personifying some Greek goddess, in retaliation for the insult inflicted on Voltaire by
the church 13 years earlier. The Marquis de Villette’s efforts to immortalize his
friend extended into every area of his life: when he died in 1793 it turned out that
he had left a nine-month-old baby rejoicing in the name Voltaire-Villette!
Turn left into rue de Beaune for the sheer delight of a window-shopping spree,
then come back to the quai. Five delectable sisters, the grand-daughters of the
Duc de Mazarin, on their mother’s side, lived at the Hétel de Mailly-Nesle, at n°

29. One by one they succumbed to the charms of the gallant Louis XV, all but the
third who was kept under tight guard by her husband, as confirmed in the following verse:
L’une est presque en oubli, |’ autre presque en poussiére.
La troisiéme est en pied, la quatriéme attend,

Pour faire place a la derniére...
(One is almost forgotten, the other almost turned to dust.
The third is on the active list, the fourth is waiting, to
make room for the last...)
The last was to become the famous Duchesse de Chateauroux, upon whom the
royal lover bestowed an annual pension of 80,000 pounds. The mob called her,

more prosaically, “La P... du Roi” (‘The King’s Wh...’) In 1744 she died suddenly, aged only 27, in her room on the first floor (it still exists). The second
eldest daughter, had given the King a son and died just as mysteriously at age 28.
The King did not grieve for long, for by the next year the Pompadour had completely captured his heart and embarked on a 19-year reign as his favourite, which
ended only with her death in 1764.
Turn left into rue du Bac, the road to the ferry (bac) that carried the stones to

the site where the Palais des Tuileries was being built. Alexandre Dumas’s hero
d’ Artagnan lived on the site of n° 1 from 1659 to 1673, when he was killed dur-

ing the siege of Maastricht. The Grey Musketeers whom he had commanded had
their barracks along this part of rue du Bac (n° 13-17) and rue de Beaune, which
is probably why he came to live here. D’Artagnan’s two children were born here
and he was held in such great esteem that King Louis XIV and Queen Marie-


Thérése acted as godparents to his elder child, and the Grand Dauphin and the
Grande Mademoiselle to the younger one.
Turn left into rue de Gribeauval, an elegant little-street with some stunning lux-

ury clothes shops, which leads to the pretty square and church of Saint-Thomasd’ Aquin, a peaceful haven, though not quite the beauty-spot it was before
Haussmann’s ruthless opening of the Boulevard Saint-Germain. The church, originally built as a Dominican noviciate, had its entrance on the now demolished part
of rue Saint-Dominique, opposite the magnificent Hétel de Luynes, from where it
could be reached by way of a beautiful, tree-lined alley. Anne de RohanMontbazon, Duchesse de Luynes, was living at the Hétel de Luynes when she
came over to lay the cornerstone of the new monastery on 5 March 1682. The
Revolution did away with the noviciate, but in 1804, when Christianity was no
longer anathema, a huge congregation gathered around the front steps of the
church, where Pope Pius VII gave them his blessing. It then became the parishchurch of the Faubourg’s aristocracy, the returning émigrés’ favourite place of
worship. Turn right into rue de Luynes and continue beyond Boulevard SaintGermain into the enchanting Square de Luynes, a reminder of past splendour. The
H6tel de Luynes was built in 1650 for the Duchesse de Chevreuse, widow of

Charles de Luynes who had been Louis XIII’s closest counsellor. It was one of
the earliest and most magnificent mansions in the Faubourg and miraculously survived the fury of the Revolution, albeit stripped of many of its works of art.
Some, however, were rescued by the zealous Alexandre Lenoir, who transferred

them to the newly opened Musée des Monuments Frangais, (in the 6th arr.). The
opening of Boulevard Saint-Germain deprived it of its front building and most of
its courtyard, the opening of Boulevard Raspail swept away a good part of its gardens, and the main building, with its marvellous 18th-century halls, was replaced
by blocks of flats. This time no one was to blame but the owners... The monumental staircase and its murals were saved and are now in the entrance hall of the
Musée Carnavalet (in the 3rd).
Retrace your steps, turn left into Boulevard Saint-Germain and right into rue du
Bac. Cross over to n° 46, which has a beautifully carved door surmounted by the
letter B. Jacques-Samuel Bernard, Marquis de Coubert, the elder son of a famous

financier, had inherited the fabulous sum of 33 million pounds, which enabled

him to build this magnificent hétel and indulge in a life of extravagance that
ended in bankruptcy. Voltaire, who had been involved in his financial transactions, also got his fingers burnt in the process. The two magnificent wrought-iron
staircases are still there, as well as the imitation-marble panelling. Only royalty
and the high nobility could afford real marble which was too dear at the time,
even for somebody as rich as Bernard. The gorgeous 18th-century knocker on the
entrance door, like much other ironwork in Paris, has been spirited away some-


where. The back garden, although just a tiny fragment
of the original grounds another victim of the Boulevard Saint-Germain - remain
s a blissful oasis of green.
Cross the Boulevard Saint-Germain and continue along
rue du Bac, a narrow,
bustling street in this section, bursting with lush food
shops which distract one
from the street’s architectural treasures. The site betwee
n n°s 68 and 80 was
occupied by the Order of the Visitation Sainte-Marie in
the second half of the
17th century, all gone with the Revolution. When the original
, modest chapel was
built in the 17th century, a humble girl, deliberately chosen
for her poverty, was
asked to lay the cornerstone. However, when the church
was reconstructed in
1775, it was Marie-Antoinette who was asked to do so.

Turn left into rue de Grenelle, once the road leading from the
abbey of Saint-

Germain-des-Prés to the plain of Grenelle (now in the 15th
arr.), a favourite hunt-

ing-ground. The name Grenelle derives from garenne, meaning
‘warren’. The
parallel rue de Varenne (a distortion of garenne) and the
nearby rue de
Bellechasse also reflect the use of the area for hunting. On your right,
at n° 55/57,
is Bouchardon’s gigantic fountain known as La Fontaine des Quatre
Saisons,
where the four seasons of the year are represented by chubby cupids,
decked in
spring flowers, harvesting, revelling at grape-picking time (which is also huntingtime, hence a frightened rabbit making a dash to escape), sheltering under a
blanket, and so on. Such an idyllic depiction of nature accorded with the tastes of
the
frivolous society of 18th-century France, unwary of the impending storm.

Voltaire, however, was unimpressed by the fountain. For one thing, he found
the

street too narrow for this overbearing monument. He also nicknamed the fountain
‘La Trompeuse’ (‘the deceiver’) because it contained “so much stone for so little
water...” This was probably a good thing given that the fountains in Paris were
supplied with the filthy water of the Seine and were to blame for a couple of
cholera epidemics. The fountain is also deceptive insofar as it is only a thin facing
on the wall behind, a consequence of the meanness of the nuns of the Recollettes,
who refused to give up more than this narrow strip of land, although their estate
extended as far as rue de Varenne.
Back on rue du Bac their old premises can still be seen at n° 83/85, but are
hardly recognizable. During the Revolution their chapel was found suitable for a
theatre - Le Théatre des Victoires Nationales - and the convent was therefore
spared. The neighbouring convent of the Visitation was less fortunate and disappeared in the turmoil. The buildings that now stand at n°s 79 and 81 were erected
during the Restoration. The delicate niches are typical of the architectural style of
the time. Across the street, at n° 94, is a rare example of an Art Nouveau shop
window, a style dubbed style nouille (‘noodle’) by the writer Paul Morand. At n°
98, on the corner of rue de Varenne, two golden angels on either side of the invit-


ing golden head of Bacchus are a remnant of an old tavern, Les Deux Anges, previously known as La Cloche d’Or. In a room on the first floor a man called
Cadoudal fomented a conspiracy against the First-Consul and future Emperor.
The conspiracy aborted and Cadoudal, together with 11 of his accomplices, perished soon after. Across the street, the Hétel de Ségur at n° 97 is an early 18th-

century house, built during the Regency for people devoted to easy living and
libertinage, as can be seen from the mischievous masks on the walls overlooking

the courtyard. Throughout the Second Empire it was the home of well-known
people, among them the Ambassador of the United States.
In 1825 the Comte de Noe moved to the next-door hétel, at n° 99. The Count
was a man of high status, a peer of France, but he also had a rebellious son,

Amédée de Noe, who had taken to drawing and was toying with the preposterous
idea of making it his livelihood. Evicted from the paternal hétel, Amédée carried
off the cook and moved to the humble suburb of Batignolles-Epinette north of ©
Paris (now in the 17th arr.). Shedding his previous identity, he assumed the name
of his predecessor of ancient times, Cham (French for Ham), the accursed son of
the Biblical Noah (Noé in French). Under this pen-name he became one of
France’s most famous caricaturists in the 19th century, contributing regularly to
the satirical Charivari, alongside Daumier and Gavarni.

Next door, the elegant Hotel de la Feuillade (n° 101) is a typical example of an
18th-century townhouse, built ‘between courtyard and garden’ (entre cour et
jardin). The H6tel de Sainte-Aldegonde, across the street at n° 102, takes pride in
its beautiful wrought iron and sculpted heads. This may have been the Swedish
Embassy before the Revolution, where Madame de Staél moved after her marriage in 1775. The neighbouring n° 104 has a delightful garden at the back of the
house, surpassed though by the Square de La Rochefoucauld at n° 108. A convalescent home was built here during the reign of Louis XIII. In the 18th century the
establishment had 21 beds and patients could stay here up to 15 days before
returning to their work. Soldiers, clergymen and lackeys were not admitted since
they were provided for elsewhere. Located in an area noted for its pure air and
tranquillity, the establishment was also reputed for its food, reported to be |
“healthy, abundant and clean” - certainly not the rule at the time!
The twin hétels at n°s 118 and 120 have beautifully carved doors representing
the four major continents, the work of Toro. Chateaubriand lived on the ground
floor of the back building between 1838 and 1848, a poor, sickly old man. Every
day, at precisely the same time, he would be seen walking over to the Abbayeaux-Bois, at 16 rue de Sévres, to visit his old friend Madame de Récamier. The

neighbours would then set their watches accordingly... It is here that
Chateaubriand wrote the last few lines of his Mémoires d’Outre-Mer:


En tragant ces derniers mots, ce 16 novembre

1841, ma

fenétre qui donne 4 |’ouest sur les jardins des Missions
étrangéres, est ouverte: il est six heures du matin. fei

vois les reflets d’une aurore dont je ne reverrai pas se
lever le soleil.
(Whilst writing these last words, this 16 November 1841,
my window looking west over the gardens of the Foreign
Missions is open: it is six in the morning [...] I see the
reflection of dawn, the sunrise of which I shall not see
again)

However, Chateaubriand was not to die until seven years later, on 4 July 1848,
when he was 80. The funeral service took place in the neighbouring chapel of the
Foreign Missions, at n° 128, then an annexe of the parish church of Saint-

Thomas-d’ Aquin. In the congregation were Victor Hugo, Sainte-Beuve and
Balzac, who left totally contradictory testimonies of the event. The seminary of
the Foreign Missions was founded in the 17th century and is the oldest religious
institution to have survived in the 7th arrondissement. La Salle des Martyrs, open
to the public, illustrates the unspeakable sufferings of its missionaries in the Far
East. The splendid gardens, invisible from the street, are unfortunately not open
to the public except by special arrangement. A wall separates them from the gardens of the Hotel Matignon, the residence of the Prime Minister, which are the
largest private gardens in the capital.
As you reach rue de Sévres you will come to the Bon Marché department store,
which contrary to its name is no longer inexpensive. Noted for its household
goods and haberdashery, until recently it catered predominantly to a solid bourgeois Vieille France clientele, who included the late Madame de Gaulle. It is also
the only department store on the Left Bank, which fits with the tradition, dating
back to the 12th century, that commercial activities were, until recently, concen-

trated on the Right Bank. The saying went: La Rive Gauche pense, la Rive Droite
dépense (‘the Left Bank thinks, the Right Bank spends’).
When, in 1852, Aristide Boucicaut, a shop assistant at Au Petit Saint-Thomas,
at n° 27/31 rue du Bac, was offered a partnership in a little hosiery shop, Au Bon
Marché, on the corner of rue du Bac and rue de Sévres, he little imagined that by
1863 he would be its sole owner. Nor could he have foreseen the staggering
expansion of the establishment from an initial floor space of 30 sq. m to 26,000
within 60 years. Moreover, the new extended premises had an iron structure, the

symbol of modernity, and were designed by Gustave Eiffel, then at the pinnacle
of his fame (1889). The story of the Bon Marché is the success story of a man of
enterprise in the second half of the 19th century, the age of triumphant capitalism.


These gigantic ‘modern bazaars’, as Emile Zola called them, paved the way for
our consumer society, eliminating in the process many a helpless small tradesman. Pursuing his lifetime mission - the exploration of the mechanism of the society of his time - the relentless Zola set about to explore the world of the Bon
Marché, probing into all its aspects and into every minute detail, and then recreating it in his novel Au Bonheur des Dames. It was a perfectly lubricated piece of
machinery, dedicated to the maximization of profit and served by cogs in a wheel,
where only the mechanically fittest survived. In this world of sham, the irresistible weapon of advertising was used to lure the female client into the store
where, dazzled by the overflowing accumulation of goods and ever-changing
fashions, she was inevitably trapped.
Next to the Bon Marché is the Square Boucicaut, which commemorates

the

brilliant self-made-man, a possible place for a rest, albeit in one of the busiest
junctions of the Left Bank. Off this square is rue de Babylone, where at n° 57 is a
curio worth discovering, though quite a walk: a pagoda-shaped cinema, built in
1895/6 by one of the managers of the Bon Marché in the hope, so it is said, of
winning back his unfaithful wife. Japanism was the rage, which should have
pleased Madame, although the architect, Alexandre Marcel, was an authentic
Frenchman. The Chinese legation, who rented the premises for a while, were not

pleased to discover that some of the murals inside illustrated the victories of
Japan over China in 1931 and never moved in. In 1935 it was turned into a cinema and has remained so since. The movie-goer will be advised to try and combine a visit to its picturesque salon de thé with a movie session. All the more so
as this is the only picture-house to have survived in the 7th arrondissement.

FAUBOURG SAINT-GERMAIN (THE WEST)
