THE Ist ARRONDISSEMENT
t the heart of the ‘snail-shell’ (/’escargot), as the layout of Paris has come
Aw

be known, lies the Ist arrondissement, as to be expected from the

orderly French. It was also the first to be settled by the Celtic tribe of the
Parisi, the early inhabitants of Paris who in the 3rd century BC occupied I’Ile de
la Cité, the original nucleus of Paris, now

shared between the 1st and 4th

arrondissements.
French society also had its origins here, from the king down to the pleb. Except
for brief spells, this was the home of the kings of France, which made it the royal
arrondissement par excellence, as its royal squares, monuments and other landmarks testify: Place Dauphine built in honour of the Dauphin, the son of Henri IV
and future Louis XIII; Place des Victoires and Place Vendéme, which honour

Louis XIV; the Palais-Royal, the palatial home of Richelieu, glamorous enough
as an early childhood home for Louis XIV; the regal rue Saint-Denis, the
‘Champs-Elysées’ of medieval Paris, the sacred way through which the royal processions entered Paris, notably on their way to the cathedral of Notre-Dame after
the king’s coronation in Reims, and through which the kings were carried to their
final resting place in the basilica of Saint-Denis, north of Paris.
From Notre-Dame it was but a stone’s throw to the King’s Palace on the site of
today’s Palais de Justice. In the 3rd century, the Roman Emperor Julian had
already established his seat here, but it was only in the 6th century that the
Merovingian king Childebert made it the permanent home of the kings of France.
In the 13th century, the pious and beatified Louis IX built a private chapel adjoining the palace, la Chapelle Royale, now commonly known as la Sainte-Chapelle.
But above all, it was the Louvre, the subsequent residence of the kings of

France, and, in the 19th century, the Palais des Tuileries which adjoined it to the
west, that shone forth on the arrondissement, dazzling the rest of Europe, making
her other courts green with envy:
“He’ll make

your Paris Louvre

shake for it, were

it the

mistress-court of mighty Europe,”
William Shakespeare/Henry V.
The Louvre of Henry V’s time, was not the present building, but a medieval

fortress, turned into a royal residence by Charles V in 1368. Initially it was no
more than a defence tower, part of the fortification system that Philippe-Auguste
had built in 1190 round the part of Paris that lay north of the Seine, before


embarking on the Third Crusade. Wary of a potential threat from England by way
of the Seine, albeit upstream (which is how the Norsemen had invaded the city
three centuries earlier), he erected the Louvre on the right bank, at the westernmost point of the fortification, facing the Tour de Nesle on the opposite bank.
With the presence of the Plantagenets not so far down the river, at Gisors (in the
Vexin in Normandy), and with the vague memory of that horrendous devastation
of Paris by the Norsemen, he had good reason for concern: Philippe-Auguste had
no illusions about the Plantagenet Richard the Lionheart’s territorial designs,
even though he was his brother-in-law and was to accompany him on his holy
journey to Jerusalem.

Soon a wall 3,000 metres long, 3 metres thick and 10

metres high encircled the right bank of Paris, complete with an adjoining fortress,
just west of the present church of Saint-Germain-l’ Auxerrois. Inside, a round
keep, 19 metres in diameter, rose 31 metres above ground level - the initial Louvre. Upon his return in 1191, Philippe-Auguste deposited the Crown treasures and archives at the Louvre, which he considered the safest place in the capital, thereby adding to its prestige as ‘la plus halte tor de Paris la citet’ (‘the tallest tower
in Paris the city’), the aura of symbolising the monarchy’s power and glamour.
Charles V, though equally dedicated to the fortification of his capital, was also
an enlightened king: besides making the Louvre his residence, he collected within
its thick walls the kingdom’s manuscripts and founded the first royal library of
France.
Frangois I, settling into a new period of peace, well being and refinement,
decided to dispense with the defensive function of the Louvre and replaced the
medieval fortress with a Renaissance palace - an ambitious project completed
only by Henri IV. The people of Paris were quite upset by the sudden disappearance in 1528 of ‘la Grosse Tour’, where Charles V used to read and meditate. For

Francois I, however, fortresses had unpleasant associations: he had recently been
released from the fortress of Madrid where he had been kept captive by the
Emperor Charles V, who had defeated him at Pavia in 1525. His overhauled Louvre now became the sumptuous backdrop of scintillating celebrations, of colourful tournaments and jousts which made show of the magnificence of a new,
enlightened reign and meant to astonish its illustrious guests - in particular
Emperor Charles V of Spain, who was to be dazzled and humbled during his visit
to the Louvre in 1540. All the weather vanes had been gilded for the occasion, the

window casements enlarged, the window panes coloured, the staircases and apartments illuminated with brass candlesticks.
But when the celebrations were over, and the silk hangings and tapestries taken
down, the Louvre assumed its daily aspect, which was still largely medieval:

Frangois I had only had time to start the construction of the two sections that
flank the south west angle of the Cour Carrée. On the other hand, he bestowed the


artistic spirit of the Renaissance upon the Louvre, and he also started the painting
collection that would one day make it the largest painting museum in the world.
His was but an embryonic collection, comprising, nonetheless, the works of such
great masters as Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Titian, among them, and probably,
the most renowned painting in the Louvre, the Mona Lisa, which Francois I is
believed to have transferred to Paris from Amboise (in the Loire Valley) after the

death of da Vinci in 1519.
;
In 1593, four years after his accession to the throne of France, Henri IV agreed
to barter his Protestant religion for Paris and put an end to the bloody strife
between Protestants and Catholics: “Paris vaut bien une messe’ (“Paris is well
worth a mass’) were his famous words. Paris meant first and foremost the Lou-

vre. His ambitious schemes for it were already on his mind when he entered the
capital on 22 March 1594. A Swiss visitor to the building site confirmed the
King’s ambition when he wrote that “the edifice is so pompous and so vast that
once completed there will be no other like it in all Christendom”. By then the
Palais des Tuileries was facing the Louvre to the west, running perpendicularly to
the Seine from north to south. It had been built by Catherine de Medici in 1564,

the widow of Henri II and mother of three successive kings, Frangois II, Charles
IX and Henri III, as well as of Marguerite de Valois, his own wife. Henri IV set
out to connect the Palais des Tuileries to the Louvre by means of a colossal wing
of monumental grandeur - 470 metres long - La Grande Galerie, also known as la
Galerie du Bord de ]’Eau (‘waterfront gallery’) since it ran along the Seine. It met
the Palais des Tuileries at right angles and was completed by the elegant Pavillon
de Flore. (The Pavillon de Marsan on the northern side of the Palais des Tuileries,

was added only at the time of Louis XIV). This gigantic enterprise was a constant
headache for his minister Sully, who had to squeeze segments of the population
dry in order to raise the necessary funds.
The Galerie du Bord de |’Eau was built to house the best artisans and artists of
the kingdom and thus realize the artistic mission Henri IV had set for the Louvre,
which became the home of royalty, along with their 1500-strong army of servants
(who were not all lodged there, however), and of a select artistic community.

Louis XIV was 14 when he settled in the Louvre in 1652, after the princely
rebellion - Ja Fronde - had been quelled and it was deemed safe for him to return
to Paris. He never liked the Louvre and in 1682 moved his court to the newly
built palace at Versailles, leaving the Louvre to fall into decline. However, as
long as he resided there, he channelled a lot of energy and money into completing
the construction around the Cour Carrée; for the show had to go on and to exceed
in flashy splendour that of his predecessors. His was the reign of glamour par
excellence. Scintillating balls, ceremonial dinners, each consisting of a score of


dishes, were succeeded by performances of plays by Corneille and Moliére. His
Majesty and his brother, Monsieur, were great lovers of this form of entertainment, unlike their grandfather Henri IV, who once confided to a woman friend,

“Yesterday evening I saw the comedians play, when I fell asleep. It was midnight
when they finished.”
During the reign of Louis XIV the number of paintings in the Louvre increased
from 200 to 2,000, thanks largely to his enterprising aides, particularly his minister Mazarin, who embarked on a feverish outburst of acquisitions for the royal art
collection and library. Mazarin’s successor, Colbert, also encouraged the develop-

ment of the arts and sciences, supported by ample donations made by Nicolas
Fouquet, the king’s wealthy treasurer, before his disgrace. The five newly founded Academies were set up too at the Louvre but paradoxically contributed to its
deterioration. The King’s apartment, for example, left vacant when he moved to
Versailles, became the premises of the Académie des Sciences, housing an elephant skeleton, a stuffed camel and various anatomical organs floating in alcohol-

filled jars.
Worse was to come: booths and stalls soon crammed the courtyard, the magnificent halls were devastated, the panelling of the royal apartments torn off, the
painted ceilings drilled into to make room for skylights or stove pipes. A motley
population of artisans, parasitical courtiers and prowlers replaced the splendid
members of the court who had moved to Versailles. Many courtiers had gone
reluctantly, resentful at having to give up the independence they had enjoyed in
the city, be it on the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, on the Faubourg Saint-Germain
across the river, or in the remote Marais. Paris offered pleasure and gratification
to the privileged, often in the form of the witty conversation and intellectual stimulation to be found in the literary salon of some enlightened lady. It was precisely
in order to keep a close eye on this increasingly independent aristocracy that the
astute monarch, asserting his divine right, transferred its members to the glorified
“ghetto” of Versailles, where they were no more than glamorous lackeys in his
service. Louis XIV had not forgotten the lesson of the princely rebellion which in
1650 forced him into exile at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, putting an end to his idyllic
childhood at Palais-Royal, when little Marie, the daughter of his mother’s chambermaid, played his queen.
Roughly a century after the move to Versailles, on 6 October 1789, the infuriated people of Paris transferred Louis XIV’s great-great-grandson, Louis XVI, back
to Paris. The days of absolutism were over and it was now the King’s turn to be
kept in check. Heading from Versailles to the Tuileries (the Louvre being too
dilapidated to be inhabited), the royal coach was made to follow a long and
strange procession of National Guards, royal troops, excited throngs of Parisians
and carts of corn and flour escorted by sharp-eyed mutinous women. From then


on the Tuileries replaced the Louvre as the residence of the kings and emperors of
France. This explains why, after his coup on 2 December 1851, Louis Napoleon
promptly left the Republican seat of the Palais de 1’Elysée (8th arrondissement) in
favour of the Royal seat of the Tuileries.
Similarly, the nascent bourgeois Third Republic, wishing to cut off all links
with France’s monarchistic past, moved out of the Ist arrondissement in 1871,

after its victory over the proletarian Commune, heading back west to the Palais de
l’Elysée, the home of the Republic’s Presidents ever since. The fire that had damaged the Tuileries during the civil strife of the Commune, had tolled the knell of

the lst arrondissement as the seat of power. In 1882, rather than restore the
charred carcass of the Palais des Tuileries, the Third Republic razed it to the

ground, securing irrevocably the definitive death of the monarchy.
With the Tuileries as the seat of power during the better part of the last century,
its gardens attracted the fashionable set, and luxury hotels opened up in the vicinity, close to the beautiful hétels (townhouses) of the nobility, catering predominantly to an affluent English clientele. Among them were the legendary Ritz on
Place Vendéme and the prestigious Meurice opposite the Tuileries Gardens, at n°
228 rue de Rivoli, next door to the English bookshop, Gagliani, at n° 224, where
they would pop in to read the daily papers of their homeland. For their convenience too WH Smith opened a Parisian branch at n° 248. The English visitors
also frequented the fabulous clothes and jewellery shops on rue de Castiglione,
Place Vend6me and rue de la Paix ( now in the 2nd arr.). In order to serve the

Empress Eugénie and the other ladies of the Napoleonic nobility, the world of
fashion concentrated in this area too. Thus French haute couture was born in the
ist arrondissement and the bordering 2nd in the second half of the 19th century
and it was Charles Worth, the Empress’s English couturier, who was its illustrious forerunner. It would take another century for its centre of gravity to shift
gradually westward, to the 8th arrondissement.
But the 1st arrondissement was not only the crown of Paris: Emile Zola had
dubbed its plebeian eastern parts ‘the belly of Paris’ a metaphor he used in 1873
for the title of one of his novels. For a year he had been haunting the central market of Les Halles at all times of day and night, imbibing the atmosphere and
recording the ever-changing hues of this gigantic digestive apparatus of the capital: dark bluish-grey metal structures against a light grey sky in wet weather;
sheets of gold on the hard-packed earth as the sun’s rays penetrate through the
grey atmosphere on a fine day; the glowing glass panes of the market’s pavilions
at sunset; the lights of gas lamps standing out against black roofs. Poultry, fish in
wicker baskets, meat, cheese, butter and milk each had their own pavilion.

Colourful vegetables, even glossier and brighter when washed by the rain; piles


of artichoke stalks, cabbage leaves, carrot and turnip-tops — heaps of refuse waiting to be removed before fresh ‘fodder’ is poured into the city’s belly, come two
in the morning, when rattling carts converge on Les Halles, delivering the bountiful harvest of rural France. The neighing of horses, the braying of donkeys, the
cries of coachmen, the occasional swish of the whip accompany this nocturnal
procession. Peasant girls in headscarves now set to work, unloading the carts and
forming piles of carrots, turnips, leeks, lettuces and cabbages. The smell of carrots, parsley and celery vie with the aroma of Provence - bouquets of thyme, laurel and garlic arrayed in neat rows at the foot of the church of Saint-Eustache.
Having watched at work les forts des Halles - the robust porters, ‘all nerves and
muscles’ - Zola descended into the undisclosable underground depths of the market, where the shameful slaughter of fowl and other creatures was carried out
nightly, a place reeking of blood and pestilence and overrun by rats. This underworld was unknown to the bourgeois and the artist, who, in the early hours of the

morning, after a night spent in a cabaret or a theatre,would drift off to the market
in search of strong emotions to be found, they believed, by mixing with the lower
orders. The onion soup and the glass of wine at the typical zinc bar would be followed at the break of dawn by a chunk of baguette dunked in a café créme as a
celebration of the new day and the never-ending cycle of life.
This world is gone. Deemed unsuitable for modern times, the market was transferred in 1969 to Rungis, south of Paris. You may be old enough to have seen it
before its demolition and may have even dined in the early hours of the morning
on a traditional soupe a l’oignon at Le Pied de Cochon at 6 rue Coquillére, or Au
Pére Tranquille at the corner of rue Pierre Lescot and rue Rambuteau, where in

1929 Evelyn Waugh also dined on onion soup. Many Parisians were appalled by
the demolition of Victor Baltard’s iron pavilions, considered an artistic testimony
to the Industrial Age. One only of the 14 pavilions was allowed to survive, but
was transferred to the suburb of Nogent-sur-Marne, east of Paris (RER, line A).

Others also bemoaned the lost soul of Paris:
Il est un lieu de bonheur... la derniére image du naturel dans la
Ville. Il est maintenant le Paradis Perdu.
(It was a place of bliss... the last vision of natural life in the City.
It is now Paradise lost), as sculptor Raymond Mason put it.

Louis Chevalier, the superb social observer and poet of Paris, was more blunt:
La mort des Halles a sonné le glas de Paris.
(The death of Les Halles has tolled the knell of Paris.)

A surreal gigantic hole - ‘le trou des Halles’ - replaced the ‘belly’ of Paris, then


left gaping for a decade while ambitious politicians shilly-shallied about its fate.
In 1979 the Forum des Halles rose out of the ashes of the picturesque central market. Undoubtedly the Forum can pride itself on being the largest pedestrian
precinct in Europe, truly an achievement in a traffic-ridden city. Otherwise, it is
barely more than yet another shopping centre, designed to squeeze in as many
shops as possible (240), and generally gaudy.
When it first opened, a new generation of trendy young people settled on the
terrace of the no less trendy Café Costes, (decorated by the up-and-coming
Philippe Starcke, who has since introduced his designs in Manhattan and at the
Palais de l’Elysée). Property prices in the vicinity rocketed, prompting the alert
Japanese, in November 1989, to buy up one third of the Forum des Halles.

Meanwhile, the ‘bowels’ of Les Halles were converted to house the gigantic
new central station of Chatelet-Les Halles, where the suburban north/south east/west express lines of the RER (Réseau Exprés Régional) meet and connect
with the urban Métro network. This, the largest station in the capital, was
designed to facilitate life for commuters, and to enhance the cultural dimension of

- the centre of Paris, with the Georges Pompidou Centre in the nearby 4th
arrondissement as its main pole. At the same time, however, it attracted the homeless and shiftless and social drop-outs, whose presence does not make this a safe
area to stroll in, especially after dark; nor does the conspicuous, oppressive presence of the police make it a pleasant one.
Fortunately the western extension of the Forum, opened in 1986, and the gardens that lie between the two Forums enjoy a more benign atmosphere. Mothers
are not afraid to bring their young off-spring to this traffic-free, sunny area, under
the reassuring and maternal watch of the venerable church of Saint-Eustache.
While for centuries the area nourished the people of Paris, it also cared for them
once departed. The Cimetiére des Saints-Innocents, into which had been piled up
the remains of generations of Parisians since Gallo-Roman days, stood on the cor-

ner of rue Berger and rue Saint-Denis.
By the late 18th century the stench of putrefaction and the danger of epidemics
were so great that a general outcry arose, this time against the preservation of a
site. Voltaire considered it a barbarity that placed the French below the Hottentots! But one journalist who opposed the demolition on religious grounds, was
sent to the Bastille prison for an entire year. The transfer of the cemetery’s occupants to the newly opened catacombs south of the city (now in the 14th
arrondissement), began on 7 April 1786 and took 15 months. Night after night
eerie processions carried draped remains from the different cemeteries of Paris to
their new abode where six millions of them now rest. Today, the Square des
Innocents, now Place Joachim Du Bellay, bustles with street performers and loi-

tering crowds, who gather around the Renaissance fountain with its cascading


water, unaware that they are treading the soil that once buried the innocent dead.
If life and death cohabited in the 1st, so did the lower orders and royalty who

were still living side by side in the last century, an intimacy inconceivable today.
The painter Auguste Renoir grew up in one of the lanes that then ran through the
Esplanade of the Louvre and was one of the little street urchins to whom Queen
Amélie’s ladies-in-waiting threw sweets through the window when they made too
much of a nuisance of themselves. Renoir’s son, the celebrated film director,
wondered “how successive kings could have tolerated such a seedy neighbourhood under their very noses”.
This rubbing of shoulders between the classes contributed to a variety of contrasts which is more striking in the 1st arrondissement than in any other: the
imposing Gothic mass of the Conciergerie, against the delicate and graceful architecture of the Sainte-Chapelle or Pei’s seemingly weightless glass Pyramid of the
Louvre. Rue Saint-Denis with its garish neon lights, provocative street-walkers
and sex-shops, is a long way from the Palais-Royal, now a peaceful haven of elegant architecture, yet in the 18th century the stronghold of the city’s prostitution.
The busy, workaday area around Place du ChAatelet, once a den of crime, has little
in common with the gem-like Place Dauphine on the Ile de la Cité. Beyond it, at
the western tip of the island, the charming little garden of Vert-Galant, enhanced
by the beauty of the 16th-century Pont-Neuf, adds a ravishing romantic touch to
the arrondissement.

WHERE TO WALEK..}..
LES HALLES
i ee Forum des Halles is a convenient starting point, best reached by the RER
or Métro. Get off at Chatelet-Les Halles station and head for Porte Lescot.
Unless you make your trip off peak, your ascent into the outside world will be
slow - an impregnable human fortress invariably obstructs the escalators, providing the visitor with ample time to take in the noise, the garish shops, the uninviting eating-places, often the conspicuous presence of the police... The atmosphere
will improve as you step out into the Patio and its open-air terraces, highlighted
by an enchanting merry-go-round and its nostalgic music, which will carry you
back to the days when the central market of Les Halles stood here, Paris’s pulsating lifeblood for nearly eight hundred years.
In 1135 Louis VI set up a primitive market on a piece of land allotted by the Bishop of Paris, against a return of a third of its revenue. Its name - Les Champeaux may have derived from the marshy fields (champs) covered with market-gardens that
surrounded it. In 1183 Philippe-Auguste replaced it with two stone buildings to shelter
goods and vendors in bad weather, and secured them with locks to prevent thefts. In
order to raise the funds for the project, he confiscated the possessions of the Jews.


‘8

439438

3NIVIN
$30O4
SLNIDONNI

'W ZNYD-WLNVS ? INDIHdVADOLAVD NOILWSI1W3a

SY3IIMNIANWA B

IWANVS &


|

The new market became known as Les Halles, or Jes alles: ‘pour ce que chacun
y allait ’ (‘for everyone went there’), and it was this name that stuck. Economic

prosperity and demographic growth in the 16th century led Henri II to rebuild and
enlarge the market in 1553, an initiative repeated by Napoleon III three centuries
later, for the same motives. By then France had entered the Industrial Age and
iron often replaced stone. Impressed by Victor Baltard’s newly-built Gare de
l’Est, Napoleon III commissioned him to build the new market, commending the

use of iron: “Faites-moi des parapluies! ” (“make me umbrellas!”). 14 iron pavilions were thus erected between 1851 and 1857 and stood till 1969, when the central market was transferred to Rungis south of Paris and the pavilions were
demolished, leaving Paris scathed. For not only was it deprived of a fine example
of the architecture of the time, an artistic expression of the Industrial Revolution,
but also of its life-giving core, which had its roots in the Middle Ages. A motley,
clamorous, plebeian world, highlighted by the colourful, forthright language of its
fishwives and other shrill female vendors, brilliantly summed up by Frangois Villon in the Ballade des Femmes de Paris:
Quoy qu’on die d’Italiennes
Il n’est bon bec que de Paris.
(Whatever be said of Italian women,
mouths of Paris are second to none).

the big

On special occasions these notorious poissardes were allowed into the King’s |
Palace to pay their respects to the royal couple. Having been served a hearty ©
meal, they would return to Les Halles and pass on proudly the latest Palace gossip
to the entire eager neighbourhood. Despite a rigid social hierarchy, the physical —
proximity of high and low created a certain familiarity, a feeling of belonging to
one and the same society. The Dames des Halles, as they were also called, felt
personally involved in the goings-on in the Palace, which accounts for an astonishing letter, written by Femme Ladoucette to Marie de Medici, Henri IV’s sec-_
ond wife, on 30 August 1608. Having introduced herself as Dame des Halles
“from mother to daughter since Saint Louis’, and a mother to four by her husband
(which is a guarantee of moral integrity), she admits to a forthright tongue, but,

she adds, it is no lying tongue... She then proceeds to complain to the Queen
about her philandering husband, the King, a good fellow deep down but who fid-_
gets at the sight of a coquette and scatters bastards around, although blessed with :
a most appetising Queen, so well conditioned to have little princes. If the King —
happened to wander through Les Halles, she pursues, she would give him a sound
thrashing for the love of her Queen. Femme Ladoucette received no scolding for
her bold letter - instead she was promoted ‘fournisseuse (purveyor) royale ’!


With its ceaseless human tide, the market-place was picked out for public executions and punishments and the scaffold was part of the landscape from the 14th
century on. Needless to say decapitations were preceded by the customary methods of torture and followed by the unrelenting mutilation of the bodies. Some of
the victims were condemned to the pillory alone, and the King’s pillory, the
largest of them all, was a sizeable octagonal structure, with a pointed roof and
weathervane, somewhat resembling a chapel. The ground floor was often inhabited by the King’s Great Executioner, while the convicts were exposed in the tower
above. The excited mob relished the sight, taunting the exposed victims, pelting
them with rubbish and litter. There were no gallows, however, at Les Halles, the

King conceding that this was no place for bodies to be left rotting on a rope.
If you wish to travel into a more recent past, visit the Musée Grévin at level -1.
Twenty-one scenes from Belle Epoque Paris are on display in this wax museum,
providing a kitschy and sketchy yet truly instructive idea of turn-of-the-century
Paris and its representative figures - Victor Hugo, Emile Zola, Jules Verne, Pasteur etc. You will travel to the old village of Montmartre, to the fashionable

Champs-Elysées, to the bustling market of Les Halles, obviously; you will admire
the 1900 Universal Exposition and will be dazzled by the scintillating bourgeoisie
at the Opera of Palais Garnier.
Also at level -1 is the Musée de l’Holographie, the most important of its kind in
the world. Holography is an optical technique, originally invented by D. Gabor in
1948, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1971. On display are numerous examples of three-dimensional images, including a portrait of the famous jazz
musician Herbie Hancock. It was done in 1985 when he stayed in Paris for the
shooting of Bertrand Tavernier’s Around Midnight. Good exhibitions are organised occasionally at the Pavillon des Arts, at Porte Rambuteau, while next to it,

La Maison de la Poésie will be of interest to poetry lovers.
The new extension of the Forum can be joined through an underground Passage
(head for Porte Saint-Eustache) but, if the sun has greeted you, walk through the
peaceful gardens. The trees are still too young, but at least the area has been given
over to the pedestrian and only cheerful children and occasional buskers will disturb the perfect tranquillity. If you long to bask in the sun, settle down on the terrace of Le Jardin des Halles facing south. For extra lazy southern atmosphere,
order a ‘Jardin des Halles’ salad. Once revived proceed towards the church of
Saint-Eustache, the second largest church in Paris after Notre-Dame. This imposage
ing, somewhat maternal 16th-century church, is a surviving witness of an
the
However,
Halles.
Les
of
n
congregatio
" when it watched over the plebeian
the
and
Richelieu
where
church,
this
with
associated
names of the greats are also
Lully
communion,
holy
first
his
received
XIII
Louis
Pompadour were baptized,


was married and Rameau was buried. A plaque on the wall of the southern aisle
informs you that the funeral service for Anna Maria Mozart was held here in July
1788. She had accompanied her son on his third arid last visit to Paris, an unhappy visit which left Mozart both bereaved and embittered. No longer a
Wunderkind, he was ignored by a shallow, unmusical society and had to share
