ASfoe:walk takes us to the area of Saint-Sulpice, the one-time parish church of
the borough of Saint-Germain and to the Luxembourg Palace and Gardens
beyond. Start from the corner of Boulevard Saint-Germain and rue de Seine and
head south. At the end of the street (which is worth exploring separately for its
boutiques, art galleries and good bookshops) can be seen the elegant facade of the
Palais du Luxembourg. Turn right into rue Clément, then left into rue Mabillon.
You will be walking around the Marché Saint-Germain, recently renovated and,
unfortunately, now devoid of local colour, a very pale replica of the worldrenowned fair of days gone by and much reduced in size. Rue Clément led to the
fair through a gate known as La Porte de Treille and rue Mabillon was known

simply as rue de la Foire. In those days acrobats, tightrope dancers and animal
tamers entertained all the social classes, including the King, who would mingle
with the crowds. Henri Ill and his entourage of mignons frisés (‘his curly-headed



R. DE MEZIERES

PL. DE L'ODEON

:1

VAUGIRARD
PALAIS

JaIVNIW3S
NG
33TIVv

L uxemeQuKt

PL.

PAUL CLAUDEL

~
RODEFLERUS

————————
—>)


Let
eer
JARDINS
cer
ste
DU
e

Si
REALISATION CARTOGRAPHIQUE : CARRIER C.


G

ls

fairies’) were ridiculed by jeering youths, skipping around his Majesty. The very
thick crowds and the availability of wine led to violent brawls, scuffles, debauchery, prostitution and murders. The poet Scarron, who would come here in his

notorious invalid’s chair, wrote:
Foire, 1’élément des coquets,
Des filoux et des tire-laine,

Foire ov |’on vend moins d’ affiquets
Que !’on ne vend de chair humaine [...]
(Fair, the element of gallants Of rogues and
of robbers, /Fair where fewer trinkets are sold/
Than human flesh)
It took only five hours for the fair to be consumed by a gigantic fire on the |
night of 16 - 17 March 1762. The flames even reached the church of SaintSulpice and damaged its Chapel of the Virgin. The new fair built in its place,
never attained the same prestige; it was closed down during the Revolution and
replaced by a market in the early 19th century. In 1898 it lost two thirds of its
area and nearly a century later was threatened with total demolition. This was
avoided in extremis, and the premises have been restored and still stand. An auditorium has been added to bring in more life and culture, but its soul is gone. The
old, picturesque houses at n°s 6, 8 and 10 rue de Mabillon stand as witnesses of
the colourful past, and the restaurant at n° 10 perpetuates the memory of the
Compagnons Charpentiers du Devoir de Liberté (the carpenters’ guild) through
its decoration and its little adjoining museum.
Turn right into rue Guisarde, a lively, narrow street, which also led to the fair.
Its name may derive from Guise, as the Duc de Guise, Henri le Balafré, may have

had his headquarters in a hétel here. Turn right into rue des Cannettes, yet another
bustling street still on its medieval site, although today it is goods from the Wild
West (and down towards Mexico) that seem to set the tone. But above the jumble
of cowboy boots and other such accessories are still the bulbous facades of old
houses and, above the portal at n° 18, an early 18th-century sculpted medallion
representing four ducks (cannettes) swimming in a pond. It replaces an even earlier street sign that gave the street its name. N° 17 across the street has a lovely
little niche with a statue of the Virgin and Child. N° 5 was the meeting place of
local bohemians, Le Cénacle des Buveurs d’Eau, described by Henri Miirger in
La Vie de Bohéme. Turn left into rue du Four, named after the oven that people
were strictly obliged to use for the baking of bread; offenders were fined, which
was another means of levying taxes on the poor. At n° 33 a massive Louis XIII
door leads to a charming, green courtyard all lined with creepers. An old well in
the corner will recalls the days before Napoleon III’s rule, when no running water


was available in people’s homes. Inside is an extraordinary spiral staircase, which
has preserved its original, 16th-century, central wooden core. A beautiful twisted
handrail carved out of the massive tree trunk is both practical and aesthetically
pleasing.
Retrace your steps and continue to Place Saint-Sulpice. The spacious terrace of
the Café de la Mairie, overlooking the rushing waters of Visconti’s fountain in the
centre of the square, makes it one of the popular cafés in the arrondissement.
Named simply after the town hall of the 6th, which faces the church across the
square, the café was already very popular in the early 1920s. In A Moveable Feast
Hemingway described the pigeons perched on the statues of the four bishops on
the fountain, and Henry Miller also mentioned them in Tropic of Cancer. Other
‘expatriates’ used to come here too from their nearby homes - Faulkner, Fitzgerald and Beckett - and in the next generation their French counterparts followed
suit. The last meeting between Sartre and Camus took place here in 1951, after

which the two quarrelled and parted company. Across the street Yves SaintLaurent has been established successfully since the 1960s, when a new era of lux-

ury opened in the 6th arrondissement.
Few artists or writers have had kind words for the unlovely church of SaintSulpice with its two jarring and conspicuous towers that pierce the sky - ‘fat belfries’, according to Henry Miller. The poet Raoul Ponchon, went further:
Je hais les tours de Saint-Sulpice!
Quand par hazard je les rencontre
Je pisse
Contre.
(I hate the towers of Saint-Sulpice! Whenever I
happen to come across them I piss on them).
But the French like things big, and the parish was swollen with pride in the
17th century, when it had the largest church on the Left Bank and the highest in
the whole city, the northern tower rising 73 metres above the ground, 4 metres
more than Notre-Dame. It was true that by the 17th century, the initial parish
church, built in 1211, could no longer accommodate the growing number of
parishioners. The parish priest, l’abbé Olier, had an ambitious enterprise in mind,
and invited Anne of Austria in 1646 to lay the cornerstone. Gamard was commissioned to design the church but after nine years it was already deemed too small
and the ubiquitous Louis Le Vau was asked to redesign and enlarge it. Le Vau
died soon after, however, and funds for such a colossal monument were hard to

find. Construction dragged on for over a century, overseen by six successive
architects, the last being the famous Chalgrin. The southern tower was never actu-

ally completed.


One of the church’s parishioners was Talleyrand, born in 1854 at 4 rue Garanciére, just behind the church, and baptized here. Later he was sent to study in the
seminary opposite the church (now the site of the square). Founded by 1’abbé
Olier in 1645, it was known as the Grand-Séminaire, as opposed to the PetitSéminaire, built for less wealthy seminarists in 1686 at the entrance of rue Férou

across the square. Young Talleyrand, however, was expelled from the institution
for having repeatedly gone over the wall to his amorous rendezvous.

Saint-Sulpice

As you walk into the church, you will notice two great conches mounted on a
marble socle, which were offered to Francois I by the Republic of Venice and
serve as a spout. These were carved by Pigalle into the form of seaweed with tentacles entangled in the rock. Pigalle, who was particularly dedicated to religious
art, also left a beautiful marble statue of the Virgin and Child at the opposite end
of the church, in the Chapelle de la Vierge, damaged by the fire of the Fair in
1762. Pigalle’s statue replaced an earlier one, which had been sent to the Mint
during the Revolution and had been made, allegedly, from the silver cutlery that
the artist Languet de Cergy spirited away from dinner parties, which explains
why the statue had been nicknamed Notre-Dame de la Vaisselle. The most
famous works of art in Saint-Sulpice, however, are Delacroix’s mural paintings in
the Chapelle des Deux-Anges, the first chapel on your right: Heliodorus Driven
from the Temple, Jacob Wrestling with the Angel and Saint Michael Slaying the
Dragon in the dome above. The painter dedicated eight years of his life (18531861) to these paintings, even when his health was declining. The Chapelle de
Saint-Martin (recognizable by the mural depicting the saint) is incidentally the
only place in Paris where the faithful are provided with sacred water. Another
point of interest is the copper strip laid in the floor. In order to determine the
spring equinox and thus the exact date of Easter Sunday each year, a hole was
pierced in the window in the south transept crossing, through which a ray of sun
reached the obelisk in the north transept. At midday on the relevant day, the ray
of sun would travel along the copper strip and strike a given point on the obelisk.
This method of calculation was worked out by the watchmaker Henri Sully in
1727, but of course it no longer holds good, the positions of the sun and stars having changed since. Note also the impressive Louis XV high altar in the Chapelle
du Sacre-Coeur, in the north transept, and its huge organ, originally designed by
Chalgrin and reconstructed by Cavaillé-Coll in 1862. With its 6,500 pipes, it is
claimed to be the largest in Europe.
The two seminaries of Saint-Sulpice were swept away during the Revolution
and a new seminary was built in 1820 on the southern side of the square, bounded
by rue Férou to the east and rue Bonaparte to the west. A tree-shaded alley along
rue Bonaparte, |’Allée du Séminaire, is a reminder of its presence. In 1906, after

the vote for the separation of state and church, the government took over the seminary and handed it over to the Ministry of Finance. Nevertheless, the neighbourhood has remained the stronghold of Catholicism in the capital, hence the
impressive number of specialized shops that sell religious items, ceremonial

gowns and books.
The narrow, old streets that run south of the church are relatively free of traffic
and crossed by few pedestrians. On a sunny weekend afternoon, a serene provincial peace prevails, interrupted only by the occasional chime of church bells. Turn

PE

left into rue Palatine, alongside the church. The street celebrates the Bavarian
Princess, Anne, wife of the Condé, Monsieur le Prince (not to be confused with

the more famous Princesse Palatine, the mother of the Regent who left an exciting
correspondence about her son, his contemporaries and culinary matters). Condé’s

magnificent palace was situated roughly where the Théatre de 1’?Odéon now
stands, but his wife’s hétel is still at n° 15 in the neighbouring rue Garanciére.
Turn right into rue Servandoni, a narrow, crooked street with elegant street-

lamps affixed to its fagades. Servandoni was the Italian architect in charge of the
sets of the opera, and also one of the six architects who participated in the erection of the church of Saint-Sulpice. The imposing, severe fagade is actually his
contribution. On the corner building of rue Canivet you will see engraved in the
stone the name of rue des Fossoyers (‘gravediggers’), which the street was called
when it led to the cemetery of Saint-Sulpice, then within the precinct of the semi- _
nary (roughly where the fountain now stands). Ahead of you on the right-hand
side of the street is n° 14, a charming, old house with a bulbous profile, a slanting
roof and windows cheerfully bursting with vegetation. It also has a massive door
carved with two magnificent medallions, the one on the left representing Saint
Anne teaching a disciple to read, the one on the right - in all likelihood - the
architect Servandoni unrolling the plan of the church of Saint-Sulpice (Servandoni lived in this building). Inside, its courtyard has preserved its old paving and
the walls are lined with creepers, muffling all noise At n° 15, across the street, a

plaque commemorates the tragic naiveté of some idealists, for it was here that the
great philosopher Condorcet, denounced for not having voted for the death sentence on Louis XVI, and tracked down by the Terror as a Girondin, was offered
shelter in July 1793 by the generous widow of the sculptor Francois Vernet. Blind
to the stark evidence of man’s inhumanity that surrounded him, Condorcet went
on with his Esquisse des progres de l’esprit humain (!), for roughly eight months,
until, worried about compromising his hostess any longer, he left her home in disguise on 25 March 1794. In no time he was caught and sent to prison, where he
committed suicide on 6 April.
Retrace your steps into rue Canivet, whose name too is probably derived from a
street sign, referring to the little knife used for making lace for the frames of religious pictures. A beautiful Louis XIII portal has survived at n° 2, leading to a
leafy courtyard, where there is an old stone bench resting on two lions’ heads. A
rare Louis XIII wooden staircase still stands inside the building. Even the letterboxes are made of smooth old wood. Across the street, a beautiful Louis XV portal is surmounted by a lovely sculpted mask set in a shell. The windows were
walled up by the landlord to avoid paying yet another tax. Rue du Canivet opens
on to rue Férou, which runs along the wall of the old seminary. It was a shabby
street in 1951, when Man Ray settled in a sculptor’s studio at n° 2 bis, on his


return to France. His wife, Juliet, was appalled by the premises which, she said,
looked like a garage. But Man Ray was happy to be back in Paris and pleased
with the “whitewashed place, flooded with light from skylights and windows on
the three sides.” Today rue Férou is an expensive street, located in one of the most
desirable areas of Paris, which explains why there are plans to replace the
adorable, one-storeyed house at n° 7 with a profitable modern block, with a car
park underneath. An 18th-century hédtel at n° 6 displays a charming bas-relief, with
chubby, playful cupids to suit the tastes of an idle society. Mademoiselle Luzy, a
famous actress of the Comédie-Frangaise, lived here between 1770 and 1785 and it
was probably for her sake that Talleyrand went over the wall when he was studying in the neighbouring seminary. Hemingway, having left Hadley, came to live
here with Pauline Pfeiffer in 1926, working at a time on A Farewell to Arms. He
often went over to the Café de la Mairie and sometimes walked into the church
with Pauline. The painter Fantin-Latour was living at n° 15 when Whistler visited
him in 1858. Finding Fantin-Latour sitting up in bed, Whistler made a drawing of
him huddled up in his overcoat. It is now in the Louvre. N° 17 next door conceals
its charm behind a wall. Two old trees overhang the wall, extending their shade to
the silent street on a hot summer’s day, echoing Alphonse Daudet’s description in
his novel Le Nabab of the peaceful streets behind Saint-Sulpice, in the shade of
its two big towers, which “seem detached from a provincial town [...] where big
trees surmounting the walls rock to the sound of bells...”
The idyllic atmosphere comes to an abrupt halt at rue de Vaugirard ahead with
its constant flow of traffic. Across the street the Musée du Luxembourg is housed
in the west wing of the former palace. In 1750 the east wing was opened to the
public, the first time such a step was taken in France. About 50 paintings from the
King’s collection were shown to visitors twice a week, on which occasion they
were also admitted to the west wing to see Rubens’s series of 24 paintings depicting the life of Marie de Medici (now in the Louvre). The present museum,

however, was opened only in 1865, in the orangery that Alphonse de Gisors had
built 30 earlier (now n° 19 rue de Vaugirard). Here were exhibited the works of
the conventional, academic Pompiers, so appreciated by the bourgeoisie of the
time and then considered modern art. The Impressionists were shown here only
once they were semi-acknowledged, though not yet worthy of such institutions as
the Louvre (where, incidentally, they were never exhibited, for in the 1920s the

Jeu de Paume on the western edge of the Tuileries Gardens opened its doors to
them instead).
Turn left into rue de Vaugirard. The Palais du Luxembourg, east of the muse-

“um, is now the seat of the French Sénat and can therefore be visited only on
Sundays, between 9.30 and 11 am and between 2 and 4 pm. The entrance is at
n° 15.


After the assassination of Henri IV, his Florentine widow, Marie de Medici, felt

estranged at the Louvre and was homesick for Florence. For quite some time
now, she had had her heart set on the Hétel du Petit-Luxembourg, the home of
Francois du Luxembourg, which he agreed to sell to her in 1611. The following
year she purchased the adjoining houses to the east in order to build a vast palace
that was worthy of a Medici Queen and would remind her of her childhood home,
the Pitti Palace in Florence. Of course it would have been more sensible to complete the Tuileries Palace and move there, but there was no thwarting her extravagant, capricious whims. Nor did she have any qualms about dipping into the
funds that her late husband had stored in one of the towers of the Bastille, for
more urgent military purposes. The great architect Salomon de Brosse was commissioned to build an Italian-style palace but instead produced a typically French
one. Whether he disregarded the Queen’s instructions or was carried away by his
own native inspiration, the Palais du Luxembourg, standing between its courtyard
and gardens, according to French taste, bears only the remotest resemblance to
the Palazzo Pitti. However, Salomon de Brosse surmounted its monumental portal
with a pleasing dome and scattered fountains and grottoes in the garden after the
Italian fashion. To flatter the Queen, Rubens was commissioned to paint a series
of 24 narrative paintings on her life, for the west wing of the Palace. The fairhaired queen was still attractive enough to serve as a model, and plump enough to
suit Rubens’s penchant for well-padded bodies.
The Queen devoted most of her attention, however, to the garden, where she
had 2,000 elms planted. Emulating the Romans of ancient Lutetia, she had an
aqueduct built all the way from Arcueil (in the southern suburbs of Paris, now on
the RER B line) to supply the fountains of her new Eden, which took Salomon de
Brosse 11 years to complete. The palace took 15 years to complete (1615-1630),
but barely had Marie de Medici settled in it than she was ousted and banished
from France for having meddled in state affairs. She had underestimated the political mastery of her redoubtable opponent, Richelieu, the former friend she herself
had promoted. She died in Cologne in total destitution. Her project for the east
wing of another series of 24 narrative paintings by Rubens on the life of Henri IV,
was therefore never carried out.
Louis XIII’s brother Gaston d’Orléans moved to the palace in her place, fol-

lowed after his death by various other members of the royal family. In the 18th
century the daughter of the Regent and the Duchesse de Berry shared a life of
careless frivolity here, so that when the Comte de Provence, the future Louis
XVIII, received the palace from his brother Louis XVI, it was in serious need of

repair. While waiting for restoration to be completed, he resided temporarily at
the Petit-Luxembourg. But the Revolution was imminent and within four years
the Comte de Provence had fled, Robespierre was reigning supreme and deter-


mined to eliminate the Girondins and the Palais du Luxembourg had been turned
into a prison. 800 prisoners were kept here, a third of whom were guillotined,
among them Danton and Camille Desmoulin. When the storm finally subsided the
building was wrecked and overall renovation was necessary to make it suitable
for its new function. It first served as an auditorium for the Directoire, then as a
Senat, and during the Restoration as a Chamber of Peers. Repairs were begun in
1804 and were entrusted to the hands of Chalgrin. The main staircase was transferred to the west wing leading to a new auditorium on the first floor with a
capacity of 80 seats. A new vestibule was also created. In 1836, another distinguished architect, Alphonse de Gisors, was commissioned to transform and
enlarge the premises again. Hence the substantial extension projecting into the
garden, a happy addition; built in the initial style of the Palace, it blends imperceptibly into the old building, while affording a magnificent view of the gardens
from inside.
In 1852 the Palais du Luxembourg became the seat of the French Sénat, which

is made up of 283 members and deals mainly with legislation and with changes to
the Constitution. At times it may act as arbitrator between the government and the
National Assembly. In case of vacancy, its President becomes acting President of
the Republic. You can visit the library with its paintings by Delacroix, the Salle
du Livre d’Or, which houses the panelling and paintings from the Queen’s apartments, the Sénat’s auditorium and the main staircase in the west wing, where
Rubens’s paintings were once on display. The President of the Sénat resides at the
Petit-Luxembourg at n° 17 rue de Vaugirard, the hdétel Marie de Medici bought
from Francois du Luxembourg in 1611 and gave to Richelieu, who lived here
while waiting for the Palais-Royal to be completed. In recent years the Sénat has
expanded across the street, above an attractive arcade, where beautiful reproductions from the Louvre’s gift shop are on display. For once the general harmony
has been preserved, with pleasing results. The portal of Anne of Bavaria’s hétel
on rue Garanciére has been successfully integrated into the new construction, at
n° 36.
The Luxembourg Gardens are a stone’s throw from the Sorbonne and are thus
permeated with student and literary associations, for, although they were designed
as part of the Palais du Luxembourg, they have long been annexed by the University and the people of the neighbourhood. Enter them through Place Paul Claudel,
just after the Palace.
Over the generations, the gardens that Jacques Boyceau de la Bareaudiére had
laid out for Marie de Medici, emulating the Boboli Gardens of Florence, have

been remodelled, most significantly in the 19th century - to suit new bourgeois
tastes - but their general spirit, even some of their aristocratic aura, have been preserved. De la Bareaudiére was a great artist, his reputation unfairly overshadowed


by Le Notre. His work Le Traité de jardinage selon les raisons de l’art et de la
nature is the first treatise on the French style of landscape gardening. Unlike
Salomon de la Brosse, de la Bareaudiére respected the Italian traditional plan for
the garden, but little of it remains after the drastic alterations, among them, shifting the central axis 90 degrees. A substantial part of its area also disappeared with
the rapid urbanization of Paris in the 19th century. Its two famous walks, La Vallée des Philosophes, much loved by J. J. Rousseau, and L’ Allée des Soupirs, the
sanctuary of lovers, were already gone before the Revolution.
In the early 19th century Chalgrin redesigned the gardens and created the present vista, which opens due south towards the Observatoire.This was feasible
because the Order of the Chartreux, which had occupied the land south of the

gardens, was expropriated after the Revolution. The entrance to their huge, magnificent domain was at the present n° 64 Boulevard Saint-Michel, previously
occupied by a famous and sinister medieval castle, the Chateau de Vauvert. The origin of its name has been lost, but the castle was possibly the home in the late
10th century of the tragic King Robert II the Pious, who was banished from his
palace on the Ile de la Cité and coerced by the Pope into renouncing his beloved
wife Berthe for political reasons. For generations thereafter the place was said to
be haunted by the Devil and no-one dared walk past it. The expression aller au
diable Vauvert (to go on a dangerous journey), still in use, refers to that deeplyrooted fear. The Chartreux were not bothered by such superstitions and gratefully
accepted the extensive grounds offered by Saint Louis, taking up residence on 21
November 1257. They came in a beautiful procession and may have frightened
the Devil away, for he has never been seen since. When they left more than five
centuries later, the Luxembourg Gardens became, for a brief spell, colossal on
Parisian standards, extending all the way to Boulevard du Montparnasse. Soon,
however, under the pressure of the real-estate market, chunks of land were

chopped off its edges to allow for the widening of rue de Vaugirard and the opening of Boulevard Saint-Michel and rue de Médicis. The people were outraged: the
imperial couple was booed at the Odéon, petitions were showered on the authorities (one of them bore 12,000 signatures!), but to no avail. The customary minimal concession was made in that Chalgrin’s Avenue de l’Observatoire was
allowed to survive.
The present gardens were created during the Second Empire. The English-style
section to the south-west reflects the fashion of the time. In the middle of its
rolling lawn stands, majestic, Le Duc’s powerful stag. The fruit orchards on the
southern edge also date from the 19th century, recalling the Order of the Chartreux, who cultivated succulent fruit, vegetables and vines in these blessed, sunny

parts. Two tons of fruit are produced here yearly, including raspberries, blackcurrants, figs, over 200 varieties of pears and apples. The trees are a feast to the eye


in early spring, when they are in bloom. A school of horticulture and an apiary
initiate the city-dweller, in search of his rural roots, to the art of cultivating a
fruit-tree or producing honey.
As you make your way into the gardens, do not leave out the Fontaine Médicis
on your left, designed by the great Renaissance sculptor Jean Goujon, depicting
Leda sitting by the Eurotas, next to a swan, the metamorphosed Jupiter. Tucked
away amidst dark vegetation, this is the most romantically shaded nook of the
gardens, a bliss during a heatwave. The fountain used to stand on the present rue
de Médicis until the time of Haussmann, when it was transferred here. Continue

till the famous central octogonal basin, the hub of the gardens, encircled by 50
sculpted female heroines of the history of France. They have watched over generations of little children who have come to float model boats on its shimmering
waters and Latin Quarter students who have deserted their austere libraries to
bask in the sun on one of the chairs ranked neatly around.
Continue due west to the exit and leave the park for a while. Ahead is rue de
Fleurus, the most sought-after address among the ‘expatriates’ in the 1920s. N°
27 on your left was the home of Gertrude Stein between 1903 and 1937, a mecca
“for those who were anybodies or on the way” — provided one had a recommendation when one was new, unless one was picked up by Gertrude Stein herself at
Sylvia Beach’s Shakespeare and C° on rue de |’Odéon. Gertrude Stein loved
meeting new people, so long as she did not feel threatened by them. James Joyce
was persona non grata; as Hemingway said, “If you brought up Joyce twice, you
would not be invited back.” Gertrude Stein once called him a fifth-rate political
schemer, and did not fail to add that she, Gertrude Stein, was the main writer of

the English language of the day. Likewise, she thought little of French writers,
Jean Cocteau and Max Jacob being rare exceptions. She did, however, take up
young Hemingway who devoted quite a few pages to her in A Moveable Feast.
From the top of her pedestal she patronized him, taught him the facts of life and
dismissed him and all his compatriots who had been through the War as ‘a lost
generation’, a phrase she borrowed from a local garage owner - ‘génération perdue’ - who had applied it to his young employee who had likewise been to the
war. Journalists back home called the Americans in Paris ‘expatriates’, no less
disparagingly. Hemingway and Stein first met in the Luxembourg Gardens. He
could not remember exactly whether she already had a dog. Hemingway and
Hadley loved the big studio on the ground-floor overlooking the courtyard, which
“was like one of the best rooms in the finest museum except that there was a big
_ fireplace and it was warm and comfortable...”. On the walls hung paintings by
Renoir, Cézanne, Picasso, Braque, Matisse, collected by Gertrude’s brother Leo,

a man of discriminating taste and flair. By that time Leo had already left for Italy
and Gertrude was living with Alice Toklas and the two ladies became godparents


to the Hemingways” baby son, Bumby. The rise of Nazi Germany lowered the
curtain on 27 rue de Fleurus. The solid bourgeois building, now as then, is private

property, but you may be able to get in if you duck the gaze of the concierge. The
shady courtyard is exquisite.
Retrace your steps to the Luxembourg Gardens and head south. Here there is a
small-scale replica of the Statue of Liberty and a tree of liberty, planted by the
American Ambassador to Paris in June 1993 to commemorate the 200th anniversary of Franco-American friendship. We leave it to you to meander through the
gardens, or just relax on one of the chairs before heading south for the last exploration in the arrondissement.

AROUND MONTPARNASSE
