THE 3rd ARRONDISSEMENT
few street names are all that is left of the mighty fortress of the Knights

A

evo

the founding fathers of the 3rd arrondissement. They were first

organized into a fighting order in the Holy Land in 1118 to protect Christian pilgrims from Moslem attacks. Having accumulated great wealth through
gifts bestowed on them by appreciative Christians, they soon owned estates
throughout Europe, including one on the eastern edge of Paris on the site of the
present rue de Lobau (next to the Hotel de Ville in the 4th arr.), where a group of
Templars settled around 1139, on their return from the Holy Land.
To the north east lay stretches of marshland, remnants of the ancient branch of
the Seine that had once flowed down from the heights of Belleville, east of Paris.

It took the hardy Templars barely a century to turn it into the market garden
(marais) of the capital, emulating the monks of Saint-Martin-des-Champs, who
had dried up the swamps in the western part of the arrondissement. Having
redeemed the land, they moved to its north-eastern edge, where they built a fortified compound, |’Enclos du Temple, complete with watch-towers and crenellated
walls, roughly on the site of the present rue du Temple, rue de Bretagne, rue de
Picardie and rue Béranger, south of Place de la République. A drawbridge led to
its only gate (now corner of rue des Fontaines-du-Temple and rue du Temple).
Using their geographical dispersion to advantage, the Templars founded a kind
of international deposit bank, thus continually increasing their wealth, while at
the same time preserving their independence behind their crenellated walls - a situation readily accepted by the throne till the end of the 13th century. PhilippeAuguste even entrusted some treasures to them when he left on the Third Crusade
in 1190, and Saint Louis did not take offence when in 1254 Henry III of England
stayed at the Temple rather than in his own palace. But Philippe le Bel, an ambitious King who had even stood up to the church of Rome, could not tolerate this
wealthy state within his state, the less so as he himself was in chronic financial

straits. During a mass rising in 1306, ignited by the fifth consecutive devaluation
of the kingdom’s currency, he accepted the Templars’ offer of shelter and took
the measure of their stupendous wealth. Eaten up with envy, he set out to contrive
their downfall by spreading treacherous rumours and slanders against them. After
hideous trials, false accusations, humiliations, torture and the burning of 54 Tem-

plars on I’Ile aux Juifs (now the southern edge of Place Dauphine), the French
branch of the Order was disbanded in 1313. On 12 March 1314, Jacques de
Molay, Grand Master of the Temple, was brought to the stake on I’Ile aux Juifs,
where, in the presence of the King, he thundred out prophecies about the King’s


and the Pope’s impending encounter with God. Both Philippe le Bel and Pope
Clement V were to die that year — whether by the hand of God or of man has
;
never been established.
Meanwhile the Templars’ possessions had been seized by the throne and, to add
insult to injury, the Enclos du Temple was given over to their deadly enemies, the
Hospitallers. They too had started out in the Holy Land, as early as 1050, initially
to welcome pilgrims to Jerusalem, a role complementary to that of the Templars;
but by the following century they too had become a fighting order, which gave
rise to rivalry and long-lasting enmity. The Hospitallers prospered at the Temple
until the Revolution and were disbanded only by Napoleon in the early 19th century.

With prosperity came the inevitable loosening of monastic life and, by the time
of the Renaissance, stylish apartments replaced austere cells. In the second half of
the 17th century the Palais du Grand Prieur, built by Mansart, matched the splendour and brilliance of the mansions in the heart of the Marais to the south.
Outside the Enclos du Temple Henri IV in particular contributed to the development of this area. Long before the Baron Haussmann, and largely thanks to the
wisdom gained from the Wars of Religion, he understood that wide vistas and
broad radiating avenues were not only elegant but also helped to keep the population in check and quell street riots. Thus,

a monumental Place de France was

planned to replace the medieval gate of Saint-Antoine as the new regal gateway
to the capital from the east. Majestic avenues celebrating the kingdom’s provinces
were to fan out of it, while a grand canal running north from the Seine was to

grace it with a Venetian touch. The concept was nipped in the bud on 14 May
1610, with the assassination of the King. Now the shabby rue de Poitou, Bretagne
and Normandie, and the curved rue Debelleyme that links them are the only trace
of that magnificent project.
Henri IV’s plan for the first open-air square in Paris, on the other hand, was
carried through to completion, albeit after his death. This is the jewel-like Place
des Vosges, on the border of the 4th arrondissement, the gem of Henri IV’s archi-

tectural style. Inaugurated on the occasion of the double wedding of Louis XIII to
Anne of Austria, and of his sister Elizabeth to the future Philip [V of Spain, it was
named appropriately Place Royale. The festivities began on 5 April 1612 and
went on for three days: a motley carousel of extraordinary splendour made its
rounds to the sound of trumpets, oboes and violins, while the guns of the Bastille
roared in the distance. At night a torchlight procession left the Place Royale and
paraded through the streets of Paris to the sound of music, while a magnificent
display of fireworks illuminated the sky at the Bastille.
These events elevated the Marais to the position of the undisputed aristocratic
centre of 17th-century Paris. Both royalty and the old nobility - la noblesse

dz

d’épée - had already spotted the Marais in the 14th century: Charles V had moved
to the Hétel de Saint-Pol in search of a safe haven after the traumatic experience
of Etienne Marcel’s revolt (see chapter on the Ist arr.), but the nobility had sought
elbow-room, outside the walls of the congested city. The religious orders, living
off its fertile market gardens, were eager to increase their revenue and yielded
their possessions readily. By the late 15th century such prominent families as the
Guise and the Montmorency were firmly established in the Marais. In the 16th
century they were joined by the newly ennobled financial and intellectual bourgeoisie - the Guénégauds, Lamoignons, Ormessons - known as the noblesse de
robe, who counterbalanced the old nobility by helping the throne to consolidate
its growing power, while supplying it with much-needed currency, the purchase
of titles being a costly transaction.
During the English occupation in the 15th century, the Duke of Bedford and
governor of Paris took up residence in the sumptuous Hétel des Tournelles, bordering today’s Place des Vosges to the north. Later it became the Parisian residence of the royal family, who preferred it to the insalubrious Hotel de Saint-Pol,
in the vicinity of the fetid moat of the Bastille.
The presence of royalty in the Marais, however, ended brutally on 30 June 1559
with the accidental death of Henri II during a friendly tournament in the gardens
of the Hétel des Tournelles (now Place des Vosges), against the Comte de Montgomery, captain of the Scottish guard. His bereaved wife Catherine de Medici left
at once the accursed place to settle temporarily in the antiquated Louvre, while
awaiting the construction of a more comfortable residence, namely the Palais des
Tuileries, to which she moved in 1564. The following year she ordered the H6tel
des Tournelles to be razed to the ground, so as to blot it out of her memory.
But the aristocracy stayed on: with peace restored after the War of Religions,
the Marais became the site of feverish building. Fabulous new hétels particuliers
were built and older ones sumptuously renovated for the “gens d’esprit, gens de
cour et de la ville, et tout ce qu’il y avait de meilleur et de plus distingué ”(“men
of learning, courtiers and town dwellers, the finest and the most distinguished”),

according to the contemporary eyewitness, the Duc de Saint-Simon. Not until the
court was transferred to Versailles in 1682 did the Marais begin to decline, being
then too far east.
For the time being its inhabitants displayed their wit and attire in gatherings
known as salons littéraires, presided over by high-powered women of letters Madame de Sévigné at Hétel Carnavalet, Mademoiselle de Scudéry on rue de
Beauce. The gatherings around Ninon Lenclos were of a different nature: at a
time of rigid, social conventions, she transformed what in others was regarded as
scandalous prostitution into a socially acceptable way of life — “le triomphe du
vice conduit avec esprit” (“the triumph of vice conducted with wit”), as Saint-


Simon put it. Her wit and musical talent, allied with her sexual appeal, made her
irresistible to the greats of France - the Maréchal d’Estrées, Gondi, Condé, Richelieu, the Sévigné (both father and son) - no one disdained her company and she
welcomed them all into her generous bed. The puritanical Anne of Austria was
impervious to her charms and eventually had her locked up at the the Madelonnettes, a convent turned prison for repentant whores, despite her protestations that
she was “neither a whore nor repentant”! It was a crowded place, for streetwalking abounded in this western part of the 3rd, close to the central market of Les
Halles, as reflected in such street names as Transnonain (‘Transnovice’), Vertus
(‘virtues’), Trace-Putain (‘Whore’s-Trail’) and Troussevache (‘Jade-Mounting’).

Undaunted, Ninon ate ostentatiously during Lent and threw her meat bone out of
the window, a brave act in an age of bigotry, when impiety was punishable by
death, as her contemporary Claude Le Petit found out when he paid with his life
for his licentious Chronique Scandaleuse ou Paris Ridicule.
Ninon had however gained the friendship of Queen Christina of Sweden and of
Francoise d’ Aubigné, wife of the satirical poet Scarron and later to be Madame de
Maintenon, whose home was “the meeting-place of the most polished members of
the court and of all the great minds of Paris”. Moliére, Boileau, La Fontaine,

Mignard, Lully, the Duc d’Orléans (the future Regent), all went to the modest
house at 36 rue des Tournelles, bringing their own food in recognition of their
hosts’ slender means.
Gaining access to the Temple was also easy for somebody of Ninon’s calibre,
for the Palais du Grand Prieur was the court of the illegitimate sons of royalty
who, like Philippe Duc de Vendéme, the grandson of Henri IV and Gabrielle
d’Estrées, led a life of debauchery, but also of literary and artistic brilliance. The
Grand Prior, for example, granted La Fontaine an annual pension of 600 francs.

After the court’s transfer to Versailles it became an alternative court where “gathered those who had nothing to hope for from the King”, we are told by Horace
Walpole. Louis XVI (who had called his cousin Philippe d’Orléans, the landlord
of the Palais-Royal, a shopkeeper) was equally contemptous of the Grand Prior,
the Prince de Conti, his “cousin the lawyer”. Horace Walpole, on the other hand,
described him as “handsome, of royal port and amiable” but also as arrogant, dissolute and prodigal. The Grand Prior reputedly kept 4,000 rings in one of his
drawers, a farewell token from each repudiated mistress; but some claimed he had

added many himself. His favourite, the Comtesse de Boufflers,

‘l’Idole du

Temple’, reigned supreme over his scintillating court, to which the 10-year-old

Mozart was introduced on his second visit to the capital. Ollivier’s famous painting of him in the drawing-room playing the harpsichord to an inattentive audience
is evidence of the Temple’s lack of deep artistic commitment.
On 13 August 1792, a sumptuous dinner was served in the same room. The


guests on this occasion were the Royal family and their retenue, virtually the prisoners of the Commune of Paris. The King was addressed as Monsieur and everyone was treated courteously during the sham celebration; but as soon as dinner
was over the royal couple, their two children and the King’s sister were locked up
in the Tower of the Temple, while the other women were transferred to the prison
of La Force (now in the 4th arr.), unknown to the people of Paris. This was the
beginning of the tragic extinction of the Royal family. On 21 September 1792, at
the foot of the small tower of the Temple, Superintendent Lubin reiterated the
proclamation abolishing the monarchy, announced earlier in the day by Danton
before the Convention. The King was kept in the main tower of the Temple till
his execution on 21 January 1793 and the Queen till the next summer, when she
was transferred to the Conciergerie. The 14-year-old Princess was exchanged
with the Austrian authorities for five Republican prisoners and the seven-year-old
Dauphin was torn away from his family and left to vegetate in a dark cell in total
isolation, till his presumed death on 8 June 1795. He was carried to the cemetery
of Sainte-Marguerite (now in the 11th arr.) for burial, but rumours persisted that
somebody else’s body had been laid there in his stead. When in 1894 it was
decided to dig up the remains and examine the bones, they proved indeed to have
belonged to an 18-year-old youth. Nevertheless, the mystery of the Temple child
has never been resolved, which explains how 43 characters could pretend to the

throne of France! It was Napoleon who got hold of the throne instead, whereupon
he prudently razed the Temple Tower to the ground, the Royalists having made it
their shrine. The original Romanesque church of the Temple and its churchyard
soon met the same fate. Only the Grand Prior’s Palace was still standing when the
Princess Royal returned to the tragic site during the Restoration, there to pray and
plant a weeping willow. Used by the Ministry of religion at the time of Napoleon,
as a convent during the Restoration and as a military barracks during the Second
Republic, it was torn down by Napoleon III in 1853.
By then the Temple area had become a working-class neighbourhood revolving
around its thriving clothing market, which had started within the walls of the
Temple. For the Enclos du Temple had been a free zone, and thus home to taxexempted tradesmen and franchised craftsmen, as well as insolvent debtors - a

population of 4,000 in all. Charlatan doctors and others could practise here with
impunity and Parisians flocked to the Temple to buy its local herb-tea against
constipation. In the 17th century Sieur Darce started to manufacture imitation
jewellery, an enterprise forbidden elsewhere in the kingdom. A century later the
Temple’s woollen wigs were the rage and its lipstick was sought after by the

ladies of the court.
In short, the Temple was the birthplace of fancy goods and fashion accessories,
for the first time available to the masses. Its inhabitants could clear their surplus

iD

goods at its annual fair, which Napoleon turned into a permanent market, consisting of four wooden pavilions bearing derisively pompous names: Flore for beddings, Forét Noire for shoes, Le Pou Volant (‘the flying louse’) for scrap. To the
fourth, Le Palais-Royal, actresses came from all over Paris in search of a piece of
velvet riband or a hat, trinkets and baubles, silk and lace, whatever they might

need for the stage. A vivid, metaphorical jargon was born here, reflecting the spirit of working-class Paris in the first half of the 19th century, and some of the
words, such as chineur (‘secondhand dealer’), gonzesse (‘chick’), eventually

found their way into French dictionaries.
After work, it was only a short step to the perpetual funfair on Boulevard du
Temple, a world immortalized in Marcel Carné’s film Les Enfants du Paradis,
with its theatres, street entertainment, passion and crime. Most of the theatres
were on the north-eastern side of the Boulevard, in the 11th arrondissement,
whereas the famous eating-places were concentrated in the 3rd as were the criminals. The most notorious was Lacernaire, an aloof, cynical dandy, irresistible to
women. Aroused by the Mémoires he had written in his prison cell, fascinated by
his impeccable attire and his polished French - after all, he had written decent

poetry in his day - they flocked to his trial, unmindful of the fact that it was their
own society he had challenged: “My duel with society [...] It was the social edifice that I wanted to attack in its foundations, its wealthy members, harsh and

selfish, who throw to their dogs the bread they refuse to their fellow man.” Writers and artists too were fascinated by Lacernaire and his portrait was recreated by
Victor Hugo, André Breton, Marcel Carné (in Les Enfants du Paradis), and others since.
On 10 January 1836, at 6 a.m., a priest entered Lacernaire’s cell. “Your visit is
useless,” was all the prisoner said before donning his morning coat and walking
out of his cell stoically, headed for the guillotine. He was 33 years of age.
The market-place too was a nest of villains and vagabonds. Their canteen was
Chez la Mére Maillard whose plat garni consisted of left-overs from the glittering
Café Turc and the Cadran Bleu, on opposite corners of rue Charlot and Boulevard
du Temple. The Boulevard was also known as Boulevard du Crime because of the
endless bloody melodramas enacted in its theatres, but it might equally have been
so nicknamed because of the real-life dramas played out on it. In this area, the
borders between fiction and reality were blurred.

Throughout the 19th century small trades and workshops gnawed their way into
the once aristocratic Marais: elegant courtyards and gardens vanished, 17th-century fagades were hidden by artificial facing, majestic halls were partitioned, ceilings lowered, harmonious proportions wrecked. The workers’ First International,
founded in London in 1864 with the support of Karl Marx, set up its Parisian


headquarters at 14 rue de Turennes, an appropriately working-class area. Place de
la République, on the north-eastern edge of the arrondissement, became the
departure point of working-class protest marches heading for the Bastille, a tradition still sometimes followed, even in these days of ideological confusion.
Waves of poor immigrants settled here too, many of them German Jews taking
advantage of the emancipation granted them by the French Revolution. They took
up residence on the northern edge of the arrondissement, where the clothing, jewellery and silverware trades flourished. By the middle of the century the synagogue they had built on rue Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth could no longer contain
their increasing numbers. Jews from Alsace and eastern Europe came to swell
their ranks in the latter part of the 19th century, pushing their way further south,
as far as the medieval Jewish Quarter, in the 4th arrondissement. During World
War I, mainland China also disgorged her poor, often to work in the arms industry. They too settled in the proletarian 3rd arrondissement, making it the home of
the oldest Chinese community in Paris, (a little known fact, as locals are more
familiar with the two recent Chinatowns of the 13th and 19th arrondissements).

There are many Anglicans among them, from families converted by the English
missionaries, and they are served by three churches in Paris, where the same
hymns are sung as in England, only in Mandarin. Besides working diligently in
the usual Chinese restaurants and food shops, they have taken over the traditional
trades of the Temple (leather, fancy goods and imitation jewellery) and thus have,
unwittingly, helped to perpetuate French traditions.
On 4 August 1962 the National Assembly passed La loi Malraux (initiated by
Charles de Gaulle’s Minister of Culture, André Malraux), for the rehabilitation of
the Marais. Since then, old mansions have been turned into museums and cultural
institutions, while stylish boutiques, art galleries and eating-places have little by

little replaced traditional trades. However, with the departure of a good part of the
original population, the Marais is in danger of losing its authenticity. Time alone
will tell whether it will retain its soul or become a tourist showcase.

WHERE TO WALK...
THE MARAIS DU TEMPLE
lhe Temple Métro station stands in a run-down neighbourhood, melancholy
and stale. Even the Temple market (open all mornings, except Mondays) cannot shake off this obsolete atmosphere. Yet this is the site of the one-time Enclos
du Temple, and as such deserves your attention. On your way there, step into the
church of Sainte-Elisabeth at 195 rue du Temple, the only 17th-century church in
the arrondissement to have survived the havoc of the Revolution. Also dating

re

from the 17th century is its fabulous Flemish wood panelling, with its hundred
sculpted scenes from the Old and New Testaments. It was bought from the Abbey
of Saint-Vaast in the town of Arras in 1945, and has been tucked away since in

the dark ambulatory of the church.
Walk along rue Dupetit-Thouars to the corner of rue Gabriel-Vicaire, where a
plan affixed to the wall will help you visualize the Enclos du Temple in the different stages of its evolution. Square du Temple, at the end of rue GabrielVicaire, and the Mairie of the arrondissement that overlooks it, to your left,
occupy part of its site. No trace is left of the 50-metre tower where the royal family was locked up; only a faded blue line in front of the Mairie marks its limits;
this is a pity, for even in the 18th century, when medieval architecture had gone
out of favour, the Tower of the Temple was admired and regarded as the most
beautiful in France. Across the Square du Temple, on the corner of rue du Temple
and rue de Bretagne, stood the Palace of the Grand Prior, where the 10-year-old
Mozart played the harpsichord for the Prince de Conti in 1766. The Palace, a
sumptuous mansion built by Mansart in 1667, was the enlightened centre of freethinking Paris. In order to provide l’abbé Prévost (the author of Manon Lescaut)
with a substantial livelihood, the Prince appointed him chaplain of the Temple,
little bothered by the fact that the clergyman never celebrated mass. When the
abbot, somewhat embarrassed, pointed this out to him, Conti retorted, “It is of little consequence - I never listen to it.”” On the other hand, the Prince was much

more of a stickler for pedigree and wouid not marry his charismatic mistress, the
Comtesse de Boufflers, although he held her in great respect.
The Square du Temple is one of several gardens opened by Napoleon III, emulating those he had admired during his exile in London. Designed on a miniature
scale, it contains, nonetheless, a lake and a waterfall (the rocks come from the

forest of Fontainebleau), and provides a rare, refreshing spot of beauty in this
passé neighbourhood.
Little is left of the Marché du Temple (erroneously called the Carreau du Temple: the Carreau was the space between the Temple and the market, where pedlars
traded with the Temple’s inhabitants), just one iron structure north of the Mairie.
Following the example of Les Halles, Napoleon III replaced the four wooden
pavilions with six iron ones, all the way to rue du Temple. In 1904 they housed
the first Paris Fair, but the following year four of them were dismantled, along
with the attractive 18th-century Rotunda, once the home of debtors entitled to the
protection of the Temple. The present iron pavilion stands on its site, devoid,
however, of the picturesque bustle of yore: gone are the ribands, lace and feathers, the rdleuses (‘Mrs Grumpy’) who pestered one into buying a décrochez-moi
¢a! (‘get this off the hook’! , i.e. a woman’s hat) or a pair of dix-huit (‘eighteen’,
i.e. shoes), a pun on deux fois neuf (‘twice nine’ and ‘twice new’), reflecting the



R. G. VI
SQRE DU

TEMPLE

R. DEBELLEYME
R. DES COUTURES
ST-GERVAIS
R. ST-ANASTASE
R. DE THORIGNY
R. DE SEVIGNE

CARNAVALET

~ OUR

¥

>

—_
R.
DES
TOURNELLES

US F.
REALISATION CARTOGRAPHIQUE : MIZERMONT S.- AMI-PHILOLA

tk

fact that worn out soles were turned over to make a new pair of shoes! Today, by
contrast, the market is standardized, transactions are conventional and men’s

shirts are neatly folded up in hygienic cellophane wrappings...
Walk along rue Caffarelli south of the market, turn left into rue de Bretagne and
right into rue de Beauce, now a narrow, shabby alley but a prestigious landmark
in the second half of the 17th century. On the corner of rue de Beauce and rue des
Oiseaux (first on your left) the enlightened Mademoiselle de Scudéry held one of
the most sought after salons of her century, her ‘ruelle’. Despite the modesty of
the premises, every Saturday a distinguished society would climb up the dark
staircase leading to her muffled, obscure sanctuary, men in their long, cascading
wigs surmounted by feathered hats, women with pyramid-like headdresses, their
white-powdered faces marked by one inevitable black beauty spot. Here, refined
conversation and lofty emotions were cultivated to excess, especially by the
ladies, in reaction to the brutish coarse manners pervailing since the reign of —
Henri IV.
Whereas Madeleine de Scudéry’s home lacked the magnificence of the wealthier hétels, her garden was a gem. Its acacias and fruit trees emitted exquisite fragrances, which counteracted the fetid stench of the street, where rubbish
accumulated in the central ditch, until the rain washed it away. A warbler, a wren

and a parrot lived in the garden, adding song to the ravishing sight (hence the
name rue des Oiseaux), a source of inspiration to the Scudéry’s friends. Thus, in
all earnest, the great philosopher Leibniz addressed her parrot in one of his verses. This literary affectation compensated for the fact that the members of the circle were not particularly alluring and that their hostess was by then an ageing
woman in her forties. Her favourite suitor, Pellisson, was described by the writer
Furetiére as short and having “a hump which he carried on his shoulders [...] His
two legs were of unequal length; he was blind in one eye and could not see with
the other...” And Ninon Lenclos, having skimmed through Mlle de Scudéry’s
preposterous Carte du Tendre - a verbal map of a land of platonic love - called
the members of her salon, les Jansénistes* de l’Amour, “because they speak a lot
about it but never make it.” The female members, the bas bleus (‘bluestockings’),
were targeted by Moliére in his immensely popular farce Les Précieuses
Ridicules. Likewise, Tallemant des Réaux, a keen contemporary eyewitness, took
to his heals after a few sessions because their activities were “beginning seriously
to bore people”.
Yet Madeleine de Scudéry was a woman of great intellect and remained so into
her nineties. Madame de Maintenon counted her among her friends and the highly
cultured Queen Christina of Sweden visited her when in Paris, as did all foreign
*Austere followers of the Dutch theologian Jansen Cornelis (1585 - 1638)
who believed

in predestination and denied free will.


travellers of note. It must also be said to her credit that she was a loyal friend, for

when Pellisson was arrested with Nicolas Fouquet she disavowed neither. As for
Pellisson, he may have been unprepossessing, but he was also a distinguished
Academician, a leading orator and the King’s official historiographer. He also
took the initiative in collecting the literary output of those Saturday gatherings
and noting down their happenings in Chronique du Samedi, which he bound into
a blue velvet volume, alas now lost.
Turn right into rue de Bretagne. At the time of writing, the picturesque market
of Les Enfants Rouges (‘the little boys in red’) on the corner of rue Charlot, the

oldest market of Paris, has been earmarked for demolition and replacement by a
modern block and a car park. The eponymous little boys in red were the inmates
of the orphanage at 90 rue des Archives, and were part of the landscape of the
Marais. Their female counterparts, dressed in blue,were known as ‘les enfants
bleus’. Rue Charlot comemmorates Heni IV’s prominent developer who was
commissioned to lay out the proposed monumental Place de France. Rue de Bretagne, rue de Poitou further down rue Charlot, to your left, and rue de Normandie,

north of rue de Bretagne, were part of this aborted project. After Henri IV’s assassination in 1610, Charlot was able to devote his time to making profits and set out
to build up the area as speedily as he could. Rue Charlot, an elegant street in the
17th and 18th centuries, dilapidated thereafter, is now in the process of gentrification. Some of its houses deserve attention: n° 38 where a sewing workshop and a
metalworks still subsist on either side of a countrified courtyard; n° 33 has
already been restored and boasts a magnificent staircase; n° 31 and n° 29 still
house vestiges of the neighbourhood’s once-flourishing silver trade. The 18thcentury hdtel at n° 28, the former home of the Marquise de Polignac, is of

unquestionable architectural distinction despite its present sorry state. An attractive 17th-century hdtel at n° 24 houses an art gallery, one of several in the street.
The corner of rue Pastourelle, with its old-fashioned street lamp affixed to the

wall and its picturesque café, Le Barométre, is a rare slice of old Paris straight
from an old movie — take it in before it is gone! The house at n° 11 rue Pastourelle
boasts a charming courtyard and a beautiful Louis XV wrought-iron staircase.
Back on rue Charlot, continue to the corner of rue du Perche on your left. The

old Armenian Catholic church, shaded by two chestnut trees, is the only vestige
of the convent of the Capucin monks, who were the fire brigade of Paris, rushing

about as best they could in their gowns, each carrying two buckets of water. This
is how they were seen at 10 pm on 15 January 1644, dashing down rue du Perche
‘to the Théatre de Marais round the corner, all aflame. “I saw it burn with horror’,

reported the President d’Ormesson who lived close by. “So big was the fire, it
could be seen throughout Paris. People rushed from everywhere and it was as


clear as daylight.” With only two buckets of water each, there was little they
could do to stop the conflagration.
The church has some relics that belonged to Saint Elizabeth, the sister of Saint
Louis, and also the chasuble of the Irish abbot Edgeworth, the last confessor of
Louis XVI. In the early morning of 21 January 1793 he was dispatched from here
with all the liturgical accessories to the Temple to celebrate the King’s last mass.
Clearly the Revolution had not sorted out its attitude to religion. Inside the church
is a 19th-century Cavaillé-Coll organ, which was played by such musicians as
César Franck, Massenet and Léo Delibes. Unfortunately, the church is kept
locked except on Sunday mornings during mass.
Walk up to n° 7 bis rue du Perche, known as Hétel Scarron because Scarron’s
widow, the future Madame de Maintenon, lived here for a while in 1664. An ordi-

nary-looking house, it has beautiful 17th-century paintings on its ceilings. Retrace
your steps and turn right into rue de Saintonge, lined with some 17th- and 18th-~
century houses. A bronze-fitter and a wrought-iron craftsman still work at n° 4. In
1651 Blaise Pascal was living at n° 13 and working on the problem of vacuum,
when his father died, which caused the family the grief of having to move out on
Christmas Day. Retrace your steps and turn left into rue de Poitou. The corner
boulangerie has typical Belle Epoque window panelling, decorated with harvest
scenes. Such panels were commonplace at the time but regrettably many have
been removed by antique dealers and collectors.
Turn right into rue Debelleyme (like rue de Poitou, a remnant of the Place de
France scheme) and cross over to rue Vieille-du-Temple. The Hétel d’Epinay at
n° 110 now houses an art gallery. Its 18th-century door is therefore likely to be
open during the day, revealing the architectural splendour of the entrance hall.
The framework of the building dates from the early 17th century, maybe in part
from before (Frangois d’Epinay was one of Henri III’s ‘mignons’), but the gorgeous staircase with its rich, curving, wrought-iron railing, is Rocaille, a style in
vogue during the reign of Louis XV. An elegant orangery can be seen inside the
garden, surmounted by a typical Henri IV and Louis XIII facade of brick and
stone. The Hotel d’Epernon at n° 106, also has a brick-and-stone facade, except
that here the bricks are painted on the wall, a common device at a time when
brick was costly. The hétel’s frontage is ornamented with a superb sculpted head
and two lions couchant on its pediment. The garden at n° 90 lies on the site of an
old real-tennis court (jeu de paume), which was taken over by the Théatre du
Marais in the 17th century, when the game was going out of fashion. Behind the

garden can be seen the back of the Hotel Salé or Aubert de Fontenay (now Musée

Picasso). Throughout its life the Théatre du Marais had to contend with the jealous manoeuvring of the King’s troupe, les Comédiens du Roi, which was established at the Hétel de Bourgogne on rue Mauconseil, north of the church of


Saint-Eustache. Time and again the Théatre du Marais was forced to yield its lead
actors to their rivals, notably Jodelet, one of the most famous actors of the 17th
century. The tremendous success of the Théatre du Marais was due to the quality
of its actors, of course, but also to the collaboration of Pierre Corneille, whose
early comedies created a sensation: indeed, in a written petition, the inhabitants of
rue Michel-le-Comte (where the theatre was located for a short while) com-

plained about the obstruction caused by the presence of so many carriages and
horses, because of which they had to wait until late into the night before they
could return home. The theatre’s stunning collection of costumes also testifies to
the fact that it was a highly lucrative business.
The premiere in December 1636 of Corneille’s play Le Cid, with the idolized
Mondory in the lead role of Rodrigue, electrified the audience. As the writer
Boileau reported, “Tout Paris pour Chiméne a les yeux de Rodrigue ” (“All Paris
gazes at Chiméne with the eyes of Rodrigue”). Today’s generations, having plodded through the dilemma of choice between love and honour in tedious French
classes, will find it hard to imagine the momentum of the event. The soaring success of the troupe was clouded by a tragic event the following August, when
Mondory, was struck by a fit of apoplexy on the stage, which left his arm and
tongue permanently paralysed and ended his career.
Nevertheless, Corneille’s great tragedies took the theatre from success to success, not dented either by the opening of Moliére’s Théatre Illustre in 1643 on the
Left Bank or by the devastating fire in 1644. On the contrary, its new leader,
Floridor, reconstructed and enlarged the premises, turning them into the most
beautiful ones in the kingdom - if hot and poorly ventilated. The theatre was
invariably filled to its capacity of 1,500. But once more lobbying by the King’s
troupe secured Floridor’s transfer, which, it was predicted, would be a fatal blow,

for he was considered by Corneille himself as the indispensable interpreter of his
plays. Nevertheless, the theatre’s new director, Philibert Robin, emerged from the

wreckage and carried the theatre to even greater heights. Using the first special
effects, he created enchanting extravaganzas, the embryonic form of the opera.
Never before had Paris marvelled at Mercury descended from a gloriously starstudded sky, at Jupiter appearing in mid-air, darting formidable flashes of lightning, while thunder rumbled in the background. La Toison d’Or (‘The Golden
Fleece’) in 1661 was the theatrical event of the century: twice Louis XIV travelled with his entire court from the Louvre to rue Vieille-du-Temple to attend the
show. This time the King’s musician, Lully, was alarmed at the competition. In
1672 he prevailed upon the King to grant him the monopoly in opera productions
‘and in 1673, after Moliére’s death, the Théatre du Marais was closed down and
the troupe ordered to join the late Moliére’s ThéAtre Illustre on the Left Bank.
The King’s official troupe survived into the 1680s, producing Racine’s plays, but


soon they too were ordered to join the newly merged troupe on the Left Bank.
With the increasing centralization of the state, there was room for one troupe
only. In 1728, the premises of the Théatre du Marais were turned into horse stables by the new owner of the Hotel Salé, Nicolas Le Camus.

Turn left into rue de la Perle. At n° 1 the locksmith museum is located in the
H6tel Bruant (1685), formerly the home of Libéral Bruant, the famous architect

of the Invalides. Having bought from the Order of the Fusées the last uninhabited
domain in the Marais du Temple (the area between the Temple and rue des
Francs-Bourgeois), he replaced the Order’s kitchen gardens with magnificent
hétels particuliers, thus completing the urbanization of the Marais. Somehow,

only the one he has built for himself has survived.
Turn left into rue de Thorigny. At n° 5 stands the Hétel Aubert de Fontenay or
Salé, now the Musée Picasso. Aubert de Fontenay was one of the King’s partisans who, from the 16th century on, were in charge of collecting his taxes and
were later known as fermiers généraux. This privileged post enabled its holder to
amass a fabulous fortune, but also placed him in a fragile position, between the
devil and the deep blue sea, between a jealous despot (cf Louis XIV and Nicolas
Fouquet) and a discontented populace. The people of Paris nicknamed Aubert de
Fontenay’s showy mansion ‘I’hétel salé’ (‘the salty hotel’), because he had made
his fortune largely through collecting the salt tax, but also because salé in colloquial French means expensive: Aubert, who was said to have started out as a
lackey, went all out to impress his neighbours. However, like many others, he lost

his fortune in the wake of Fouquet’s downfall and died before the hétel had been
completed. Other parvenus were more fortunate and it was not unusual to see
them climb from the bottom all the way up the social ladder, as we are told by
Moliére in L’Ecole des Femmes:

“I know a country fellow called Gros Pierre,

who, not having any other property than a single piece of land, had a muddy ditch
dug round it, and pompously called himself Monsieur de I’Isle.” Or, as the great
observer of the human animal, La Bruyére, summed it up succinctly in his
Caracteéres: “Certain people go to bed as commoners and rise noble.” Which was
precisely what the maternal great-grandfather of the very noble Marquise de Sévigné did, a wealthy tax-collector by the name of Philippe de Coulanges, who had
married his daughter into the very old feudal family of the Rabutins. The bridegroom, the Baron de Chantal, being ridden with debts, found the match to his

interest, but the rest of the family did not appear at the wedding. Commenting on
such mésalliances a few decades later, Madame de Sévigné said: “JI faut bien

fumer ses terres (“One does have to manure one’s land”).

After Aubert’s death the Embassy of Venice rented the dazzling mansion with
its richly decorated pediment and its imposing staircase, surrounded by Corinthi84

an pillars, medallions and sculpted eagles - no effort was spared to dazzle all and
sundry. Its fabulous wrought-iron balustrade is marked with the letters A for
Aubert and C for Mademoiselle Chastelain, his wealthy wife, who had helped
him rise in the world but also made him a cuckold. When, a century later, the

hétel became the property of Leclerc de Juigné, the Archbishop of Paris, he laid a
crimson carpet on the gorgeous staircase and covered up the nude sculptures on
the walls.
The Revolution left the mansion disfigured beyond recognition. André Malraux’s bill of August 1962 for the restoration of the Marais saved it from demolition, and in the same year the City of Paris bought it and leased it to the state.
After Picasso’s death in 1973, it received the donations of his heirs, including

paintings by Renoir, Cézanne, Douanier Rousseau, Matisse and Braque from his
private collection, along with some of his own works.
North of the Hétel Salé, the names of rue des Coutures-Saint-Gervais and rue
Sainte-Anastase are still engraved in the ancient stone, a relic of the medieval

Marais, when it was shared by different orders who lived off its kitchen gardens
(couture, as distinct from culture, ‘extensive farming’). The words ‘Saint’ and
‘Sainte’ were blotted out during the anti-clerical days of the Revolution. Retrace
your steps and turn left into rue du Parc-Royal, which once led to the gardens of
the Maison Royale des Tournelles (now Place des Vosges). To its south, Square
Léopold-Achille and Square Gaston-Cain provide a charming spot of greenery,
enhanced by an elegant orangery, which once belonged to the Hotel Le Peletier
de Saint-Fargeau, soon to be reached. Square Léopold-Achille was opened in
1931 and honours the then deputy mayor of the 3rd arrondissement. Square Gaston-Cain, opened in 1913, honours the curator of Musée Carnavalet between 1897
and 1914. It serves as an attractive depository for the museum’s stones.
Hotel Boneval at n° 16 rue Parc-Royal, has a charming pavilion hidden in the
courtyard. At n° 10, the Hétel de Vigny (no connection with the illustrious poet)
has a magnificent wrought-iron staircase and exquisitely painted beams dating
from the time of Louis XIII on several of the ground-floor ceilings. A beautifully
painted ceiling on the first floor, ornamented with allegorical figures of the four
seasons and the elements, is a fine example of the splendour of a 17th-century
interior. The Ministry of Education was planning to pull down the building and
replace it with a school but was successfully opposed by the Monuments Historiques after a fierce campaign. Likewise, now that the hétel at n° 8 has been
bought by a German cultural body, its renovation and upkeep are secure. The
lovely (fake) brick-and-stone house at n° 4 has preserved its period, carved wood-

- en balustrade, a precious rarity.
Turn right into rue de Sévigné, named after the most illustrious inhabitant of
at
the Marais, the Marquise de Sévigné. The Hotel Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau


n° 29 was inhabited successively by four generations of the Le Peletier family,

who also owned the domain of Saint-Fargeau in Sologne. The last one, Louis-

Michel, turned Republican during the Revolution, joined the Convention and
voted for the death of the King. On 20 January 1793, on the eve of the King’s
execution, he was himself murdered by the King’s bodyguard in Café Février, in
the Galerie Valois of the Palais-Royal, to avenge his sovereign. The Hotel is now
an annexe of the Musée Carnavalet. The historical library of Paris was located
here until 1968, when it moved to the neighbouring Hétel Lamoignon on rue
Pavée (in the 4th arr.).

Hétel Carnavalet undoubtedly is one of the landmarks of the 3rd arrondissement, both as the museum of the history of Paris and as the most famous and
most permanent of Madame de Sévigné’s nine dwellings in the Marais, the one
where she lived the last 20 years of her life. It was built in 1545 for the President
of Parliament, Jacques de Lingeris, who was much in favour with Francois I,
which accounts for the contribution of Jean Goujon, the King’s official sculptor:

i

S14Oe

Hotel Carnavalet


the gorgeous bas-relief of the Seasons in the courtyard is his work. Coysevox’s
statue of the Sun King is obviously a later addition; having been miraculously
rescued during the Revolution, it was transferred here from the Hétel de Ville.
The architecture, a blend of ornate Italian Renaissance and French formality, is
characteristic of the reign of Francois I, who, in the wake of his Italian campaigns, sought to bridge the two cultures. These features are best seen from rue
des Francs-Bourgeois, round the corner to the right (see below). In 1572, the hétel

became the property of Madame de Kernevenoy, when its name was distorted
into Carnavalet. The Hétel Carnavalet is also, it should be noted, the third oldest

non-religious monument in Paris, after the Hétel de Sens (1475), and the Hétel de
Cluny (1485), respectively in the 4th and Sth arrondissements. The Renaissance
Louvre was started only two years later.
Madame de Sévigné, born in 1626 in her grandparents’ hétel on Place Royale
(now Place des Vosges), lost her father in early childhood and both her mother
and grandparents by the age of 10. From then on she was constantly on the move
but, except for her numerous long stays in the provinces, she remained within the
perimeter of the Marais. Though she occasionally visited Madame de Rambouillet by the Louvre and Madame de La Fayette in Faubourg Saint-Germain across
the river, most of her friends - Lamoignon, Ormesson, Scudéry - were near neighbours, and most of her social life rotated around the area of Place Royale, referred

to simply as the ‘Place’. This peripatetic lifestyle using rented premises was not
uncommon among members of the nobility, who tended to be short of cash, their
wealth often lying solely in their country estates. Besides, they came up to Paris
to have fun and preferred to spend what money they had collecting fabulous
pieces of furniture, tapestries and other works of art, which they would take with
them from one rented place to the next. They often ran into heavy debt and were
sometimes even evicted for unpaid rents.
Madame de Sévigné took a long time finding a home that would suit both herself and her daughter’s family. On 7 October 1677 she informed her beloved
daughter Madame de Grignard that, at long last, “Thank God, we have the [lease
of the] Hétel Carnavalet. It is an admirable affair; there will be room for all of us

and we shall have good air. As one cannot have everything, we shall have to do
without parquet floors and without the small fireplaces that are so in vogue; but
we have at least a beautiful courtyard, a beautiful garden, a beautiful neighbourhood and good little ‘blue girls’ who are very well behaved [at the time the
_‘enfants bleus’ occupied the convent of the Annonciades Célestes in the Hotel
Danville next door].” A beautiful neighbourhood indeed, of graceful buildings of
religious institutions and of palatial private homes. Come spring their fragrant
gardens filled the air with the scent of orange blossom. Above all, Hétel Car-


navalet was just a few steps from the Place Royale, the hub of social life. After
endless shilly-shallying, Madame de Sévigné and her daughter took over the first
noble floor, while the grandaughters and their governess lived on the second. The
imposing staircase (the present one is a later addition brought over from the Hotel
de Luynes in Faubourg Saint-Germain) led to the living-room. Madame de Grignard occupied the second room and Madame de Sévigné the third. It may have
been partitioned, since she refers to her ‘petite chambre’. Although the inventory
compiled after Madame de Sévigné’s death provides a complete list of her possessions, we do not know how they were arranged. Among them were eight
pieces of tapestry relating the life of Noah and seven relating the life of Psyche.
Gorgeous silk fabrics covered the furniture, which was proportionately of little
value, since in those days both workmanship and wood were cheap. The only
paintings Madame de Sévigné owned were family portraits. To celebrate Madame
de Grignard’s return to Carnavalet in 1680, after a year’s absence, the doting ~
Madame de Sévigné arranged for her to have a new room on the ground floor and
asked Libéral Bruant to update it and install a parquet floor and a new small fireplace.
Hordes of lackeys, cooks, butlers, tutors and governesses waited on the members of the family during the endless bustle of their comings and goings. And yet,
despite a whirling timetable, Madame de Sévigné found the time to devour books,
to observe the world around her and to indulge in a substantial correspondence
with her daughter, which is an invaluable testimony of 17th-century Paris.

The City of Paris purchased the Hétel Carnavalet in 1866 and turned it into a
museum in 1880. Besides its permanent exhibits, which range from prehistoric
days to the French Revolution, temporary thematic exhibitions, connected with

the history of Paris, are held periodically.

Turn right into rue des Francs-Bourgeois, from where you will have a good
view of the courtyard of the Hétel Carnavalet and its architecture. The street

forms part of the borderline between the 3rd and 4th arrondissements and runs
along the site of the northern section of the walls built by Philippe-Auguste. Vestiges of one of its towers can be seen in the basement of n° 7 (in the 4th arr.). The
street is named after the inhabitants of an almshouse situated further west, who
were exempt from paying taxes because of their extreme destitution. Today this is
the tourists’ main artery, leading to Place des Vosges, behind you, and is consequently lined with attractive boutiques. Avoid weekend afternoons, when heavy
traffic rather mars the pleasure of window-shopping.

A charming salon de thé at the corner of rue Payenne is a good stopping-place.
Once restored, turn right into rue Payenne. The house at n° 7 is nothing much to
look at, but it was the home of the great architect Mansart, the founder of the


greatest dynasty of architects of the Ancien Régime, among them his greatnephew, the architect of Versailles, and the famous Gabriel family, to whom they
were linked by marriage. The Hétel de Marle at n° 11 has been beautifully
restored and now houses the Swedish cultural centre. Originally built for Hector
de Marle in the 16th century, it was renovated extensively in the 17th and 18th
centuries. Among its residents was Madame de Polignac, much befriended by
Marie-Antoinette who entrusted her children to her care.
Retrace your steps, continue on rue des Francs-Bourgeois and turn right into
rue Elzévir. The H6tel Donon at n° 8 now houses the Musée Cognacq-Jay, set up
by the founders of La Samaritaine department store, Ernest Cognacq and Nelly
Jay, to avoid the dispersal of their private collection of 18th-century paintings,
among them works by Fragonard, Greuze, Boucher, Tiepolo. When they
bequeathed the collection to the City of Paris in 1928, they stipulated that it was
to remain in their 18th-century hétel on Boulevard des Capucines, because it
belonged architecturally to the same period as the paintings. Despite these
instructions, the collection was transferred in 1990 from the Boulevard des

Capucines, where, admittedly, hardly anyone visited it, to the Hétel Donon,
where, it was hoped, it would benefit from the popularity of the Marais. It was
also a way of saving the dilapidated Hétel Donon, parts of which date from the
16th century. Further down the street, on your right, are the lovely gardens of the
Swedish cultural centre - a charming sight.
Rue Barbette, on your left, recalls the Hétel Barbette, the site of the prologue to
the Hundred Years’ War. An earlier country dwelling had been built here at the
end of the 13th century by the provost of merchants, Etienne Barbette. It was
known as La Courtille Barbette, which indicates that the spacious grounds,

extending from rue Vieille-du-Temple to rue Elzévir, were walled. Barbette provided the capital with the first of its quais, the quai des Grands-Augustins (now in
the 6th arr.) to thwart the devastating flooding caused by the capricious Seine. He
also originated the law that binds landlord and tenant to three months’ notice to
vacate; this law is still in force. His contemporaries viewed him in a less
favourable light, begrudging his collaboration with Philippe le Bel, who lived
beyond his means at their expense. When the people of Paris rose against the
King at Christmas 1306, the Courtille was not spared. By 1390 it had been totally
rebuilt, renamed Hotel Barbette and was under the proprietorship of Jean de Montagu, Charles VI’s superintendent of finance, who sold it to Queen Isabelle of

Bavaria a decade later. Jean de Montagu himself met with a tragic end later: jealousy engendered false accusations against him and in 1409 he was decapitated
and hanged by the feet at the gallows of Montfaucon (in today’s 10th arr.), where
- his body was left dangling in the wind for three years, before he was rehabilitated.
When the fair, black-eyed Isabelle retired to her newly acquired mansion, her


husband Charles VI had partly lost his reason. Officially she moved there to
escape his fits of dementia; in fact she was now free to lead her own life, notably
in the company of her husband’s brother Louis, Duc d’Orléans, who was also the

cousin of Jean sans Peur, Duc de Bourgogne. Trouble was brooding: for beyond
the eternal struggle for power, the unavoidable consequence of the political vacuum created by the King’s mental impotence, there was male rivalry, jealousy and
passion between two blood cousins, all the ingredients of a Shakespearean
tragedy. Louis, Duc d’Orléans was handsome, gallant and licentious. Jean, Duc
de Bourgogne, was short and puny. Louis was the King’s brother, Jean, only his
cousin. Not only was Louis the Queen’s lover, but he also exerted a seductive
power over Jean’s own wife, Marguerite of Bavaria, a fact of which Jean was not

unaware. On Wednesday, 23 November 1407, the Duc d’Orléans was paying a
visit to Queen Isabeau who had just delivered a stillborn child, when a King’s ©
equerry entered their presence to inform the Duke that His Majesty demanded to
speak to him. The Duke left at once for the royal residence at the Hétel de SaintPol (now in the 4th arr.), riding his mule, preceded by three torch carriers, while
two pages shared another mule behind him. It remains unclear whether he used
the discreet exit into the Allée des Arbalétiers, at 38 rue des Francs-Bourgeois, or

the main entrance at 64 rue Vieille-du-Temple. Whichever way, his route went
past the H6tel de Rieux (47 rue Vieille-du-Temple), where

18 hired killers,

equipped with hatchets and pointed mallets, lay in wait, led by Raoul d’Ocquetonville whose wife had also been sensitive to the Duke’s charm. As the Duke
reached the door, the assassins emerged and hurled themselves upon him. “I am
the Duke of Orléans!” he exclaimed, believing this to be a mistake. “Precisely so.
You are the man we want.” Watching from her top-floor window, Jacqueline
Griffart, a shoemaker’s wife, burst out screaming, “Murder! Murder! ”, which

caused enough commotion to enable the assassins to flee into the dark. Too late:
the butchered, lifeless body of the slain Duke lay in a puddle of blood in the
street; close by lay one of the two pages who had been killed in the scuffle.
At the funeral service the following day the Duc de Bourgogne declared,
“Never was such evil, such treacherous murder in this kingdom perpetrated.” Yet
two days later he admitted his crime and fled temporarily to Burgundy, soon to

return to the capital and unleash a civil war of unspeakable horror, which opposed
the Bourguignons, his supporters, to the partisans of the late Duc d’Orléans in the
person of his brother-in-law, Bernard VII, the Comte d’ Armagnac. In 1419 Jean
sans Peur was assassinated in his turn, but not before having opened the gates of
France to invasion by England. Meanwhile, Isabeau had rallied the camp of the
Bourguignons, and turning her back on her own son and legitimate heir, the

future Charles VII (1403-61), surrendered her daughter Catherine to Henry V of
England, making him heir to the throne of France, as we are told both by history


and by Shakespeare. Not until 1422 was the Monarchy restored to its lawful king,
Charles VII.
The great enlightened Duc de Berry, the uncle of both Louis d’Orléans and
Jean sans Peur, had not underestimated the danger inherent in his nephews’ feud
and hoped desperately to reconcile them. On the Sunday before the assassination
of Louis d’Orléans, he had united them in the chapel of the Grands-Augustins
next to his palace, the Hétel de Nesle (now in the 6th arr.), where they received
communion and shared the host. He then had them sup and sleep in the same
room, the ultimate proof of mutual trust - so soon alas to be betrayed.
Some 150 years later the Hétel de Barbette belonged to the seneschal of Normandy, Louis de Brézé. The ageing man was remarried to a 13-year-old girl,
Diane. While riding one day through rue Vieille-du-Temple, Francois I noticed
her and brought her to the court, but their liaison was cut short by the King’s official mistress, the Duchesse d’Etampes. Undeterred, Diane set out to win the heart

of the Dauphin and waited for her day, which happened some 20 years later, in
1547, when the Dauphin acceded to the throne of France as Henri II. This time it

was the turn of the Duchesse d’Etampes to pack up.
Rue Barbette will lead you to the magnificent 18th-century Hétel de Rohan, at
87 rue Vieille du Temple, built by Delamair at the same time as the Hétel de
Soubise. The Rohan and the Soubise were members of the same family and
shared the same garden. Today both hétels belong to the National Archives and
can be visited during temporary exhibitions. The elegant simplicity of the facade
overlooking the garden of the Hétel de Rohan, contrasts with the sumptuous dec-

orations inside, as was the rule in the 17th and 18th centuries. In order to recreate
its period setting, some decorations were brought over from other mansions,
notably the celebrated cabinet des singes, a masterpiece of Louis XV Rocaille
style, flamboyant, overladen with tortuous gilt borders, yet somehow delicately
graceful, a reflection of the mannered society of the time.
Turn left into rue Vieille-du-Temple. On the corner of rue des Francs-Bourgeois an early 16th-century turret with lace-like carvings is affixed to the corner
wall of a house straight out of a fairytale. This was the home of Jehan Hérouet,
Louis XIi’s treasurer. It was damaged by German bombing in 1944 but was later
in even greater danger when a French deputy in the National Assembly suggested
it being torn down, saying that it obstructed the traffic.
Turn right into rue des Francs-Bourgeois. On the corner of rue des Archives
stands the Hétel de Soubise, some say the most superb Aétel in the Marais. In the
18th century it replaced the mansion of the Guise family, the greatest family of
the Marais, second only to the King’s. At the height of his popularity, Corneille
was lodged by the Guise (1662-1664) in one of their apartments. The hétel now


houses both the National Archives and the museum

of the history of France,

offering the visitor a rare opportunity to see an 18th-century interior.
The first Duc de Guise to settle here was Francois de Lorraine, who in 1553
bought the Hétel du connétable de Clisson, a Gothic-style mansion (as witness
the two turrets on rue des Archives) built by Olivier de Clisson in 1371 on
grounds bought from the Templars. A close friend of Charles V and Charles VI,
de Clisson personally set out to hunt down Pierre de Craon, who had tried to
assassinate Charles VI. It was during that chase that Charles VI had his first fit of
dementia in the forest of Le Mans.
The mansion must have been outstanding for it was requisitioned during the
English occupation of Paris for the Duke of Clarence, the King’s brother, and
later for the Duke of Bedford, the Regent of France (1420-35). When Francois de
Lorraine settled here a century later he called on the greatest artists of the day to _
redecorate the palace in Renaissance style, notably the Italian Nicol6 dell’ Abbate
who executed the drawings of Francesco Primaticcio, the most famous Italian

artist of the time, and turned the chapel into the most beautiful private chapel in
Paris. A gorgeous frieze ran along its walls above the windows, depicting the procession of the Magi. Contemporaries could recognise the features of the lord of
the house in the guise of one of the three kings, which was one way of satisfying
one’s vanity in those days. In the 19th century, in an extraordinary act of philistinism, the walls were whitewashed. Some of Primaticcio’s original drawings are
now in the Louvre and in Chantilly, and some copies are kept in the Staedelsches
Kunstinstitut in Frankfurt am Main. In 1556 Francois gave the hédtel to his brother
Charles, who had opted for a religious career and who, five years later, crowned
Charles [X in the cathedral of Reims.
Charles de Guise extended his property as far as rue des Quatre-Fils to the
north and rue Vieille-du-Temple to the east and turned the hAétel into a palatial
mansion, fit for the next landlord, Henri I, le Balafré (‘Scarface’), his nephew and

son of Francois. A man of overriding ambition and cunning, he hoped to seize the
throne. He started out by respectfully greeting the humblest of Parisians, ‘down to
picklocks and fishwives’, who, in their turn, a sign of loyalty, sported green
scarves, the emblematic colour of the House of Guise. He then instigated the massacre of Saint-Bartholomew (August 1572) against the Protestants, before plotting

the overthrow of Henri III, which would have cleared the road to power. Henri III
pre-empted him, however, and had him assassinated in Blois on 12 May 1588.
It is probably the belligerent life he had engaged in, rather than a taste for Gothic art, that accounts for the survival of the medieval defence turrets of the Hotel
de Clisson, to the delight of today’s visitor. Henri de Guise was not a man to beat
about the bush. Happening one day to walk into the apartment of his wife, Catherine de Cléves, and catch her in the company of one of Henri III’s mignons, he had


her immediately thrown out of the window (on the corner of rue des Archives and
rue des Quatre-Fils) and finished off in the street.
Henri II de Lorraine, Duc de Guise, was the contemporary of Louis XIV. By
then the wealth of treasures inside the palace was stupendous. His red velvet bed,
embroidered in gold and silver thread and studded with pearls, was one of the
highlights. All the arms of the House of Guise were displayed on the base, and an
embroidery of Godefroy Le Bouillon, the ancestral hero of the family, decorated
the back. Silver and gold, precious and semi-precious stones, provided a glittering
backdrop to the House of Guise, along with an abundance of works of art,
notably, the series of tapestries in the great hall, Les Belles Chasses de Guise,

now in the Louvre.
The royal authorities, anxious to appease the Guise, showered them with ecclesiastical offices, which enabled them to accumulate fabulous wealth. Henri Il, for

example, was the owner of nine abbeys by the time he was Il, and at 15 was
appointed Archbishop of Reims! But harbouring ideas about deposing the king
became impracticable after Richelieu, chief minister to Louis XIII, had laid the

foundations for the reign of absolutism, and Louis XIV had added to his reign the
unequivocal emblem of the sun, eliminating those who tried to outshine him (cf

Nicolas Fouquet). Louis XIV never forgot the princely revolt - la Fronde - that
had shaken the early days of his reign, and ruled with a rod of iron. He did, how-

ever, give the Guise a free hand, within the limits of the Marais, to lead a licentious and prodigal life and lavish on society scintillating balls as an outlet for their
ambitions. Madame de Sévigné left an account of one of the balls held by the
Guise, at which “all the courtyards of the Hétel de Guise were lit up with two
thousand lanterns.” The King honoured the place with his presence and with a
couple of courantes but did not stay long “and returned to the Louvre to sup with
his usual company.” An astute monarch indeed!
Henri II vented his energies in a complicated love-life, marrying and having his
marriages annulled, despite the fact that he was both archbishop and nine times
abbot, which got him into trouble with the royal authorities. In 1638, Richelieu’s

opposition to his marriage, regarded as incompatible with his ecclesiastical status,
led him to leave Paris and rally a coalition against the authorities, which involved
even Spain. He was sentenced to death in his absence, executed in effigy as was
the custom and his house was sealed and confiscated. When he returned to Paris
in 1643, after the accession of Louis XIV, he at once resumed his amorous pur-

suits. In 1646 he went as far as visiting Rome, in the hope of obtaining the annulment of his second marriage, so as to marry a third time. The Pope refused
categorically but the Duke used the opportunity to travel to Naples and get himself involved in an insurrection against Spain - to which, in the end, he was taken
as prisoner. Blood ran quick in the veins of this Guise who also fought a duel


over the lovely Comtesse de Montbazon with the Marquis de Coligny (Madame
de Sévigné’s father), who died of his wounds several months later. When his
mother and brothers refused him access to the family jewellery, which he meant
to bestow upon a new fiancée, the calculating, go-getting Mademoiselle Pons, he
kicked them out of the house. His conduct, which contemporaries attributed to

insanity, was the talk of the town and the subject of mockery. Designated great
chamberlain and master of ceremonies by Louis XIV, he could now strut about

with a permanent troop of 36 pages and 12 Moors and indulge his luxurious
tastes, surrounded by the most beautiful women in the land. On the occasion of
the birth of Louis XIV’s first son in 1662, he led the quadrille of the carrousel,
wallowing in his vanity, not unlike his ancestor, who had led the procession of the
Magi in Nicolo dell’ Abbatte’s frieze, on the walls of the family’s chapel.
The death in 1696 of the last Guise and the dispersal of their treasures marked
the extinction of the dynasty and also the beginning of the decline of the Marais.
It is significant that while a new buyer was being sought, the house was let to the
Portuguese Embassy who used it as a gambling dive! Nevertheless, the lustre of
the Marais subsisted until the Revolution, for example in the form of the splendid
HO6tel de Soubise that rose out of the ruins of the Hétel de Guise. It was built by
Delamair in 1705 for the illustrious House of Rohan-Soubise. Its first proprietress, Anne de Rohan, was the wife and cousin of Charles de Rohan, the Prince
and Maréchal de Soubise, and the sister of Armand de Rohan, landlord of the

H6tel de Rohan. Having yielded her charms to Louis XIV, he offered to finance
the construction of the new hétel, a situation to which the cuckolded husband

chose to turn a blind eye. Wagging tongues said that, while “Louis XIV had supplied the wood [bois also means ‘antler’, hence a pun on the cuckold’s horns, as
is the case in French], his friends threw in the stones (i.e. were hard on him)”.

Charles de Rohan was in great favour with Louis XV who described him as
“very good and very excellent prince”, and equally with Madame de Pompadour,
who obtained several high commands for him during the Seven Years’ War.
Madame du Barry, Pompadour’s successor, also offered him her friendship.
When Louis XV died in 1774, de Rohan was the only member of the nobility to
follow him to the basilica in Saint-Denis, while on either side of the road the
crowds cheered at the passing of the unlamented King. The Prince died three
years later and was thus spared from seeing his house being confiscated and looted, its spacious halls used for storing gunpowder and the courtyard cluttered up
with booths for the sale of lottery tickets. The lovely garden that lay between the
two hétels was wrecked. After the Revolution, it was turned into a public garden
and in 1808 Napoleon conceived the idea of keeping the nation’s archives here.
Today the entire history of France is packed into 200 km of shelves, while the
wall paintings, the works of Boucher, Van Loo and others, give the visitor an idea


of aristocratic taste in the first half of the 18th century. The apartment of the
Prince on the ground floor and that of the Princess on the first provide a rare
example of a Parisian interior of the time. The present Hétel de Soubise is a masterpiece of elegant harmony. Its courtyard with its spectacular colonnade is
unique and all those who love architecture should be grateful to Delamair for having preserved the two Gothic turrets at a time when medieval art was regarded
with contempt.
Continue into rue Rambuteau and turn right into rue du Temple. At n° 71, the
Hotel d’Avaux, also known as Saint-Aignan, is one of the noteworthy mansions
in the Marais, as befits its first two illustrious proprietors: the Comte d’ Avaux,
Louis XIV’s ambassador to Holland, Venice, England and Sweden; and Paul de

Beauvilliers, Duc de Saint-Aignan and son-in-law of the great statesman Colbert.
Unfortunately, the premises are usually closed to the public. Turn right into rue
de Braque, a lovely, quiet street. The elegant 18th-century hdtel at n° 4/6, has a
splendid wrought-iron staircase. Seen from this angle, the Gothic turret of the
Hotel Clisson ahead of you is sheer delight.
Turn left into rue des Archives and continue to the corner of rue des Haudriettes, at which is the charming Haudriettes fountain and the exquisite sculpture of
the sleeping naiad, innocently unaware of her loveliness. Across the street, at n°
60, the Hétel Guénégaud, is a 17th-century masterpiece of elegant simplicity and
perfect proportions, supposed to be the work of Francois Mansart. The property
of the City of Paris, it houses the hunting museum.
Retrace your steps and turn back into rue des Francs-Bourgeois. The old Allée
des Arbalétiers at n° 38, so called because it led south to the training field of the
crossbow-archers (les arbalétiers) served as the side exit of the Hétel Barbette.

This may be the spot where the Duc d’ Orléans was assassinated (the alternative is
the main entrance at 64 rue Vieille-du-Temple). This dark alley, with the crooked

profiles of its houses jutting out, still has a medieval feel. Plaques on each side of
the alley used to remind the passer-by of the night of the terrible crime that
plunged France into the longest disaster of her history:
Dans ce passage
En sortant de I’hétel Barbette
le Duc Louis d’ Orléans
Frére du roi Charles VI
a été assassiné
par Jean sans Peur
Duc de Bourgogne
Dans la nuit du 23
au 24 Novembre 1407.


(In this passage, on leaving the Hétel Barbette, the Duke Louis of Orléans,
brother of King Charles VI, was murdered by Fearless Jean, Duke of Burgundy,
in the night of 23 to 24 November 1407).
The plaques were removed in 1908, and never put back again, thus wiping out
the memory of an essential landmark in French history.
N° 36 and 34 are on the site of the alms-house where 48 of the above mentioned francs bourgeois (tax-exempted paupers) were given shelter in the 14th
century but reviled by their neighbours. At n° 30 the Hétel d’ Alméras or Hétel de
Fourcy, dates back to the reign of Henri IV and an impressive period staircase can
still be seen inside. The delicately sculpted door, however, is early 18th-century
Regency. The facades of the hétel at n° 26 belong to different periods and are
representative of their styles, pointing to the different phases of its extension: the
street facade is late 18th century, the courtyard facade is early 17th and the garden facade is late 16th.
Continue past Musée Carnavalet and turn left into rue de Turenne. Henri de la
Tour d’Auvergne, Vicomte and Maréchal de Turenne, lived at n° 66, but only

vestiges of his home have survived. Having led the royal troops against the rebellious Conti during the Fronde, he was praised by Bossuet in his famous Oraison
funébre, a classic of 17th-century French epic literature. Today this is a functional
street, lined with wholesale clothing shops, on the whole devoid of charm. How-

ever, a beautiful fagade can be seen at n° 23, the home of Edouard Colbert de Villacerf, the Queen’s chief butler at the time of Louis XIV, later the
King’s

superintendent of construction. The hétel’s exquisite boudoir, all painted and
gilded, can now be seen at Musée Carnavalet.

N° 54 (and the portal of n° 52) was the home of Montrésor, a staunch enemy
of

Richelieu and Mazarin and a hero of the Fronde. But it is n° 56 - a plain house
with a modest statue of the Virgin tucked in a niche, on the corner of rue de
Villehardouin - that has gone down in history as the home of the burlesque writer
and
poet Scarron and of Frangoise d’ Aubigné, an ill-matched couple indeed. Scarron
was deformed and crippled and 26 years older than the 15-year-old Francoise,
but
an impoverished orphan like herself had only two choices in life: matriage
or a
nunnery. At 15 Frangoise was already a practical, clear-sighted
woman. Once
widowed, she rose from the role of governess of Louis XIV’s children
to that of
his official mistress, then to become his wife, Madame de Maintenon
- the only
such case in French history. The King’s nickname for her, ‘ma
solidité ,encapsulates the contrast between her and the schemers at court, and the
secret of her success.
Scarron signed the lease on 27 February 1654 for the modest annual
rent of 350
pounds (Mile de Scudéry paid roughly the same rent on rue
de Beauce). Though
relatively poor (he did keep five servants), Scarron was
much sought after


because, as his contemporary Tallemant des Réaux put it, “It is perhaps one of the
marvels of our century that a man in that state and so poor can make others laugh
the way he does.” His wife reported that at night he screamed out in pain, which
even strong doses of opium could not relieve. By day, however, he hid his pain
under the cover of laughs and sallies. Writers and noblemen climbed to his spacious room on the second floor to enjoy his company (Francoise probably lived in
a two-room apartment on the first). Although he was relatively poor, his fourposter bed was covered with yellow damask, as were the four armchairs and the
twelve chairs disposed around it. A Venetian mirror hung on one of the walls, a
rich tapestry on another. A painting by Nicolas Poussin, Le Ravissement de Saint
Paul (now in the Louvre) probably hung there too, Scarron having nagged the
recalcitrant painter into giving it to him.
The guests would draw the twelve chairs to a long table and eat the food they
had themselves brought. Nobody minded for great fun was guaranteed in return
and, at times, the presence of the poet’s fair wife, though more often she withdrew, offended by the coarse behaviour of her husband’s companions. Scarron
died in this house in 1660 aged 50, leaving debts and a new literary genre, the
burlesque, the literature of a cripple. who used his biting pen as a weapon of
revenge.
The Ho6tel du Grand-Veneur at n° 60 is a magnificent late 17th-century mansion. Its hunting motifs were added in the 18th century, when the mansion
belonged to the master of the royal hounds (Grand-Veneur) It now belongs to a
commercial company which has restored it beautifully and turned it into a showroom, where visitors may wander freely.
Retrace your steps. Rue des Minimes, on your left, evokes the third Franciscan
monastery of Paris (the first two being in Chaillot and Vincennes), so called as a
mark of humility. Turn right into rue des Tournelles, and on to rue du Pas-de-laMule. A famous cabaret, La Fosse aux Lions, was situated here in the 17th centu-

ry, a gathering-place where literati such as Tallemant des Réaux, Voiture and
Saint-Amant gathered for a hearty drink in merry company between visits to the
great families of Place Royale. The proprietress, La Coiffier, had the clever idea
of introducing meals at set prices: some claim she was the first to do so in Paris.
Nowadays dining around Place des Vosges is less basic, the atmosphere more
polished and prices considerably higher. There are several eating-places under the
arcades; or you may wish simply to relax in the lovely gardens. Place des Vosges
lies mostly in the 4th arrondissement, and is covered in that chapter.


SAINT-MARTIN-DES-CHAMPS
