s you enter the Marais from the corner of Place de la Bastille and rue SaintAntoine, you are following the route taken by the foreign ambassadors and
their trains, when entering Paris during the Ancien Régime, and even by the King
when repairing to the Louvre from his palace in Vincennes. This was also the
itinerary of Louis XIV’s wedding procession, on its way from Place du Tréne
(now Place de la Nation) to the Louvre. No doubt it is hard to picture the formidable, eight-towered fortress of the Bastille that was built here in the 14th century to

fend off an English assault from the east. The corner café, with its clinical-looking designer furniture and succulent pastry display in its window, is hardly suggestive of the medieval gate that stood here, complete with a moat, drawbridge
and crenellated walls. The pink cobbles on the ground outline the exact location
of the Bastille, but nobody pays any attention to them. If anything, it is the golden
statue of the Spirit (Génie) of Liberty on top of the Bastille column that catches
the eye as it glitters in the sun, bringing to mind the heroic destruction of this
symbol of oppression.
By the time it was stormed, however, the Bastille had long ceased to conform

to its image of merciless brutality. In fact, in the 17th century and especially in
the 18th it had become a sort of luxury prison, often used for members of the aristocracy sent here, with a sealed letter from the King, for a period not exceeding a
few months. Thus, when the Man in the Iron Mask was brought here, since noone could see his face, rumour had it that he was the twin brother of Louis XIV!
Within reasonable limits the prisoners could maintain their previous lifestyle,
bringing over their own furniture and servants, entertaining visitors and even
keeping amorous rendezvous. Voltaire used his time to complete his play Oedipe,
the Marquis de Sade draped his cell walls and brought over his own wine from
Provence; while the Cardinal de Rohan once hosted a lavish dinner party on 20
guests. Although this lifestyle was financed by the prisoners’ families, the upkeep
of the Bastille was a costly business, owing to the high fees paid to its highly
qualified staff of doctors, priests, chemists and surgeons, not to mention the highly paid governor. When Voltaire was released in 1717, the Regent granted him a
pension of a thousand crowns; Voltaire thanked him graciously, with particular

reference to the food received at His Highness’s expense, but suggested that in
future he need not trouble to provide him with lodgings!



R. FRANCOIS MIRON
REALISATION CARTOGRAPHIQUE

: GUIGNARD

H.

BIBLIOTHEQUE DE L'ARSENAL
HOTEL DE SENS

eps
e AV rlA
cabinet


HOTEL DE SENS

ee
Yi»
LEE



CAISSE DES MONUMENTS
HISTORIQUES ET CITES

—

R. ST-ANTOINE

PL. DE LA BASTILLE

Re

ECOLE DES FRANCS-BOURGEOIS

Qe

ECOLE MASSILLO

N

R

A
Le =

00s

IN
REALISATION CARTOGRAPHIQUE : CARRIER C.


In order to cut down on state expenditure the Minister of Finance, Necker, had
shut down the prison of Vincennes in 1784 and was planning likewise to demolish the Bastille. A square named Place Louis XVI-was to replace it, but one battered tower of the fortress of the prison was to be preserved as historical
testimony. A statue of Louis XVI stretching out a liberating hand in the direction
of the demolished gaol was to surmount a pyramid made up of chains, bars and
locks retrieved from the Bastille. But the patriotic sans-culottes got there first.
Their heroic assault against tyranny and the deliverance of the victims of oppression turned out to be much less glorious than the uplifting myth history has since
created, for all they found in the Bastille were seven prisoners: four forgers, one
accomplice to an attempted murder, who had been locked up in the Bastille for
over 30 years, a count who had committed incest and was sent there at his family’s request with a sealed letter, and one feeble-minded wretch, also kept here at
the request of the family, whom the liberating forces transferred to the celebrated’
asylum at Charenton. An eighth prisoner had been sent to Charenton ten days earlier - the notorious Marquis de Sade, who had been transferred here from Vincennes when it was demolished in 1784. He too had been arrested at the request
of his family, anxious to remove a cumbersome relative whose sexual perversion
was not limited to the written word. It was in Vincennes that he wrote Justine and
Gomorrah. In June 1789 the governor stopped the prisoners’ daily walks on the
towers because of the growing unrest in the neighbourhood. This enraged the
Marquis who made himself a sort of megaphone and yelled through it that the
prisoners were being slaughtered inside. On 3 July 1789 he created such a commotion that he had to be removed from the sight of the restless crowds and at 1 in
the morning he was transferred to the prison section of Charenton. When that

prison was closed down in 1803, he was locked up in the asylum for ‘licentious
dementia’.
Rue Saint-Antoine, which has preserved its medieval, winding route, is
enhanced by the domes of the churches of the Visitandines and Saint-Paul-SaintLouis on the left-hand side. On the right-hand side the street opens into a tiny,

pleasant square in which stands a statue of the 18th-century playwright Caron de

Beaumarchais, a local inhabitant. N° 5 across the street is an old, countrified little
house, a remnant of past times. At n° 17 is the reformed church of Sainte-Marie,
once the church of the Visitandines; this was one of the historic sites of the
Marais but it is unfortunately open only during Sunday service at 10.30 am. In the

15th century an aristocratic mansion stood here, which belonged successively to

illustrious figures such as Louis d’Orléans, the brother of Charles VI and the

archbishop of York during the English occupation. Eventually it became the prop-

erty of the Comtesse d’Etampes, the widowed sister of Charles d’Orléans, and
was known as the Hotel d’Etampes, later to be bought by Francois I. Diane de


Poitiers, Henri II’s all-powerful favourite, resided here in 1554, followed two

years later by Philippe Delorme, the architect of the Tuileries and of Sully’s
dwelling in the Arsenal.
It was only in 1628 that the building became a religious institution, when the
Order of Sainte-Marie-de-la-Visitation (or Les Visitandines) bought it. Founded
by Saint Francois de Sales, the Bishop of Geneva, the order was dedicated to the
education of girls and to the relief of the sick. A first convent was opened for that
purpose across the Swiss-French border from Geneva, in the town of Annecy. It
was headed by an enthusiastic supporter of the Bishop’s charitable ideals, Jeanne
Frémiot from Dijon, the wife of the Baron de Chantal and the grandmother of the
Marquise de Sévigné. In 1619 she arrived in Paris and opened a convent in the
southern suburb of Faubourg Saint-Marcel (now in the 13th arr.), before moving

to the more central position of the Marais two years later, to the Hétel de Cosse
on the present site of n° 26-30 rue du Petit-Musc, first to your left. Its gardens
communicated with the Hétel d’Etampes, which she purchased in 1628 to allow
for further expansion.
The Visitandines chose to settle in the Marais because it offered them both the
moral and the financial support of the high nobility, and before long they were
able to expand east all the way to the Bastille and as far as rue de la Cerisaie to
the south. Such was their prestige that in 1628 the illustrious Francois Mansart
was happy to build their chapel, a rotunda surmounted by a 35-metre dome,
which was inspired by Santa Maria Rotondo in Rome and served as a model for
several other Parisian churches, notably the Val-de-Grace and the Invalides. Its

crypt was also an architectural feat, its vault being supported by a single pillar.
The chapel was known as Notre-Dame-des-Anges, while its mother superior,
the Baronne de Chantal, took on the name of Mére Angélique. The prestige of
this institution is also underlined by the fact that Vincent de Paul, the most promi-

nent churchman of the 17th century, who was later beatified for his altruistic life
and charitable work, was appointed its first chaplain in 1632, the year the cornerstone of the church was laid, and held the position for 28 years. A century later,
the founder of the order, ‘la Bienheureuse Mére’, became the only married

woman to be beatified.
The place also served as a retreat for members of society. Madame de La
Fayette, author of La Princesse de Cléves, retired here under the name of Soeur

Angélique, possibly to avoid Louis XIII’s overtures, in parallel with the heroine
of her novel. Her relationship with the King remained platonic throughout,
although he kept coming to visit her. Mazarin’s niece, Hortense Mancini, on the
other hand, was locked up here against her will, for hers was a less exemplary
life. As an act of revenge she is said to have filled the stoup with black ink and
gloated at the sight of the nuns’ smeared faces. Several members of society were


brought for burial to the chapel crypt, notably Madame de Sévigné’s great-uncle,
the archbishop Frémiot and brother of Jeanne; her mother, Marie de Coulanges;
and her hot-headed husband, Henri de Sévigné, who died in a duel. The disgraced
Minister of Finance, Nicolas Fouquet, a close friend of the family, was also
buried here.The order was abolished during the Revolution and the buildings
demolished, except for the chapel, which was thereafter used as a revolutionary
club, hence the famous Phrygian cap of the sans-culottes sculpted above the side
door. The club was led by the inflammable, rabidly feminist Théroigne de Méricourt, who later became demented and was locked up in the horrific institution La
Salpétriére (in the 13th arr.). In 1803, Napoleon decided
to put all religions on an
equal footing and gave the church to the Protestants. It has remained in their
hands ever since.
Next to the church, at n° 21-23 stands one of the beautiful hétels of the Marais,

the Hdtel de Mayenne, best appreciated from across the street. At the time of
writing it is a striking example of the way a monument looks before and after a
face-lift. N° 21 is a school and being presumably short of funds is in a sorry state,
while n° 23 has been stunningly renovated, revealing its Louis XIII architecture,
with its characteristic brick-and-stone fagade and its imposing slate roof (a style
also known as bleu, blanc, rouge — bleu for the slate, blanc for the stone, rouge
for the brick).

Charles VI owned an earlier hétel on the site, which he gave a present to his
brother, Louis d’Orléans. After his assassination, it went to his son, Charles

D’Orléans, a great poet. In 1578, Quélus, Henri III’s mignon, was brought here
after a duel motivated, in this case, by politics: he, Maugiron and Livarot were
Henri III’s mignons and were fighting his cause against d’Entragues, Ribrac and
Schomberg, members of the Catholic League, headed by Henri le Balafré, Duc de
Guise. It was a duel of unspeakable savagery after which all the participants lay
dead or seriously injured. Quélus, who had been stabbed 18 times, took 33 days
to die, during which time Henri III ordered the busy street of Saint-Antoine to be
strewn with straw so as to stop all the traffic. It is believed that Henri III’s assassination was plotted in this hdtel by the Duchesse de Montpensier, the Balafré’s
sister, in revenge for her brother’s assassination in 1588. On 1 August 1589,

Henri III was sitting on the latrine in his tent in the camp of Saint-Cloud, wearing
only his dressing-gown, when Jacques Clément broke into his tent and pierced
him through the heart.
The present mansion was built in 1613 by Henri de Lorraine, son of the Duc de
Mayenne, one of the greatest families in France of the Ancien Régime. In 1812 it
became the boarding section of the neighbouring Lycée Charlemagne and the
premises consequently deteriorated dramatically. In 1870 it was leased by the
brothers of the Christian School of rue des Francs-Bourgeois, which is why it is


now called Ecole des Francs-Bourgeois. The Hotel de Mayenne stands on the corner of rue du Petit-Musc, which is lined with charming old houses. The corner

house of rue Charles V was the home of the notorious poisoner, La Brinvilliers. If
you stroll through the street all the way to the quai, you will see the impressive
fagade of the Hotel Fieubet at n° 1, richly sculpted in a Spanish Baroque style.
Retrace your steps, cross rue Saint-Antoine and walk into Impasse Guénémée, a
picturesque, narrow, dead-end alley, lined with old, crooked houses, which once

led to the royal palace of the Tournelles and later to the Hétel Rohan-Guénémée
on Place Royale (now Place des Vosges). Its back entrance was at n° 12 of this
alley. Turn round for a superb view of the Hétel de Mayenne. As you retrace your
steps, notice the unusual pediment at n° 6 on your left, with its pile of thick books
sculpted into the stone. This may have been the entrance to the convent of Les
Filles de la Croix, another religious institution dedicated to the education of girls,

whose head was the sister of the mother superior of the Visitandines. At present a
lovely courtyard lies behind the thick wall, hidden from the public eye. In the
1950s Impasse Guénémée was a favourite of Simenon’s Commaissaire Maigret,
who appreciated a good, no-nonsense French meal at the modest café-restaurant
that until recently stood on the corner of rue Saint-Antoine.
Back on rue Saint-Antoine, turn right into rue de Birague. Ahead of you is the
impressive brick-and-stone arcaded Pavillon du Roi, a foretaste of the gorgeous
Place des Vosges on the other side. This is the most spectacular approach to the
square, through which the prestigious foreign guests of the kingdom entered it.
notably Christina of Sweden, on the evening of 8 September 1656, preceded by
four cavaliers seated on horses with coats embroidered in gold and silver and
gem-studded harnesses. After her came the city guards, archers, Swiss Guards,
the fanfare and the city aldermen carrying the gold-and-silver brocade canopy of

Place des Vosges


the abdicating queen, but with no-one underneath: free-spirited Christina refused
to take her place there. When night fell the glittering procession was magically
illuminated by torch lights. The Place Royale was equally illuminated and its gorgeous wrought-iron balconies crowded with France’s nobility in their most fabulous garb. Trumpets sounded and the guns of the Bastille could be heard in the
distance.
The Pavillon du Roi was built as the keystone of Place Royale. Reflecting the
King’s supreme position in the social hierarchy, it is taller than all the other buildings of the square except for the Pavillon de la Reine which matches it on the
northern side of the square (in the 3rd arr.). Thirty-six houses, nine on each side,
surround the square giving the illusion of perfect symmetry. The architects, probably Androuet du Cerceau and Claude Chastillon, created a ravishing harmony of
red brick, white stone and grey slate, “a certain shade of colour so pleasing to the
eye”, according to Sauval, whose histoire et recherches des Antiquités de la Ville
de Paris is an irreplaceable contemporary testimony.
The equestrian statue of Louis XIII was substituted in 1829 for the early statue
erected in 1639 to commemorate the double wedding of the two royal couples on
5,6 and 7 April 1612. Originally Henri IV had the idea of setting up a silk-and-silver weaving mill (‘une manufacture de soye et argent fillé a la fagon de Milan’)
along the northern side of the square, a venture intended to reduce French dependence on Italian imports. To this end he had mulberry trees planted in the Tuileries Gardens for the breeding of silkworms and 200 workers were brought over
from Italy to work in the mills. But somehow the venture failed, the buildings
were pulled down and the Place Royale became instead the living quarters of the
most prestigious families of the nobility. The mansions were much larger than the
narrow fagades overlooking the square would suggest; in fact they extended a
long way back. Besides, some of the families owned more than one house. Their
splendid furnishings and fittings are all gone, as are the wall paintings, plastered
over without compunction when new tastes came into vogue. Nevertheless, the
Place des Vosges remains a place of beauty and harmony, enhanced by the serene
atmosphere of its arcades, by the old street-lamps and by the geometric layout of
the square and its four fountains. However, some neat flowerbeds would do the
garden justice.
Turn right on Place des Vosges and continue to Musée Victor Hugo at n° 6
(even numbers are right of the Pavillon du Roi, odd numbers are to the left). Built
in 1604, this was the largest and one of the famous mansions in the square, the
home of the great Rohan-Guénémée family. It extended along rue Birague
towards rue Saint-Antoine and had the largest alcove in Paris, according to

Sauval, “all gilded and painted by Cotelle”. A sketchbook of Cotelle’s drawings
for the mansion, now kept at the Ashmolean Library in Oxford, preserves the


memory of his magnificent monochrome paintings against a background of gold,
for which the Prince de Guénémée paid him more than 17,000 pounds. Sauval
also reports that the large casement windows of the mansion “overlooked the
largest garden of Place Royale”. The landlady, Anne de Montbazon, Princesse de
Guénémée, was a cultivated person who even learnt Hebrew.

She was also a

desirable person over whom the Duc de Guise fought a duel with Coligny, or
rather murdered Coligny, when, against all chivalrous etiquette, he grabbed the
latter’s sword and stabbed him to death.
When Victor Hugo came to live here in 1832, aged 30, he occupied the second
floor apartment, which now houses the museum. By then the square was known
as Place des Vosges, in honour of the mountainous eastern département (district),

which was the first to pay off its taxes to the young Republic in 1800. The years
Victor Hugo spent on Place des Vosges were very creative, resulting in such
works as Les Chants du crépuscule, Ruy Blas, Les Rayons et les ombres. It was
here that he sketched out two of his major works, La Légende des siécles and Les
Misérables. This was also a time of intensive exchange of ideas and merry gatherings of the Romantic circle. The poet Théodore de Banville described how in
summer “the big door of the apartment remained open and the smell of flowers
and leaves entered through the windows.” The young guests would go out for a
stroll and a smoke in the square’s alleys, then “come up again, intoxicated by the
night and the azure, into the dazzling atmosphere of torches and dancing.” (Incidentally, Theodore de Banville still referred to the square as ‘Place Royale’ - traditions die hard...) On the personal front, however, this was a painful time:
Hugo’s wife Adéle became the mistress of writer and critic Sainte-Beuve in 1831
or 1832, while his own liaison with Juliette Drouet began in 1833. A back stair-

case in his study allowed him to leave the apartment unnoticed and repair to his
rendezvous with the boulangére in rue du Petit-Musc, by way of Impasse
Guénémée.
By 1902 the city of Paris owned the building and decided to turn it into a museum and thus honour one of the most venerated figures of the Third Republic. Victor Hugo’s environment was recreated, including fragments of his later life,
between 1848 and 1885, when he was no longer living here. Thus the room,
including the Louis XIII four-poster bed, in which he died on 22 May 1885, in a
building now demolished at 22 Avenue d’Eylau (in the 16th arr.), was put together in Place des Vosges in what used to be his study. His exile on the island of
Guernsey is also recaptured on Place des Vosges. Hugo had taken Juliette Drouet
along and set her up in a little cottage within sight of his own home; the decorations of her dining-room in Guernsey are now in what used to be the original
lounge of the apartment.
Retrace your steps and continue as far as the Hétel de Sully, at n° 7, originally


built in 1624 by the great Androuet du Cerceau for Monsieur Gallet, a money
speculator, who indulged in this extravagance after he had won 1,200,000 pounds
at La Blondeau, the gambling house in Place Royale, where one played ‘for high
stakes’. However, he lost his fortune as suddenly as he had made it and had to
yield the house to his creditor. When Henri IV’s former minister Maximilien de
Béthune, Marquis de Rosny and Duc de Sully, bought this place ten years later,
he was 75 years old, a fulfilled old man, laden with titles and pensions, who liked
to strut under the arcades or dance the pavan with young women of doubtful reputation, unaware of the outdated figure he cut in his Renaissance garb. At the same
time, he apparently did not mind being cuckolded by his young wife and went so
far as to provide generously for the upkeep of her lovers. But he did not wish to
bump into them on the main staircase, and had a separate one installed, leading to
his wife’s apartments.
The next generations at the Hétel de Sully continued in the same vein. Sully’s
daughter, the Duchesse de Rohan, had an illegitimate son and since her own
daughter, Marguerite de Rohan, seemed set fair to follow in her footsteps, it was
decided to remove her from her mother’s influence and send her to live with her
aunt on the other side of the square. Widowed in 1655, the Duchesse moved to
the present n° 26 from where she was evicted in 1672 for refusing to pay her rent
(despite her colossal wealth). All her furniture was seized and piled into the
square to await removal, in view of all — not that anyone was particularly
shocked. Living beyond one’s means and getting into debt was an accepted way
of life among the nobility.
Voltaire too was involved in the long history of the Hétel de Sully, its landlord,
the Prince de Rohan, having picked a quarrel with him at the Comédie-Frangaise
on the occasion of the performance of his play Oedipe. When the Prince had
Voltaire beaten up, both for the fun of it and to mark his social superiority,
Voltaire invited him to a duel, but was spurned and instead he was locked up at

the Bastille. As a child of the bourgeoisie he would never forget the humiliation
inflicted on him by a representative of the nobility. On his release he went into
exile in England, where he learnt about social liberty, a notion he later brought
back to France, sowing the seeds of revolution.

Today the Hétel de Sully belongs to the Caisse Nationale des Monuments Historiques et des Sites, dedicated to the preservation of the historical and cultural
heritage of France. It could not have fallen into better hands, and indeed has been

beautifully restored in its original aspect, down to the box borders of the garden,
as can be seen from an old engraving by Israél Silvestre. The main entrance to the
hétel, then as now, is on rue Saint-Antoine (n° 62), and it was built like most
mansions of the time ‘entre cour et jardin’ (“between courtyard and garden’), the

courtyard standing in front of the main building, the garden at the back. In the


main building is a bookshop specializing in the heritage of France, enhanced by a
painted, Louis XIII wooden ceiling. The sculptures of the Seasons and the Elements in the courtyard probably date from the time of Sully. An ancient olive tree
graces the garden. It is sheer delight to sit in its shade on a serene summer day.
Like us, you may even be lulled by a flautist.
The famous 19th-century actress of the Comedie-Frangaise, Rachel, lived for a
while at n° 9, although by then she was ailing and had ceased to work. A gastronomic restaurant, |’Ambroisie, is here now, noticed only by those who know. N°
11 was the home of a notorious courtesan, Marion Delorme, who was ten years

older than the even more notorious Ninon Lenclos. Her lovers included the Cardinal de Richelieu, whom she visited twice, once dressed as a man. The second
time the Cardinal gave her a present a basket of 60 pistols, we are told by Tallement des Réaux, a notorious gossip. The Cardinal’s great nephew, the Duc de
Richelieu, lived at n° 21 and was also known for his sexual appetite. He claimed
to have been the lover of all the females in Place Royale.
Retrace your steps to rue Saint-Antoine and cross over into rue Saint-Paul,
named after a 7th-century church, which disappeared with the rest of Paris during
the Norse raids of the 9th century. A new church replaced it in 1107 and was
enlarged substantially in the 14th century to accommodate its growing number of
parishioners. A small vestige of its tower can still be seen at the corner of n° 32.
The street led to the bustling harbour of Saint-Paul, where passengers embarked
for a three-day journey to Auxerre in Burgundy. Horses were also washed there,
which added to the filth of the Seine, by then as polluted as it is today. Undaunted,
by such trifles, Henri IV used to bathe there in the nude on a hot summer’s

evening, soon to be followed by his subjects. Every evening in August 1608 as
many as 4,000 of them frisked about in the water, between Charenton, east of

Paris and the Ile de la Cité. The women were hidden by a ‘tent’, but their keenness to get a look at the men, who bathed in the nude like their king, even
inspired a verse:
On y accourt pour voir l’>homme en son naturel
Et tel qu’il est sorti des mains de |’Eternel.
(One rushes over to see man in nature’s garb
And such as he came out of the Eternal’s hands.)

At n° 31 turn right under the archway and on to rue Eginhardt, a tiny Jewish
enclave in the 17th century, even though officially no Jews were living in Paris at
the time. However discreet, it is mentioned by Alphonse Daudet in Les Rois en
Exile. On the right is a shady courtyard with pretty trellises, an old well and a
charmingly useless old stone bench on which nobody ever sits. Rising above,
bathed in sunshine, is a rustic, old tiled roof complete with picturesque attic win-


dows and a stocky chimney-stack. As you turn left and reach the corner of rue
Charlemagne, you will notice an old street name engraved in the stone of the corner house on your right, rue Neuve Sainte-Anastase, after a religious order once
established here. Back on rue Saint-Paul, you will now reach a succession of
charming courtyards, zigzagging from one to the next, up and down pretty steps,
unfolding new surprises at each angle. This is a compound of antique dealers and
secondhand shops known as ‘le village Saint-Paul’ whose setting is as pleasing as
the contents of its shops.
Continue in the direction of the Seine and turn right into rue Ave Maria for a
spectacular view of the Hétel de Sens, a magical sight by night. This is the oldest
civilian monument in Paris, the only example of the transitional period between
the Gothic and the Renaissance. Although its exquisite turrets were true watchtowers, as was appropriate in feudal times, great attention was already devoted to
their ornamentation, and it is this combination of austerity and grace that makes
them such a splendid work of art. The mansion was originally built by the Archbishop of Sens, Tristan de Salazar, the highly cultivated son of a Spanish Captain
who had saved the life of Louis XI in 1465, in the battle of Montlhéry, which
strengthened the bond between the throne and the archbishopric of Sens. Tristan
de Salazar commissioned Martin Chambiges to build this new palace on the site
of the archbishopric’s previous pied-a-terre, which he did not like, but he never
had the time to enjoy it. He died aged 87 in 1519, just before the hétel was
completed.
At that time the archbishopric of Sens was much more important than that of
Paris and had seven dioceses under its rule. Their Parisian dwelling, therefore,
was often left vacant, especially during the civil wars of the 15th and 16th centuries. Some claim that this is what preserved its original architecture: if it had
been occupied permanently, it would have been altered according to changing
fashions. The fact that it was intermittently occupied also enabled Henri IV to
borrow it for his repudiated wife, Queen Margot, when she was allowed back to
Paris, in 1605 (see chapter on 6th arr.). Although she was by then 52 and had lost
her figure, her hair and her fresh complexion (and therefore introduced the use of
face powder!), her sexual appetite had not been assuaged. Her lover at the time
was the 20-year-old Comte de Vermond, whom she soon discarded for an 18year-old lackey, Julien Date, or, as she romantically renamed him, Date de SaintJulien. Their liaison was short-lived, for on 5 April 1606 the Comte de Vermond,

consumed by jealousy, killed his rival on the threshold of the Hétel de Sens. The
next day he had his head removed on the same site by order of the vengeful Margot, who watched the execution from her window. No sooner was this done than

she left the site, crossed the Seine and settled in her magnificent new palace, still
under construction. Like other historic monuments


of the Marais, the Hétel de

Sens was later converted into various commercial businesses, such as a jam facto-

ry, a laundry, a glassworks and a warehouse. Little has therefore survived inside,
except for one majestic fireplace and a beautiful spiral staircase in the tower. The
city of Paris bought it in 1911 and its restoration began in 1929. In 1961 it was
handed over to the Forney library of decorative and fine arts, a venture begun by
Aidé-Samuel Forney, a Parisian manufacturer of the 19th century, and continued
with his legacy. The beautiful reading room is open to the public and well worth a
Visit.
Retrace your steps through ‘le village Saint-Paul’ as far as rue Charlemagne.
Beyond the pretty green fountain across the street rises the back of the church of
Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis, the Jesuits’ stronghold in the 17th century and much of

the 18th. Adjoining it to the left is the Lycée Charlemagne, a well-known school.
Turn right into rue Charlemagne and left into rue Saint-Paul. A narrow alley on
your left, the Passage Saint-Paul, will take you to the side door of the church (its
main entrance is on rue Saint-Antoine).
The Jesuits arrived in the Marais in 1580, 46 years after Ignatius of Loyola had
founded the order in Montmartre. In order to impede the expansion of Protestantism, Charles de Bourbon, the abbot of Saint-Germain-des-Prés,

whom the

Catholic League had appointed King, bought a hétel on this site and gave it to the
Jesuits, who replaced it with a modest chapel dedicated to Saint Louis. Louis
XIII’s right-hand man, Richelieu, granted them his full support, determined to
create a centralized, all-powerful State and to eliminate anything that got in its
way (e.g. the Huguenots, whom he crushed at La Rochelle). The present church
was built during his joint rule with Louis XIII and it was the King himself who
came over to lay its cornerstone on 7 March 1627. In order to demonstrate where
the State’s allegiance lay, Richelieu celebrated its inaugurational mass on Ascension Day, 9 May 1641, in the presence of the King. A fabulous royal procession
left the Louvre at 8.30 am and half an hour later reached the church, illuminated
by hundreds of candles. The Cardinal, in vermilion satin and gold lace, officiated
against a backdrop of shining black marble, gilded wrought-iron decorations and
paintings specially commissioned from renowned artists such as Vouet, Philippe
de Champaigne and Vignon. The highlight of the church was the sumptuous
retable of gilded bronze, and in front of it a glittering tabernacle of massive silver,
overladen with sculptures and decorations, some would say to excess. “There is

no altar in the kingdom that is more richly decorated and where there are more
reliquaries, vessels, more candelabras, more girandoles, more lamps and other

such things unknown to our ancestors, who liked simplicity in the house of God,
and that the new orders have invented so as to arouse the declining devotion of
the last few centuries”, wrote Germain Brice in his Guide de Paris in 1685. But to

the Jesuits, this display of luxury did not seem offensive. On the contrary, they

believed it inspired awe among the poor, who are more inclined “to pray to God
in a spacious, well-decorated church than in a dirty, poor, neglected place.” In the
afternoon of that Ascension Day 100 Jesuits, bearing a candle each, went to the
old church of Saint-Paul round the corner to fetch the relics of Saint Louis and
Saint Ignatius and deposited them in the new church, which enjoyed the favour
both of the court and of Condé, who descended from Saint Louis. It is needless to

describe the resentment and frustration of the clergy of Saint-Paul.
Throughout the 17th century the most magnificent religious ceremonies were
celebrated here. Music played an indispensable part in the staging of devotion.
The most prestigious musicians were called upon to play on its organ - Nicolas
Métru, who had been Lully’s master, Michel-Richard Delalande, and, above all,

Marc-Antoine Charpentier, whose famous Miserere was composed for this
church. Its orators were equally talented: when Bourdaloue came to preach, the
entire neighbourhood was cluttered up with carriages. He became a household
name, rather like some modern entertainers, and there was even a type of hat

named after him. Madame de Sévigné, a regular of the church, reported
Bourdalou’s archetypal Jesuit evasiveness in his funerary oration for the great
Condé, who had betrayed his King, believed neither in God nor in the Devil, been

cruel in battle and maintained a scandalous private life: “The heart of the great
Condé,” Bourdalou said, “was solid, honest and Christian.”

But the wheel of fortune turned and after a century and a half of being in
favour, during which time the head of the church was also the King’s confessor,

the Jesuits lost all credibility under Louis XV and in 1762 were expelled from
France. The chapel of Saint-Frangois-Xavier was now dedicated to the Holy Virgin, and the chapel of Saint-Ignatius became the chapel of the Holy Heart. The
Revolution did away with the lot and in 1804 the newly opened Lycée Charlemagne was given a substantial part of the order’s premises. Vestiges of their presence there remain, such as Gherardini’s mural which decorated the Jesuits’
library. The older parish church of Saint-Paul was demolished but its name was
transferred to the former Jesuit church, so as to perpetuate at least its memory.
The church now commemorates

both Saint Paul and Saint Louis, but most

Parisians are unaware of its Jesuit past and know it only as Saint-Paul.
Even though the church has been stripped of its past glitter, the walls with their
overwrought sculptures create an atmosphere that is dizzying and oppressive, and
it is a relief to leave through the main door and be out on rue Saint-Antoine, the
site of the first gate of Saint-Antoine at the time of Philippe-Auguste. After the
gate was demolished the street widened at this point and was used for special celebrations. On 26 August 1660 the wedding procession of Louis XIV and MarieThérése stopped here on its way from Place du Tréne (now Place de la Nation) to
the Louvre, drawing additional attention to the church of Saint-Louis, which


served as a glorious backdrop to the events in front of the facade. Today this is a
busy street junction, crowded with traffic and pedestrians, overflowing with
colourful food shops, an excellent place to buy the best food and drink produce of
France.
Cross over and walk into rue de Sévigné, which celebrates the most illustrious

lady of the Marais. In 1791 the playwright Beaumarchais opened a theatre at n°
11, largely built of material retrieved from the demolished Bastille. Like its glorious predecessor from the time of Corneille, it was known as the Théatre du
Marais. However, its career was short lived, as in 1807 Napoleon decided to shut

down most of the theatres in Paris. The facade overlooking the street has survived, though, complete with elaborate pilasters and wrought-iron decorations.
The wall at the back of the courtyard is a vestige of the horrific prison of La
Force, of which more later.
Turn right into the charming and quiet rue de Jarente. N° 6 on your left opens
into a lovely, cobbled, elongated courtyard, lined with countrified houses and

their rambling vegetation. The silence is broken only by bird-song and, occasionally, the sound of a flute or a piano. There is a similar but more modest courtyard
at n° 4. Some workshops - very numerous at one time in the Marais - have subsisted on the ground floor. Rue Caron to your right, a picturesque, cobbled street
for pedestrians only, has a pleasant open-air café terrace and leads to the exquisitely italianate Place Sainte-Catherine, an enchanting spot on a warm summer
night, when you may wish to dine on one of its terraces. If you continue along rue
de Jarente beyond rue Caron, you will come to a tiny dead-end alley on your left,
Impasse de la Poissonnerie, with a charming fountain. This whole enclave stands
on the grounds that once belonged to the order of Sainte-Catherine.
Retrace your steps to rue de Sévigné. Ahead of you, at n° 13, is a spectacular
example of the social, and therefore architectural, evolution of the Marais. The
archway and magnificently sculpted wooden door indicate that this was the home
of a person of note. Through the archway, however, is an extraordinary jumble of
parasitical constructions, climbing on top of one another to house various workshops. Even a chalet has found its way into this eccentric compilation. Another
indicator of the evolution of the Marais is the shop on the left-hand corner of rue
des Francs-Bourgeois, now a fashionable clothes shop but formerly a neighbourhood boulangerie, as can be seen from its Belle Epoque window panelling. Turn
left into rue des Francs-Bourgeois. At n° 23/25 lie the pretty back gardens of the
Hétel Lamoignon, the entrance to which is on rue Pavée to your left. Before turn; ing into it, notice the corner building on your left, with its medieval-looking corbelled turret, a picture from a fairy-tale book.
The Hotel Lamoignon is one of the oldest mansions in the Marais, built on land


bought from the Order of Sainte-Catherine. It belonged to Diane de France,
Duchesse d’ Angouléme, the legitimized daughter of Henri II, and was therefore
known as the Hétel Angouléme. In 1658 it was rented by President Lamoignon,
hence its present name. Lamoignon was the most senior magistrate of France, a
highly respected person, “the wise, the learned, the first Lamoignon”, according
to the churchman Bossuet. The writer Boileau added his own praise: “Ariste
(Lamoignon) whom Louis and Heaven have chosen to regulate their scales and
dispense their laws.” Indeed Lamoignon presided over the most sensational trial
of the time, the trial of la Brinvilliers, whom he sentenced to death after 26 court

sessions. A person of great learning, Lamoignon took pride in his library, and the
intellectuals of the day - Bourdaloue, Racine, Boileau, La Rochefoucauld,

Madame de Sévigné - gathered at his home. Moreover, every Monday from 5 to 7
in the afternoon, a ‘literary academy’ made up of 18 scholars met here for serious
discussions and lectures on matters such as classical literature or ancient history —
an Academie Francaise in the making.
His great grandson, Lamoignon de Malesherbes (now remembered mainly in
the name of a major Paris boulevard), was born here in 1721 and later became a

minister of Louis XVI. During the Revolution he attempted in vain to save the
King from his death sentence. After the Revolution the hétel was divided up into
apartments, one of which was occupied, from 1867 to 1876, by Alphonse Daudet

and his family. His son Léon wrote in Paris Vécu. about his happy, luminous
childhood here, stimulated by the presence of his father’s friends, Zola, Turgenev,
and the ‘giants’ Goncourt and Flaubert, so called because they were so tall. Léon
Daudet also noted that “behind our Hétel Lamoignon was a chemical factory.
They proliferated in those days in the Marais...”. The mansion was earmarked for
demolition and was saved in extremis when the City of Paris bought it in 1928. In
1968 the historical library of Paris was set up here. It has one of the most pleasant
reading rooms in the capital, with a beautiful Louis XIII ceiling and overlooking
the lovely back gardens. Some departments of the library, however, are now
based in an unsightly building recently adjoined to the Hétel Lamoignon, which
would have been better served by a garden on the site.
At n° 10 rue Pavée is a well-known synagogue, the work of the Art Nouveau
architect and decorator Hector Guimard, famous for the green vegetal archways
he made for the Paris Métro stations. Hector Guimard had married the Jewish
American Miss Oppenheimer and with the rise of Nazism left for the States,
where he died forgotten. The synagogue stands on the edge of the Jewish enclave
of the Marais, which starts on rue des Rosiers ahead. Before entering it, proceed

to the corner of rue Pavée and rue Malher to give a thought to a gentle, fair-haired

princess whose life came to a tragic end here. During the French Revolution the
prison of La Force, which extended along the site of the present n° 14-22 rue


Malher, was used to detain political enemies of the nation. Although the Princesse
de Lamballe was totally apolitical, she had sinned a) by being a princess, and b)
by being Marie-Antoinette’s friend, for whose sake she left her safe refuge in
England and returned to the lion’s jaws, hoping to join her at the Temple. Instead,
the Revolutionary authorities sent her to La Force. On 2 September 1792, a threeday outburst of fury broke out in the city when several prisons, among them La
Force, were attacked by the blood-thirsty mob, an episode known as le massacre
de Septembre. After a mockery of a trial, during which the Princess refused to
speak against the Queen, she was sentenced to be transferred to the Conciergerie,
the antechamber of the guillotine, but the delirious mob seized her on the way out

and dragged her to the corner of rue Pavée and rue Malher where she was literally
torn apart. Two wild processions now parted ways: one carried her mutilated
body to the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, the stronghold of the sans-culottes east of
the Bastille; the other, bearing her impaled head with its dishevelled long blonde
hair through the streets of the Marais, headed north for the Temple, where they
displayed it in front of the window of the Queen’s cell.
Retrace your steps and turn left into rue des Rosiers, a wide artery at this end,
which has gradually been taken over by fashionable boutiques. However, beyond
rue Ferdinand Duval it narrows to medieval proportions and has maintained its
picturesque Jewish character. This is the backbone of the Jewish pletzel, where
bookshops alternate with enticing eating-places and food-stands, and abundant
posters announce coming Jewish events. Goldenberg, on the corner of rue Ferdinand Duval, and Finkelztajn, on the corner of rue des Ecouffes, are two shrines to

which people flock for (comparatively expensive) traditional Jewish savouries.
Cn the whole, however, it is the North African community that has taken over
most of the food shops, selling their own variety of Jewish cuisine, and at lower

prices. Rue Ferdinand Duval was known as rue des Juifs until 1900. In the back
of the courtyard of n° 20 stands a house that may have belonged to a Jew, since it
was known as the Hotel des Juifs. It is believed to date from the 18th century,
which supports the assumption that Jews, albeit few in number, continued to
maintain a presence in these parts, even though officially banned. With or without
Jews, rue des Rosiers never lost its commercial flavour, and even in the golden

age of the residential Marais it was lined with shops and maintained a plebeian
atmosphere. The Jewish enclave continues into rue des Hospitaliéres-Saint-Gervais to your right. At n° 6 is an old Jewish boys’ school, an easy target for hounding down Jews during the last war: 165 pupils were deported from here, despite
_the headmaster’s efforts to save as many as he could. The words N’OUBLIEZ
PAS (DO NOT FORGET) are engraved on the wall, a desperate gesture against
indifference. Before the Revolution the site was covered with the lovely gardens
of the convent of Sainte-Anastase, which was built in the 17th century, next to the


Order of Saint-Gervais. Across the street, the attractive vaulted architecture of the

former market of Saint-Gervais adds a picturesque touch of antiquity to this spot.
It now houses temporary exhibitions and fairs.
To your left is rue des Blancs-Manteaux, celebrated during the Liberation by
Jean-Paul Sartre in a poem made famous by the singer Juliette Gréco. The white
gowns in question were those worn by the religious order of beggars that Saint
Louis brought up to Paris from Marseilles in 1258. Twenty years later they were
replaced by the Order of Saint-Guillaume, les Guillemites, who wore black
gowns, but the name stuck. The church of Notre-Dame-des-Blancs-Manteaux

stands beyond a children’s playground, but first turn left into rue Vieille-du-Temple for a glimpse of the magnificent wooden door at n° 47, behind which stands
one of the most glorious hétels in the Marais, the Hotel Amelot de Bisseuil,
unfortunately closed to the public. It is also known as the Hétel des Ambassadeurs de Hollande, after the Ambassador of Holland, who reputedly lived here

in the early 18th century. Some fifty years later, from 1766 to 1768, the playwright Beaumarchais lived here and wrote his most famous work Le Mariage de
Figaro. Beaumarchais was in fact first and foremost an arms dealer, and a major

supplier of the Americans in their fight for independence from the English. Here
he set up his company, Societé Roderigue Hortalez & Cie, for this purpose, which
was secretly financed by the French and Spanish governments. When the American Revolution finally broke out, a sumptuous ball was given here in its honour.
The mansion dated from the 17th century and disposed of a relatively small
area, compensated for by its indescribably lavish decorations. Unusually in those
days, one of the rooms was allocated specifically for dining. The house also had
‘an Italian chamber’, a two-storeyed room, usually surmounted by a dome, with a

gallery and balustrade half-way up, where musicians could perform. Only the
most luxurious mansions had such rooms and this is the only one to have survived. The garden, on the other hand, seems to have been quite ordinary. According to an English observer, Martin Lister, there were only a few wilted orange
trees in the orangery and he did not like the green trellis, although he did admire
the Roman statue that stood in a niche in the centre of the trellis, and the fig trees,

daffodils and tulips. The hétel has been beautifully restored by the Caisse des
Monuments Historiques, but the public is not allowed in. Whether or not you will
gain entry to the courtyard when you ring the doorbell, depends on luck.
Retrace your steps, turn left into rue des Blancs-Manteaux and proceed to the
church. Although originally built at the end of the 17th century, it was altered and
enlarged in the 19th century by Victor Baltard. The contrast with the church of
Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis is striking. In an overall stark setting the figure of Jesus
stands out above the high altar against the central window. Above the altar, the

glory of God unfolds in a man-made golden sun, while the rays of nature’s sun


-

shine through the window, crowning the Saviour in divine splendour.
Beyond the church, at n° 22, is a financial establishment called Le Crédit
Municipal de Paris, which also opens onto 55/57 rue des Francs-Bourgeois. This
establishment, originally known as le Mont de Pieté, was founded as a pawnshop
by Louis XVI. Napoleon transferred it to this location. Ordinary financial transactions, such as loans, are now carried out here, but also operations connected with

the arts, such as auctions. At times the premises on this side are used for temporary exhibitions, while those on rue des Francs-Bourgeois have been turned into
an up-market, plush restaurant, where you can dine to the accompaniment of
music performed by a crystal-voiced singer. You will reach rue des Francs-Bourgeois by turning right on rue des Archives and right once more.
The 17th-century Hotel de Coulanges at n° 35 was meant to be replaced by a
block of flats in 1961. The press raised the alarm and managed to save it and Malraux’s bill in 1962 did the rest. The 17th-century Hotel d’ Albret at n° 31, possibly
built by Frangois Mansart, is unquestionably one of the most beautiful mansions
in the Marais and houses the city’s cultural services. César Phoebus d’ Albret was
exiled from Paris by Richelieu, following a duel, but later Anne of Austria
allowed him back. Because he was devoted to Richelieu’s successor, Mazarin, he

was appointed Maréchal de France in 1654. He loved luxury, knew how to mingle with the right people and make his way through society into high spheres. It
was here that Madame de Montespan (his cousin’s wife and Louis XIV’s mistress) made the acquaintance of Scarron’s widow, née Francoise d’ Aubigné. The
Montespan picked her out, believing that her discreet conduct would make her an
ideal governess for her eight illegitimate royal children, hidden on the site of the
present n° 108 rue de Vaugirard. A fatal misjudgment! After the children had
been legitimized, the self-effaced Francoise penetrated into Versailles, where she
was provided with her own apartment as governess of the court. Equipped with
the title of Marquise de Maintenon (Madame de Montespan had incautiously
given her the domain of Maintenon as a gift), she bided her time patiently and
when the Queen died in 1683, she began to manoeuvre herself into the King’s

heart and supplant her unwary rival. Madame de Montespan retired to the convent
of Saint-Joseph in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, where she died in 1707 at the age
of 66, while Madame de Maintenon married the King secretly in 1684, the only
mistress to have married a French king. She died in 1719, aged 84, having out-

lived His Majesty by four years.
A well-known salon de thé at the corner of rue des Francs-Bourgeois and rue
Payenne may be a good place to finish your walk. It boasts a wide variety of suc" culent pastries and also sells some interesting knick-knacks and toys. Another
salon de thé, a place with many devoted regulars, is Le Loir dans la Theiére (“The
dormouse in the teapot’), commemorating Alice and her tea party at n° 3 rue des


Rosiers, in the section between rue Malher and rue Pavée. It has a wonderfully
cosy clutter of unmatching old furniture, including weary leather armchairs, and
sells delicious pies, salads and pastry - but then so do many other places in the
Marais.

FROM THE CENTRE GEORGES POMPIDOU
