THE 4th ARRONDISSEMENT
ising out of the silver waters of the Seine, like some regal vessel, haloed
R: the glowing rays of a rising or a setting sun, Notre-Dame, “the old
queen of our cathedrals”, diffuses her splendour all around, a spellbinding
vision between water and sky. Between 1163 and 1330, man’s yearnings for the
divine were carved into her stone by hosts of anonymous artisans, who, by some
intuitive grace, slipped imperceptibly from the Romanesque to the Gothic style,
yet managed to sustain her architectural unity and create a homogeneous masterpiece out of an infinite profusion of diversity and detail.
For centuries the people of Paris had found spiritual nourishment in the eastern
part of the Ile de la Cité. As many as 23 church steeples pierced its medieval sky,
and even a synagogue found a place in this tiny area, until Philippe-Auguste had
it converted into the church of Sainte-Madeleine; at the same time he confiscated
the Jews’ possessions, using the proceeds partly to finance the construction of the
market of Les Halles, before expelling them altogether from the kingdom of
France in 1182. Thus ended their centuries-old presence on rue de la Juiverie, the
central axis of the Ile de 1a Cité, once the ancient Roman cardo (main urban

street), now the very heart of Christiandom. (When 16 years later, PhilippeAuguste invited the Jews back, so as to squeeze them dry once more, they did not
return to the island; some settled on the left bank, where Jews had lived before,

but most concentrated on the right bank, where the new Paris was developing, on
rue Saint-Bon, south of the present church of Saint-Merri, from where they even-

tually spread to the neighbourhood of rue des Rosiers, further east).
The site of Notre-Dame had already been the foremost shrine of the heathens,
as is confirmed by vestiges of a pillar-shaped monument dedicated to Jupiter,
found in 1711 under the cathedral’s chancel and now on display in the Musée
National du Moyen Age at the Hotel de Cluny (in the 5th arr.). The shrine was
erected by the corporation of water merchants, the Nautae Parisiaci, (hence its

name, Le Pilier des Nautes), who engraved the names of their own gods alongside
those of Rome. One of the inscriptions dates it to the reign of Emperor Tiberius,
(AD 17-34), which makes it the oldest sculpted monument found in the capital.
Its central position on the intersection of the east-west water course and the northsouth cardo made it a privileged site for the cult of the chief god in the Roman
pantheon and a pivotal point for trade. Incidentally, because of the way in which
Paris has expanded homogeneously and in a spiral, Notre-Dame has never lost its
central position and after 2,000 years still marks the point from which the distance to any other place in France is measured.


The mosaics of the Roman temple came in handy some 300 years later, when,
as diggings under the chancel confirm, the early Christians replaced it with a
church dedicated to Saint Etienne. By the next century, such was the speed of
expansion of Christianity that another church was built just west of it, dedicated
to Notre Dame (Our Lady). The church of Saint-Etienne was spared by the Norsemen against a huge ransom, but Notre-Dame was destroyed and replaced later by
another church. Both were in a sorry condition by the 12th century, when the
Bishop of Paris, Maurice de Sully, decided to replace them with a glorious monument transcending every other in the kingdom, an ambitious goal, condemned by
some as contrary to the Christian ideal of humility. Every craftsman was harnessed to this great project and imprinted into the vertical stone his imagination,
thoughts, knowledge and faith.
Notre-Dame became the parish church of the kingdom and as such host to all
its major celebrations: royal weddings, funerals, victories; but only two coronations, both controversial: that of Henry VI of England who had conquered France
and that of the Emperor Napoleon. The legitimate dynasties stuck to the cathedral
of Reims throughout. It was in Notre-Dame that the conversion of Henri IV to
Catholicism was celebrated in 1593, and in 1687 Louis XIV came all the way
from Versailles to thank the Lord for restoring his health. In modern times
(1970), the funeral mass of Charles de Gaulle was celebrated here.

Notre-Dame equally offered sanctuary to the poor and distressed. Its square (le
parvis) - a sixth the size of the present square - was the social centre of the city,
providing entertainment, spiritual comfort and commerce, by way of annual fairs,
edifying mystery plays with stories taken from the Holy Scriptures and religious
processions when the reliquaries of saints were carried here from their respective
churches. Geneviéve, the patron saint of Paris, was consistently a favourite. In
times of crisis her reliquary was brought here from its home on the Left Bank,
and the people would implore her on their knees to intercede on their behalf.
Rabelais’s hero Gargantua naturally went to Notre-Dame during his visit to
Paris. Followed and gawked at for being a stranger and a giant, he found the
Parisians an irresistible target for a practical joke. Having climbed the church
tower, he “‘unfastened his codpiece and, lugging out his pleasure-rod, he so fiercely bepissed [on them] that he drowned two hundred and sixty thousand four hundred and eighteen, exclusive of women and children.” In Rabelais’s version of the
story, the city of Lutetia (meaning ‘white’), so called because of the white thighs
of its maidens, henceforth became known as Paris, (from par rie, ‘for a laugh’, in

recognition of Gargantua’s jest).
At a time when intellectual activities were restricted to theology Notre-Dame
was also the seat of learning of the capital. In the early 12th century, however, the
philosopher Guillaume de Champeaux, followed by a throng of disciples, crossed


the Seine and settled south of the river, turning the left bank into the academic

and intellectual centre of Paris for centuries to come.
The Romans had preceded him, having spilled over from the island to the firm

soil of the hilly left bank, the site of Gallo-Roman Lutetia. The new Paris that

grew out of the ashes of the Norman devastation, on the other hand, sprang up on
the right bank because its strand (gréve, hence Place de Gréve, now Place de
l’Hotel-de-Ville) was an invaluable asset to the corporation of water merchants
(les marchands de l’eau) who were the backbone of the new city’s economy and
remote descendants of the early Nautae Parisiaci. Having bought the strand from
Louis VII in the 12th century, they made it their new harbour instead of the rudimentary Saint-Landry, on the northern bank of the island, then moved to the natural plateau that rose above the strand, the only site on the right bank that escaped
the flooding of the Seine. From then on medieval Paris was made up of three entities: the right bank, its economic sinew, called La Ville; the left bank, its intellec-

tual mind, L’ Université, and the island, its original city, La Cité. The little island
lying to its east was covered with meadows, reeds and willows and totally uninhabited. During the troubled times of the 14th century, a defence tower was built
on its eastern tip with a moat to its west, which divided it into two: I’Ile NotreDame, serving as the cathedral’s recreational grounds, and |’Ile aux Vaches, the

domain of grazing cows (and also of laundresses and lovers). In the first half of
the 17th century, when these two bucolic havens could no longer resist the
encroachment of the city, the moat was filled in and the two islands were united
once more into the Ile Saint-Louis.
Philippe-Auguste was the natural ally of the water merchants, whose prosperity
ensured his own. Before leaving on the Third Crusade, he therefore decided to

have the right bank belted by a rampart but, being a seasoned businessman, he
made the merchants finance it themselves: after all, they could afford to pay and
he in return was offering them protection, which seemed a fair deal.

With economic growth there was soon need for an administrative structure and
by the next century a kind of corporation or tribunal of commerce was set up on
Place de Gréve, la Maison de la Marchandise, later known as le Parloir aux Bour-

geois. This was the embryo of the municipality of Paris, as is illustrated by the
fact that the city’s aldermen were elected among its members and the provost of
Paris was the head of the corporation. Likewise, the municipality adopted the corporation’s seal, the same one used by the Nautae Parisiaci a thousand years earlier: with only minor changes, this remains the coat of arms of Paris. The
provostship lasted until the French Revolution, although by then it had long lost
its independence and played an insignificant role. In the early days, when its
members represented the prosperous merchants of Paris, it could be as much of a
threat to the throne as were its princely subjects, as in the case of the bloody


revolt led by the provost Etienne Marcel in the 14th century. As the throne consolidated its authority, it learnt to keep them under check by abolishing the free
election of members and appointing them to their posts instead. Etienne Marcel
was the first provost to settle in a town hall on Place de Gréve, a two-storeyed
house he had bought from the king on behalf of the city in 1357. It was known as
La Maison des Piliers because it stood on a row of arcades. A magnificent
Renaissance building replaced it in the 16th century, begun at the time of
Francois I but completed only during the reign of Louis XIII. At a time of commercial expansion, Francois I encouraged the prosperity of the bourgeoisie and
therefore entrusted the famous Italian architect, Boccador, with the prestigious

project.
The festive Renaissance-style Hétel de Ville now stands as a reminder that the
Ath arrondissement is the birthplace of the Paris we know, the stronghold of the
city’s authorities since its beginning, the home of the only governing institution in
Paris still on its original site. Even during the Revolution it was left in peace, for
being a bourgeois institution it was not contested. The anti-bourgeois proletarian
Commune, on the other hand, burnt it down in 1871, but the victorious bourgeois

government of the Third Republic rebuilt it at once in its old style, so as to brush
off this unfortunate incident and demonstrate that its possession was irrevocable.

The Place de Gréve was also a focal site in the life of the city, where people
would gather in the early hours of the morning in search of work: this was known
as faire la gréve, an expression still in use but nowadays meaning ‘to go on
strike’. The square was also used for festivities, in particular for the féte de la
Saint-Jean on 24 June, when a 10-metre-high bonfire, accompanied by fireworks
and firecrackers, celebrated the birth of John the Baptist. Occasionally the King
would come over to light the fire, heralded by the sound of trumpets. But the
Place de Gréve is remembered above all as the main place of public executions
and the gallows were a permanent fixture. Not that all the victims were hanged:
some were dispatched promptly by the sword or the axe, others were quartered,
others still - mainly witches and heretics - were burnt at the stake. The type of
crime and the social rank of the victim also determined the category of punishment: decapitation for a nobleman, hanging for a menial... Many notorious criminals were executed here, for example Cartouche, the terror of Paris in the early
18th century, Ravaillac, the assassin of Henri IV, and the Marquise de Brinvilliers, a mass poisoner. These occasions provided entertainment to Parisians of all
social ranks who thronged into the square and crammed on to rooftops. A fee was
sometimes charged for places at the windows.
On Friday 17 July 1676, Madame de Sévigné, posted on the bridge of Notre-

Dame, watched the Marquise de Brinvilliers, in a shift and a cornet, being pushed


on to the tumbril that was to carry her to Place de Gréve, “a doctor [confesso

r] by

her side, the executioner on the other. To tell the truth, this made
me shudder.”

The bare-footed prisoner had a rope around her neck, which Madame de
Sévigné
could not see because of the huge crowds. “Never was there seen such a crowd,
nor was Paris ever so astir, nor so attentive.” After all, the Marquise de Brinvilliers was one of the most sensational serial killers in the history of France.
After prolific sexual activity that began when she was seven, Madame
de
Brinvilliers was married off but soon took a lover, the slender, blue-eyed cavalry
officer Godin. Her principled, honest father had him locked up at the Bastille with
a sealed letter from the King, but Godin used his time there to make the acquain-

tance of an Italian named Exili, an expert on poisons. Once released the two went
on experimenting in Exili’s laboratory and sharing their findings with Madame de
Brinvilliers, who, having squandered the generous dowry provided by her father,

now plotted the elimination of her family, so as to receive the entire inheritance.

She became a benevolent member of the staff at the Hétel-Dieu hospital, next to
Notre-Dame, the better to experiment first on patients. Having got the proportions
right, she applied them to her father, who must have been of a more robust constitution than the patients of the Hétel-Dieu, for it took her ten attempts to finish
him off. Her two brothers soon met with the same fate, but her attempt to poison
her sister and sister-in-law failed; nor could she eliminate her husband, for Godin,
not being very anxious to marry her, removed the poison secretly at each attempt.
When Godin died (naturally) before the venture was over, he left behind a casket
with 34 compromizing letters, 27 ‘recipes’ headed ‘curious secrets’ and some
samples of poisons. The Marquise fled to a convent in Belgium, which granted
her right of sanctuary, but the French authorities got her out by subterfuge. Meanwhile they also got hold of her memoirs, an edifying autobiographical confession
of a life peppered with adultery, incest, attempted abortions and successive murders. The sensitive Madame

de Sévigné found her execution rather harrowing,

writing to her daughter later that day, “At last, it is all over, the Brinvilliers is in
the air: her poor little body was thrown after the execution into a very big fire,
and the ashes to the wind...”
The French Revolution did not retain Place de Gréve for its executions, other
than for the guillotining of the odd common criminal. On the other hand, it was
on Place de Gréve that the remains of Geneviéve, the patron saint of Paris, were

burnt by an ideologically confused and brainless populace, indifferent to the fact
that she had dedicated her life to the welfare of the people. Public executions continued here until the advent of Louis-Philippe in 1830, who ruled them out
because “the generous citizens had so gloriously spilled their blood (on Place de
Gréve) for the national cause”, during the July Revolution. In 1832 the guillotine
was transferred to the remote Place Saint-Jacques in the 13th arrondissement.


Like most people of their class, both the Marquise de Sévigné and the Marquise
de Brinvilliers had their homes in the nearby Marais, which by then extended east

of Place de Gréve, all the way to the Grands Boulevards, a much vaster area than
the initial historical Marais du Temple, roughly today’s 3rd arrondissement. This
was the golden age of the Marais, all spruced up and shining new, studded with
magnificent hétels, each with an elegant courtyard in front and an exquisite garden at the back - entre cour et jardin. The streets had no pavements and, with the
cobbles extending right up to the facades of the buildings, looked like beautiful
courtyards. On this stage a fascinating variety of people acted out their lives monks in the mantles of their respective orders, orphan girls in blue and orphan
boys in red, gentlemen dressed in all their splendour, escorted by a train of servants in rich bright liveries. The ladies, however, moved about only in carriages,
the streets being frequented by cutpurses, cutthroats and streetwalkers, who
would come over from the seedy west to try their luck.
A few pioneering families had already moved to the southern part of the Marais
(now the 4th arr.) in the 13th century, but the real boost to the area was given by
the Dauphin and future Charles V, when he settled in the Hétel de Saint-Pol in

1365, following Etienne Marcel’s rebellion. The house had been the Paris pied-aterre of the archbishops of Sens, and was protected on one side by the Seine and
on the other by the fortified gate of Saint-Antoine, soon to be reinforced by a veritable fortress, the Bastille, and by a new rampart around the right bank of the
city. Having purchased it in 1361 and three neighbouring dwellings by 1365, the
Dauphin merged them into the Hotel de Saint-Pol, a vast estate now bounded by
rues Saint-Paul, Saint-Antoine and Petit-Musc and the Seine, with lovely gardens,
a fruit orchard and even a menagerie. He intended this to be his permanent home
and when he came to the throne in 1364 as Charles V, he signed a deed stipulating that “the Hétel de Saint-Pol was irrevocably united to the domain of the
crown.” But in time the smells emanating from the rampart’s moat and from the
open sewers on rue Saint-Antoine became too much and he deserted it for the
Louvre and the Hétel des Tournelles (in the 3rd arr.). Charles VI, who succeeded
him to the throne, was too deranged to be affected by such discomfort and
remained there until his death in 1422, but his wife Isabelle (Isabeau) of Bavaria

moved to the Hétel de Barbette (also in the 3rd arr.). Frangois I found it “a large
hétel most vague and ruinous and of very little value”, and had it replaced by a
convent which he gave to the Order of the Celestins.
A forward-looking king, Frangois I encouraged the development of the Marais
and the sale of land by the religious orders to the wealthy newcomers in search of
space. In the 16th century the Marais was already a neighbourhood of superb elegance of which only traces remain, because in the 17th century its architectural
masterpieces were swept away and replaced by more fashionable buildings. One


such dwelling belonged to the Italian Jaquetti di Diaceto, a contemporary of
Catherine de Medici, whose palace, on the site of the present Marché Saint-Gervais, had paintings by Raphael and Michelangelo hanging on its walls.
The opening of Place Royale (now Place des Vosges) was a determining factor
in promoting the Marais. This was the first open-air square in Paris, and a magnificent one. Surrounded on all four sides by exquisite bright pink brick and white
stone pavilions in neat order, these served in 1612 as an enchanting backdrop of
the most dazzling celebration recalled by Parisians, that is, the double wedding of
Louis XIII and his sister Elisabeth, respectively to the Infanta of Spain and her
brother,which was fixed to coincide with the inauguration of the square. The
Square became the most prestigious address in the most desirable neighbourhood
of Paris, as claimed by the abbé d’ Aubignac: “The most beautiful quarter in the
town of stylishness [i.e. Paris] is the big square which can verily be said to be
royal.” His contemporary Scarron, in Adieux aux Maretz et 4 la Place Royale,
described
Ses dedans somptueux, ses superbes lambris
Ses riches ornements, ses peintures sans prix,
Ses rares cabinets, ses dais et ses balustres.

(Its sumptuous interiors, its superb panelling/Its rich
ornaments, its priceless paintings,/Its rare cabinets, its
canopies and its balustrades).
At a time when Versailles was no more than a hunting lodge, great architects
such as Mansart and Le Vau and painters such as Le Brun, Mignard and Vouet
dazzled Paris with their talent. Polychrome cupids, lyres and garlands of flowers
against a background of gold decked the halls of splendid apartments, while gilded foliage and grotesques or scenes from Greek mythology adorned their ceilings.
Tapestries and damask hangings, mirrors and carpets, silk and velvet upholstery,
silver and gold embroideries added further splendour to those interiors, not to

mention the collections of paintings and furniture of some of their occupants,
notably those of the Duc de Richelieu, the prodigal great-nephew of the Cardinal.
Many of the paintings he owned, in particular ten works by Nicolas Poussin, now
hang in the Louvre, the Duke having sold them to Louis XIV in order to buy
some 20 paintings by Rubens, the largest series of that painter’s works ever to be
brought together by a private person. (Most of them are now in the Arte
Pinakotech in Munich).
-Place Royal was also a stopping-place of foreign ambassadors arriving in Paris.
Having been met at the Porte Saint-Antoine by the municipal troops and the
Royal Swiss Guards, they would use rue Saint-Antoine as their route to the Louvre because it was the broadest artery in the city. On the way they would stop at


Place Royale to parade their dazzling attire, their carriages and the livery of their
train - all for the prestige of their country. Vying with them, the natives strutted in
all their splendour on the balconies of Place Royale, spectators and actors at once,
and also judges, distributing points to each delegation of this international contest. Needless to say, those ambassadors of exotic, far-away lands often came out
on top. Christina of Sweden, who had abdicated and was an enlightened feminist
long before the term was coined, also drew large crowds to Place Royale on her
official entry into Paris, and the balconies of the square were filled with the most

distinguished members of society, among them Henrietta of England and the
Princesses of Orange and of Conti.
Place Royale was also a favourite choice for duels, watched from the balconies
by the ladies whose favours were being sought: some of these could boast of several suitors who had given up the ghost for their sake. Louis XIII’s minister, the

Cardinal Richelieu, was determined to put an end to this raging epidemic and in
1626 took drastic measures to enforce a ban on them. Accordingly, when Boutteville contravened his ruling, believing that his glorious pedigree would put him
above the law (he was said to have descended from the first Baron of France),
Richelieu had him decapitated on Place de Gréve, together with his witness Des
Chapelles, and had their bodies and heads exposed as an example on a table in the
main hall of the Hétel Angouléme (now the historical library of Paris). Madame
de Sévigné’s grandfather, the Baron de Chantal, was also involved in the duel and

sentenced to death, but he and the two members of the opposing party managed to
run for their lives and were therefore replaced on the rope by dangling paintings.
As an ultimate act of defiance, the three had their lackeys return to Place de
Gréve during the night and remove the paintings. In 1643 Richelieu died and the
duels resumed as never before.
With the transfer of the court to Versailles in 1682, the centre of gravity of
Paris shifted west, entailing the decline of the Marais, while the French Revolution dealt it its final blow. With the development of industry in the 19th century,
once-beautiful mansions were converted into collections of workshops, which
proliferated like cancerous growths on rooftops, on neglected house-fronts and
inside courtyards. It became a lugubrious environment, inhabited by the poor.
Many of them were Jews who made their way back to the area around rue des
Rosiers, where, in the 13th and 14th centuries, they had led a precarious existence, punctuated by successive expulsions and returns according to the whims or
economic calculations of respective monarchs, which ended in 1394 with their
definitive expulsion from France. Some took advantage of loopholes to return,
and there were always some Jews living in Paris, which explains why in 1615
Louis XIII reiterated the ban. It ended only with the emancipation of the Jews on
27 September 1791. Their presence was perpetuated through the name of rue des

Juifs, which became rue Ferdinand Duval only in 1900. The Jewish newcomers of
modern times tended not to stay long: as they improved their lot they moved elsewhere, to be replaced successively by new arrivals, the most recent significant
group being the North African Jews of the early 1960s.
In 1962, André Malraux’s bill calling for the rehabilitation of the Marais was

passed in the National Assembly, and in 1965 the area was declared a ‘protected
zone’. One by one parasitical appendages were removed from historical buildings, which underwent thorough restoration before being turned into museums or
cultural centres. An annual festival helped promote the resurrected Marais among
tourists and Parisians alike, while expensive boutiques were substituted for the
old neighbourhood shops and workshops. When the high-flying clothes designer
Chevignon took up residence on the premises of the antiquated Turkish baths in
rue des Rosiers, there was an outcry among nostalgic sentimentalists, and the
word ‘assassin!’ was scrawled on the pale pink walls of the building.
West of the Marais lay an infested neighbourhood of damp, dark, narrow alleys.
An enclave now limited by rue Saint-Merri, rue du Grenier Saint-Lazare, rue
Saint-Martin and rue du Temple (in the 3rd arr.) became the rubbish dump of the
market of Les Halles and was derisiveiy named Beaubourg (Beau Bourg). In the
1970s, however, the name became associated with avant-garde pop culture, when
the seedy streets on the plateau Beaubourg were cleared to make room for a
gigantic community arts centre, the Centre Georges Pompidou, which commemorates its originator, the President of the Republic, a lover of contemporary art.
Pompidou did not live to see the project completed, having died in 1974, three
years before its inauguration. Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano sought to express
the spirit of the time in their bright blue building with bright red and blue piping,
which, when seen from an elevated viewpoint, stands out in the silver-grey
cityscape. Most Parisians were scandalized that two ‘hippy’ architects should
have been allowed to build a ‘refinery’ in the historic heart of the city. Nearly
twenty years later the building still ranks first among the city’s monuments they
wish to see wiped out! And yet it is visited en masse, beating all records: 28,000
visitors per day, 8 million per year (as against 2.5 million visitors for the Eiffel
Tower), and over 400 million since it first opened in 1977. These figures, however, mask the fact that visitors often come here because access to most of the build-

ing is free of charge, notably to the library, which is heavily used by default, the
University of Paris being unable to accommodate all its students. The result is an
interminable queue on the second floor, made up of a daily average of 11,000
"readers waiting to occupy the 1,800 available seats.
The homeless and winos too take advantage of free admission and sometimes
take shelter in the library, especially in winter. A recorded announcement in the


library warns readers to beware of pickpockets, and the occasional syringe is to
be found in the toilets. In short, the Centre Georges Pompidou has become Paris’s
mecca of mass culture, although a different atmosphere prevails in the Museum
of Modern Art on the 4th floor, which charges admission and is free of queues.

Of the museum’s collection of 35,000 works, space permits only 850 to be exhibited at any one time. A fee is also payable for admission to temporary exhibitions,
on the 5th floor, which attract queues, if they are on a popular theme.
The quality of the exhibitions has fallen off somewhat, as have the premises
and the environment. By early 1993 the fact had to be faced that the Centre
Georges Pompidou was sorely in need of repair. Measures are now being taken to
have it renovated by 1997, in time for its twentieth anniversary. Its ‘piazza’ is
also to be renovated. Since the opening of the Centre, this has been a focal point
in the street life of Paris. Buskers, acrobats, mime artists, jugglers, fire-eaters, —
portrait painters and pickpockets share this spacious square, spontaneously recreating the medieval atmosphere of the parvis of Notre-Dame. Today’s performers,
however, have come from the four corners of the earth and give expression to the
multi-cultural nature of Parisian society, in which the African component indisputably predominates, at least in the field of music. This street culture reflects the
inexorable march of the city towards a multi-racial society in the face of the
extreme right-wing Jean-Marie Le Pen and his followers. Just as Parisians’ ancestors carved their emotions meticulously into the stone of Notre-Dame, today’s
residents identify with the slapdash, brightly-coloured Centre Georges Pompidou
and with the bright-coloured mobile sculptures that play in the water of
the
Stravinsky fountain by its side. As if by some predetermined design, Notre-Dame
and the Centre Pompidou, the two shrines of the people of Paris, stand guard
at
the borders of the arrondissement from which the city emanated, Notre-Dame
rising out of the waters where a tribe of navigators once plied, the Centre Pompidou
rising out of the asphalt that supports a mass population of city dwellers.
Both
reach up to the heavens, Notre-Dame by way of its towers, the Centre
Pompidou
by way of an escalator. Half-way between, the Hotel de Ville takes
care of the
terrestrial needs of the people.

WHERE TO WALK...
THE ARSENAL
O; the eastern edge of the 4th arrondissement lies an attractive
area, bypassed
by most pedestrians. If you wish to discover it, do so on a Wednes
day afternoon, when the Arsenal Library and the apartments of the
Grand Master of

Artilleries, on the corner of Boulevard Morland and
Boulevard Henri IV, are

open to the public (2 to 4 pm, except Ist to 15th Septemb
er). Sully-Morland
Métro station is where you get off.


Built in the 14th century for the manufacture of ammunition, the royal Arsenal
lay along an arm of the Seine (now Boulevard Morland), which made the small
stretch of land lying to the south into an island, the island of Louviers. In 1563 a
gigantic explosion - which could be heard as far as Melun, 46 km south-east of
Paris - blew most of it up, after which it was used only as an arms depot, while
the rest of the site was turned into a dwelling for the Grand Master. At the time of
Henri IV the post was held by his minister, the Duc de Sully, who commissioned
Philippe Delorme, the great architect of the day, to build him a palatial home,
befitting the glamorous figure he cut and splendid enough to entice his King to
visit him there. It was in fact while Henri IV was on his way to the Arsenal from
the Louvre, on 10 May 1610, that Ravaillac jumped onto his coach and stabbed
him to death. Sully’s apartments were surrounded by beautiful courtyards and
gardens, where he organized spectacular jousts and cavalcades, notably a magnificent carousel in 1606 in honour of Henri IV who had made him Duke: led by
four representatives of the great noble families, it embodied the four elements, in
keeping with the spirit of the Renaissance. The apartment now in existence, however, was not Sully’s but belonged to the wife of La Meilleraye, Louis XIII’s
Grand Master.
Louis XIII did away with the foundry as well and a court of justice was set up
in its stead by Richelieu, of sorry memory, for this was where the scandalous trial
of Nicolas Foucquet, Louis XIV’s treasurer, was held in 1664. Officially tried for

embezzlement, Fouquet’s real crime was having built the sumptuous palace of
Vaux-le-Vicomte for himself and having challenged the blazon of the Sun King.
Louis XIV’s minister, Colbert, convened a band of magistrates in his pay, yet the
courageous d’Ormesson stood up to the King who wished to see Fouquet sentenced to death and sentenced him to banishment only. For his pains, d’Ormesson
was exiled to his estate south-east of Paris, but the intellectual élite of the time Boileau, Racine, Bossuet, Bourdaloue, Madame de Sévigné - sided with him and

came to visit him there. La Voisin’s trial in 1680 was another memorable event.
Women of distinction, taking the Marquise de Brinvilliers as a model, set out to
eliminate those they found cumbersome.

La Voisin was one such, evidently

among many: when she was questioned, so many names of high-ranking ladies
began to leak out that the procedures were hastened so as to silence her before too
much embarrassing information was divulged.
By then France had entered a peaceful lull and Louis XIV could divert his
attention from bellicose activities to the construction of the palace of Versailles.
The old abandoned foundry, where the army’s cannon had once been cast, now
came in handy for the casting of the numerous bronze statues that were to decorate the gardens of the new palace that was meant to dazzle all the courts of


Europe. At the same time the King’s megalomania was fed by having his entire
grand armoury displayed at the Arsenal, to demonstrate France’s invincibility; all
foreign dignitaries visiting France were taken to see this magnificent array - a
subtle reminder as to who was top dog!
In the second half of the 18th century the tenant of the Arsenal was the Minister
of War, the Marquis Paulmy d’Argenson, who set up in his apartments a library
of over 100,000 volumes, among them illuminated medieval manuscripts. Louis
XVI's brother, the Comte d’ Artois and future Charles X, bought the library in
1785 and enriched its collections. The revolutionary authorities flooded it with
the confiscated treasures of the neighbouring convents and also transferred here
the Bastille’s archives. Thus, the prison register is still kept here, as well as the
death certificate of the legendary Man in the Iron Mask. In 1797 the library was
opened to the public under its new name, Bibliothéque Nationale de 1’Arsenal.
Charles Nodier, the head of the library from 1824 to 1844, gathered here the”

Romantic writers Victor Hugo, Lamartine, Alfred de Musset, Alexandre Dumas,

Sainte-Beuve and others, perpetuating a 200-year-old Parisian tradition of salons
littéraires. Towards the end of the 19th century, when Heredia was curator of the
library, his Parnassien poet friends gathered here. At present the library owns 1.5
million volumes with a substantial department on the performing arts. Its theatre
section is of particular interest and includes the archives of such great stagemen
as Louis Jouvet.
The library was set up in the Arsenal’s extension that was built by the
famous
Boffrand for the Duc du Maine, the legitimized son of Louis XIV and Madame
de
Montespan, who moved here in the early 18th century. This was a luxurious
town
dwelling, to suit the polished, frolicsome society of the time, but as a
tribute to its
initial military vocation, Boffrand enhanced its fagade with sculptures
of smoking

mortar and cannon. The main entrance to the library, however,
is set in the old

facade. On either side of the vestibule, the busts of Henri IV
and Sully are

reminders of the heyday of the Arsenal. A majestic staircase leads
to the reading
rooms and to the private apartments on the first floor. The apartment
of Madame
de Meilleraye provides a unique example of a Louis XIII interior.
The Maréchal
de Meilleraye had just married the young Mlle Cossé-Brissac
and commissioned

Simon Vouet to create for her a dwelling of great splendour, as
can be appreciated from the magnificence of every detail. The Duc du Maine’s
apartment next to
it has several lavish reception rooms, above all, a fabulous music
room, exquisitely decorated to please a light-hearted society.

Across the street is the Pavillon de I’ Arsenal, a glass and steel

structure dating

from the 19th century, which served as an art gallery and
later as a warehouse of

the Samaritaine department store. Since 1988 it has been home

bitions dealing with different aspects of town planning in


to temporary exhi-

Paris, which have been

increasingly visited by Parisians. To wind up, walk along quai Henri IV and turn
left into Boulevard Bourdon, along the marina of the Bassin de 1’ Arsenal, a bliss-

ful haven reminiscent of sunny holidays. Boulevard Bourdon will take you to
Place de la Bastille where our exploration of the Marais will begin.

FROM THE BASTILLE TO THE HEART OF THE MARAIS
