lhe next itinerary runs through rue de Varenne, which, like the parallel rue de
Grenelle, once led to the hunting-grounds further west (now the 15th arr.).
This is a bastion of embassies and government institutions, often extending
between the two streets, in magnificent 18th-century hétels, resolutely closed to
the public. The fronts of the buildings and the courtyards may sometimes be
glimpsed but never the gardens. However, the fashion houses of the first section
of rue de Grenelle, where Italian and Japanese designers have lately moved in, are
worth seeing instead.
The Hétel Matignon, at n° 57 rue de Varenne, is the residence of the Prime

Minister and perhaps the most sumptuous mansion in the Faubourg. Its construction began in 1721 for the Prince de Tingry, Christian-Louis de Montmorency, an
exemplary soldier under Louis XIV and a future Maréchal de France, who sold it
two years later to his niece’s husband, Goyon de Matignon, the Comte de


Thorigny. The hétel changed hands several times before it was taken
over in 1808
by Talleyrand, who was already residing in the neighbouring n°
55. Here his
famous cook, Caréme, produced lavish dinner parties four times
a week for 36

privileged guests. However, three years later Talleyrand chose to sell the hétel
to
the state. Louis XVIII swapped it for the Palais de l’Elysée, the Right Bank
property of the Duchesse de Bourbon, which has since become the residence of
the
President of the Republic. The Duke of Galliera bought it in 1852 and it was
his
widow who offered the Comte de Paris, the pretender to the throne, the use
of the

ground floor, where he gave a brilliant reception on the occasion of his daughter’s
engagement to the heir presumptive to the throne of Portugal, the Prince of
Braganga. Displeased with this turn of events and suspecting that the forces of
reaction were at work once more, the Third Republic passed a law expelling the
princes of the House of Orléans from France, a law that remained in force until
after the Great War. When the war broke out in 1914, the Prince d’Orléans perceived it his duty to return to France to join the army, but the authorities were not
moved by his patriotism and imprisoned him! From 1888 to 1914 the Austrian
Embassy was located here, the Duchess of Galliera having bequeathed it to the
Austrian emperor, Franz Joseph. After the Great War it was sequestered and ultimately appropriated by the Republic. It has been the residence of the Prime Minister since 1935. Besides splendid interior decoration, the Hotel Matignon has an
immense garden with a bejewelled 18th-century folly, built as a music room and
called Le Petit-Trianon.
Further down rue de Varenne, at n° 78, the Hotel de Villeroi, is occupied today

by the Ministry of Agriculture. Unfortunately, this lovely example of a Regency
town house and its charming gardens are hidden from the street by newer government buildings. The hétel was originally built for the famous actress Charlotte
Desmares, a mistress of the Grand Dauphin and later of the Regent, by whom she
had a daughter. Like many of her contemporaries, Charlotte Desmares went bankrupt and had to let out her hétel. The Dutch Ambassador moved here in 1726 but
died the following year. The English Ambassodor, Horace Walpole, succeeded
him, followed by Lord Waldegrave. Later the Comtesse de Tessé, Adrienne La
Fayette’s aunt, lived here and invited her friend Thomas Jefferson to stay here.

The H6tel de Biron at n° 77 is now the Musée Rodin and is therefore open to
the public, together with its lovely grounds! For this we must be thankful both to
historical circumstances and to Auguste Rodin. Originally the hdtel was built for
Monsieur Peyrenc, a wigmaker from Languedoc. Unlike his neighbour Charlotte
Desmares, who had suffered from the sudden drop in the speculative market
‘introduced by the Scotsman John Law, Monsieur Peyrenc had made such a staggering fortune that he could afford to employ the great architect Gabriel to draw
up the plans for this mansion. It was certainly fit for royalty, since Louise de



PALAI:
BOURBO!

REALISATION CARTOGRAPHIQUE : GEORGET N.


Bourbon, the Duchesse du Maine and daughter-in-law of Louis XIV and Madame

de Montespan, bought it from the wigmaker’s widow in 1732. Its last owner, the
Duchesse de Charost, sold it to a religious congregation in 1820, which eventually housed a school. When the congregation was dispersed in 1904 the school went
public. With so much space becoming available, somebody had the idea of letting
it Out to artists at a moderate rent: thus Rainer Maria Rilke, Isadora Duncan,
Rodin and Jean Cocteau became the privileged tenants of these enchanting surroundings. Cocteau was 19 when he arrived and remained for a year in this “large
building, with five French windows opening into a park of 7 hectares in the middle of Paris, on Boulevard des Invalides...”, as he reported in his PortraitsSouvenirs. His modest, meagrely furnished room had been previously the
«

43o

Ty
He hs

ny

Musée Rodin


solfeggio classroom of the school. From there he could see Rodin working in the
unkempt garden, which was overgrown

with wild briars, forget-me-not and

weeds. When all was dark he could see a light in the window of the room where
Rilke was working late into the night on Les Cahiers de Malte Laurids Brigge.
When the state bought the Hétel Biron in 1910 Rodin was given a life lease and it
was agreed that a museum would be set up here to house his works which he was
to bequeath to the state. The building and gardens have now been restored - some
say too much - but certainly this is one of the most beautiful museums in the city,
as far as premises and gardens go. A visit here should definitely be reserved for
fine weather and leisurely sightseeing.
Turn right into rue de Bourgogne, up until recently one of the delightful streets
in the arrondissement with its numerous succulent food shops. But one by one
their shopkeepers have retired and closed down, carrying with them the soul of
the street. The excellent Italian bookshop is still here, probably because of the
proximity of the Italian Embassy, Consulate and school at n° 47 and 50 rue de
Varenne. The Club des Poétes, at n° 30, is a cosy cabaret where poetry readings
are given.
If you wish to look at some more 18th-century architectural gems, turn right
into rue de Grenelle. On the corner of rue de Bourgogne and rue de Grenelle, on
the site of n° 115, the adulated Adrienne Lecouvreur from the ComédieFrangaise, is said to have been buried secretly in 1730. Banished by the Church,
like all other members of her profession, she was refused burial by the priest of
Saint-Sulpice, in spite of Voltaire’s angry protestations:

N’a méme pas eu la faveur
De deux cierges et d’une biére
(was not even favoured with two candles and a bier)

That once admired body, he pursued, had to be carried by night to the river by
three charitable souls, one of whom was his friend M. Laubiniére. The years went

by and eventually the Hétel de Saumery was erected on this site. In 1786, an 86year-old admirer of the actress, the Comte Ferrio d’ Argental, fixed a commemo-

rative plaque under its portal, which has been there ever since. But the remains of
Adrienne Lecouvreur were never found, despite thorough search undertaken in
1797 at the instigation of the Comédie-Frangaise.
The owner of the H6tel de Villars at n° 116 at the time of Louis XVI was the
Duc de Brissac, the governor of Paris. On 9 September 1792 the Duke was slain
on the streets of Versailles, after which his head was sliced off and carried by the
patriotes all the way to Louveciennes, to be displayed before his ex-mistress the
Contesse du Barry. She took the head back to Paris and buried it in the gardens,
where it was found accidentally in 1901, by which time the hétel had been the


Mairie of the 7th arrondissement for nearly 40 years (1862). Little of the past
splendour of the house has been preserved. Its mirrored gallery, 24 metres long
and 8 metres high, was one of the finest in the capital. The elegant building next
door, the Petit Hétel de Villars, was built as an annexe during the Regency.
Hotel de Rochechouart, at n° 110, a late 18th-century building, is today part of
the Ministry of Education. The Duc de Saint-Simon died in 1755, aged 80, on the
first floor of the Hétel de Maillebois, at n° 102, to which he had retired to work
on his Mémoires. N° 99/101, the Hétel de Charolais, a house of faded splendour,

was the home in the early 18th century of the Baron de Presle, who built the
Hotel Villeroi for his mistress, the actress Charlotte Desmares, conveniently
across his own gardens. During the Second Empire the Princesse de Metternich
held here a sumptuous salon of world renown. Since 1870 the premises have been
occupied by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Hétel de Baufremont at
n° 87 is a sheer aesthetic delight - somehow, it has hardly been touched by renovators and has retained the harmony of its original Regency architecture. The
H6tel d’ Avaray at n° 85 was built at the same time and remained in the hands of
the Avaray family for a remarkable 200 years. During his ambassadorship,
Horace Walpole rented it from the Marquis d’ Avaray for a couple of years, during which he hosted some lavish receptions upon his guests; these were the talk of
the town. After the death of the last Duc d’ Avaray in 1896, the hédtel was bought

by outsiders, most recently in 1920 by the Dutch government for its Embassy.
During their visit to Paris in 1896, Tzar Nicholas II and his Tzarine stayed in

the Russian Embassy at n° 79. The early 18th-century decoration of the lounges
has survived, as has a splendid staircase. The Hotel de Fiirstenberg at n° 75, with
its peach-coloured walls blending delicately into the curve of the street, is the
work of Delisle-Mansart, who had been very active in the Marais. This is one of
the earlier mansions in the Faubourg, dating from 1703, still in the time of Louis
XIV. The Hotel de Gallifet at n° 73 (main entrance being on rue de Varenne), has

been occupied by the Italian Embassy since 1909. Talleyrand, the one politician
who had managed to wriggle his way through revolutions and counter-revolutions, came to live here four times during four different regimes - during the
Directoire and into the Consulat, during the First Empire, during the First
Restoration and during the Second Restoration which followed Napoleon’s brief
return to power and his final defeat at Waterloo. He was not beloved by Napoleon
who had defined him as “shit in a silk stocking”.
Retrace your steps and turn right into rue Saint-Simon, which commemorates
the great memorialist. Note the delightful profusion of greenery behind the gorgeous door at n° 102. Turn right into rue Paul-Louis Courier and right again into
Impasse Paul-Louis Courier. A picturesque well and two pretty street-lamps add a


romantic touch to this leafy nook. Note also the curious artist’s studio at n° 7.
Continue on rue Saint-Simon and turn left into Boulevard Saint-Germain, then

left into rue Saint-Dominique. You will soon reach the Ministry of Defence
which occupies the premises of the Dominican convent of Saint-Joseph at n°
10/12 and the Hétel de Brienne at n° 14. Very little of it can be seen from the
street, nor of its magnificent gardens overlooking rue de |’ Université. The convent was originally built for poor orphan girls, to provide them with training and
a future livelihood. Madame de Montespan not only took great interest in the convent and made charitable donations to it, but also retired to it when Louis XIV left
her for Madame de Maintenon. From 1747 all the Parisian intelligentsia and
many honoured foreigners gathered at Madame du Deffand’s celebrated salon,
held in this convent where she too had retired.
The H6tel de Brienne is named after its last owner during the Ancien Régime;

the Comte de Brienne. He was also the last Minister of War of the Ancien Régime
and among the victims of the guillotine during the Terror of 1794. When the
storm subsided his widow did not wish to keep the mansion and in 1802 it
became the property of Lucien Bonaparte who filled it with a wealth of bibelots
and paintings. It was in his house that the Duc de Luynes who had, as a matter of
pragmatism, befriended the new regime, noticed and pointed out to his host two
of his old paintings hanging on a wall, as mentioned earlier. That same night
Lucien Bonaparte, had them returned to their original owner at the Hétel de
Luynes.
Across the street the Square Samuel-Rousseau, with its colourful flower-beds,
recalls the composer César Franck who, from 1858 until his death in 1890, was

the organist of the church of Sainte-Clotilde (on the other side of the square). A
sculpture of the composer meditating can be seen in the square; an angel hovers
above, symbolizing divine inspiration. The church is a 19th-century pastiche of
Gothic architecture, built by Gau and Ballu (the latter being the architect of several Parisian churches, notably the Trinité north of the Opéra).
Turn left into rue de Bellechasse, which leads to the Musée d’ Orsay on the corner of quai Anatole-France and to the Musée de la Légion d’Honneur, across the
street. First have a look at n° 31 on your right, where Alphonse Daudet lived
between

1885 and 1897 and where Proust claimed to have visited his widow,

writing “Je n’en sais d’aussi pleine du passé, de pensée, d’aussi pieusement consacrée par le souvenir que le 31 rue de Bellechasse” (“I don’t know of another so
filled with the past, with thought, so piously consecrated by memory, as 31 rue
Bellechasse”). The building is historic indeed since the mathematician Monge,
the physician Villemin and the historian Bainville all died here. Gustave Doré had
a studio at n° 27, which still bears the initials GD.
Paris loves novelty and converting a railway station into a museum, which,


moreover, would house the immensely popular Impressionists, was bound to create a sensation. 11.5 million people visited the Musée d’Orsay within the first
three years of its inauguration in February 1987. Even now there are at times discouragingly long queues for admission. Although the museum is devoted to all
the forms of art that developed in France in the second half of the 19th century,
and hosts other activities such as chamber-music concerts, most visitors come for
the Impressionist collection, on which its reputation has been built, and to marvel
at the audacious architectural conversion. This was always an admirable piece of
architecture, a testimony to those glorious days when the railway station was the
temple of modernity and the steam engine its object of worship, as witness
Monet’s paintings of La Gare Saint Lazare and Zola’s novel La Béte humaine.
However, this one was not inaugurated until 1900, on the symbolic date of 14
July, and was so beautiful that the painter Edouard Detaille suggested even then
that it should be turned into a museum or art gallery. Like every self-respecting
station, the Gare d’Orsay took pride in its hotel, of which the huge Belle Epoque
dining-room was decorated with utmost care. The latter has been preserved on the
first floor of the museum, complete with extravagant candelabras and a magnificent allegorical mural, Allégorie des périodes du temps, bringing to mind those
pioneering days, when the travelling adventure began on the station platform. It
also offers a beautiful view overlooking the Musée de la Légion d’ Honneur in the
Hétel de Salm, and Place de la Concorde. The museum’s interior is perhaps less
successful: too many partitions and too many cumbersome items cramp what
should have remained an unobstructed space, distracting the eye from the beautiful vaulted glass-and-iron ceiling and the wonderful station clock.
The Musée de la Légion d’Honneur has a fine collection of medals, crosses,

pictures, manuscripts and other paraphernalia. The mansion was named after its
first owner, Frédéric Ill, the Prince of Salm-Kyrburg, who, despite his sincere
support of the Revolution, was accused of being “but the mask of patriotism” and
was sent to the guillotine on Place du Tréne, six days before the fall of Robespierre. His sister, the Princess Hohenzollern, bought the plot of land in the present 12th arrondissement known as the cemetery of Picpus, where his remains
still rest, together with those of 1,300 other victims of the Revolution. He was

possibly denounced by one of his creditors, for he was so heavily in debt that by
the time the mansion was completed he no longer owned it but had become merely a tenant on the premises. Thomas Jefferson, who arrived in Paris in 1784, was

a frequent guest at Lafayette’s home at n° 123 rue de Lille, from where he could
‘admire this beautiful hdtel. He showed it to the architect Charles Bullfinch and to
the painter John Trumbull when they visited Paris, and above all to Pierre
!’Enfant who is known to have been much inspired by the architecture of Paris in
his design for the city for Washington DC.


Claude Lenthereau, a wigmaker who by the end of the Revolution called himself Marquis de Beauregard, became the next landlord of the Hotel de Salm. He
also bought the jewel-like Chateau de Bagatelle (now in the 16th arr.) on credit,

while keeping the celebrated Mlle Lange on a pension of 10,000 pounds and
holding unbelievably lavish banquets in his new home. Not everyone took him at
face value and the Feuille du Jour of 9 August 1796 wrote:
la sottise et l’impertinence d’un faquin parvenu [qui]
pour effacer tout vestige de poudre originelle, se fait
appeler le marquis de Beauregard.
(the foolishness of a parvenu rascal [who] in order to
efface any vestige of original powder [from wigmaking],
called himself the Marquis de Beauregard).
He was eventually unmasked and condemned to be publicly exposed, branded
and put in irons for four entire years. The Hotel de Salm was set on fire during theCommune, but was fortunately beautifully restored. The Cour des Comptes (the
revenue court), on the other hand, was utterly destroyed and replaced by the
Orsay railway station.
Continue westwards along the quais to the Esplanade des Invalides. The Palais
Bourbon at n° 33 quai d’Orsay, is the home of the National Assembly. Facing the
Pont de la Concorde, it makes a perfectly symmetrical pendant to the Neo-classical church of the Madeleine on the opposite side of Place de la Concorde, across
the river. Altogether, this is one of the most spectacular vistas of Paris, an urban
expression of French order and Napoleon’s legacy to the world. The Neo-classical fagade of the building, however, is only a facing: the Emperor, a fervent
admirer of Classical art, added it in 1806 to the 18th-century Palais-Bourbon to

match the front of the Madeleine, then known as Temple de la Gloire.
The magnificent Regency palace was originally built for Louise-Frangoise de
Bourbon, the legitimized daughter of Louis XIV and Madame de Montespan, by
such great architects as Gabriel, Ghirardini, Lassurance and Aubert. The latter
three also built the next-door Hétel de Lassay, for her friend and counsellor, the

Marquis de Lassay, which is now the home of the President of the National
Assembly. The Hotel de Lassay consists essentially of a single, elongated, raised
floor, with a row of elegant French doors along its front, surmounted by a sculpt-

ed balustrade carrying urns and clusters of chubby cupids - a masterpiece of
Regency architecture, noteworthy for the purity of its lines and its elegant proportions. Inside, a succession of five spacious halls - still used for official receptions
- were decorated with mirrors, carved doors and delicate paintings, all in keeping
with the aesthetic taste of the time, which valued discreet simplicity of architecture contrasted with sumptuous interior decoration, to suit the lifestyle of their


spoilt pleasure-seeking inmates. The best craftsmen of the land, notably those of
the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, were commissioned to create embellishments to
their new dwellings, which were more splendid than those at the time of Louis
XIV but also smaller in dimension and more comfortable. Hence the growing use
of mirrors - a rare commodity at the time of the Sun King - to create an illusion of
space and also to embody the perpetual game of hide-and-seek, intrigue and of
elusive love that so engrossed society at the time.
The Palais-Bourbon became the property of the Prince de Condé in 1764. Having extended his domain to the Seine and to the Esplanade des Invalides, he also
annexed the Hotel de Lassay. Needless to say, the entire estate was confiscated
during the Revolution, but at least its owner was luckily able to emigrate in time.
The interior architecture of the Palais-Bourbon was largely modified by Gisors
and Lecomte to suit its new function as the French people’s parliament. The
entrance is from Place du Palais-Bourbon (reached by way of rue Aristide Briand,
beyond Boulevard Saint-Germain on your left), a charming square of distinguished, understated harmony, in keeping with the subdued dignity of the
Faubourg. Both the Palais-Bourbon and the H6tel Lassay (at n° 120 rue de 1’ Université) are closed to the public except on special occasions or for arranged guided tours. Nevertheless, you can take in the atmosphere of the area by stopping at
one of the very pleasant eating-places as an enjoyable way of ending the exploration of the old Faubourg.

FROM LES INVALIDES TO THE EIFFEL TOWER
