FROM PLACE DU CHATELET TO THE SQUARE DU VERT-GALANT
he western part of Ile de la Cité is our next destination, but we shall set out

from Place du Chatelet on the mainland. In its centre the fountain La Victoire, erected in 1808, commemorates Napoleon’s Egyptian campaigns, following
which Paris was seized by a feverish Egyptomania and set out to adorn her streets
with pseudo-Egyptian art. Hence the four crouching sphynxes flanked to each
side of its socle. The Théatre du Chatelet (Théatre Musical de Paris or TMP) and
the Théatre de la Ville on either side of the square were later additions by Davioud built in the 1860s, when the present square was opened as part of the Second
Empire’s scheme to rehabilitate what was hitherto a seedy slum.
To generations of French provincials between the 1860s and the 1960s, the
name Chatelet was associated with the Théatre du ChAtelet, the highlight of their

visit to the capital, specializing in sugary operettas such as L’Auberge du Cheval
Blanc (The White Horse Inn), which made their hearts throb and their eyes weep.
Luis Mariano was their adulated star, sweeping the ladies off their feet with his
schmaltzy ‘Mexico’. To contemporary Parisians the name Chatelet means more
prosaically the inevitable central underground junction everyone is bound to hit
upon occasionally. Few connect it with the ghastly prison of Le Grand Chitelet,
which stood here for nearly a thousand years and was only demolished between
1802 and 1808. A plan of the Grand-Chatelet is engraved in marble on the facade
of the Chambre des Notaires at 12 avenue Victoria, unnoticed by most passers-by.
In 870 Charles le Chauve erected a primitive wooden tower in front of the
bridge (Pont au Change) to defend it against the Norsemen; it seems to have
played its role effectively. Around the year 1130 Louis VI built a proper fortress
to protect the Ile de la Cité (roughly on the site of today’s TMP), and linked the
two with a bridge - Le Grand Pont. The city walls erected by Philippe-Auguste in
1190 made this fortress superfluous and it therefore became the seat of the Paris
courts of law, provostship and main prison. The governor of Paris (Préfet under
the Romans, Comte de Paris in the early centuries of the French kingdom) was
invested with military, financial and judiciary powers. At the beginning there was
not always a clear-cut division between the king and the governor, and a couple
of Comtes de Paris were also kings, notably Hugues Capet (987-996) who
merged officially the two functions. In 1060, however, Philippe I delegated his
powers over the city to a newly appointed prévét, who, as a representative of the

Crown, sat under a canopy decorated with fleurs-de-lis. Incidentally, the present

heir to the French throne (in case of a restoration of the Monarchy) is also the
Comte de Paris.
The prison of Le Grand-Chatelet was the most sinister prison in Paris, the mere
sight of which chilled the passer-by. We shall spare the reader the details of the


1373LVHD

eo)g

NG LQ)
“Id LOU

é/ feo] |
/
a zg fe Ry
|v
&

JUIVLON

> 97
Cc

Ty

$30
3Y8WWHD

» S$

>

G31393319NO>

193;


Ss2

IvNe

al

>

nad

Sl
naiy

SUZBAIDS

KO
Yi:

NiZs

VIVO:

NO

—_

|

///

fon


perverse methods of torture afflicted upon the writhing prisoners inside, although
their agony can be perceived through the lines of 16th century poet Clément
Marot, who was locked up here for having eaten meat on Lent and who named his

poem, significantly L’Enfer (Hell).
The neighbouring streets were just as ghastly, filled with the stench, blood and
screams of slaughtered animals (hence rue de la Grande-Boucherie, today’s
Avenue Victoria, rue de la Triperie, a small section at the beginning of rue SaintDenis). The site of today’s Théatre de la Ville (in the 4th arrondissement) was a

maze of foul alleys, bearing such evocative names as rue de la Tuerie (carnage),
de I’Ecorcherie (skinning)... Another maze of dark alleys lay north of the square,

the realm of cut-throats, villains and felons; even more threateningly to the

authorities — a lair of political opponents and rioters, which determined Napoleon

III’s right-hand man, the Baron Haussmann, to reduce it to ashes. The broad

artery of Boulevard Sébastopol replaced it, securing for the government forces
full control over the rabble. But it was also as a health measure that Haussmann
decided to clean up the area and, while he was about it, to turn it into a fashionable neighbourhood. Hence the new square and its two elegant theatres and the
pompous inauguration of the Théatre du Chatelet in 1862, with a magical performance of Around the World in Eighty Days. But the neighbourhood never attracted the fashionable set. Rather, it was a source of inspiration to the opening lines
of T.S. Eliot’s Wasteland.
Turn right into quai de la Mégisserie and continue to the bridge of Pont-Neuf
through the bustling pet and flower market. The quai is named after the
mégissiers (tanners) who had worked here for hundreds of years, slaughtering
lambs and fowl] and causing great ravage to the Seine. In order to remedy the situation Louis XIV ruled the tanners out of the city, transferring them to the remote
banks of the Biévre in the southern Sth and 13th arrondissements, where they
caused as much damage, but out of his sight. Cross over and retrace your steps
along the picturesque green bookstalls of the bouquinistes. These are a remnant
from the time when the Pont-Neuf was a world of its own, crowded with strollers,

pedlars, acrobats, prostitutes and riff-raff. When the bridge was cleaned up in the
late 18th century, its hucksters spilled over to the quais, eventually settling into
the book trade. Don’t let them distract you from the impressive view of the
Conciergerie across the river, even more spectacular when seen from the bridge
of Pont-au-Change.
Continue along the bridge and onto Boulevard du Palais on Ile de la Cité, the
border line between the Ist and 4th arrondissements. On your right, behind a
beautiful 18th-century wrought-iron gate, is the Palais de Justice, on the site of the
first residence of the kings of France, and before them of the Roman governors.
Above all Julian who in 360 was proclaimed here emperor by his soldiers. Part of


the Roman palace was still standing when the Merovingian kings (the first French
dynasty) returned to the site in the 6th century. It is not quite clear whether Clovis, the founder of the dynasty, lived here, but all his followers did, throughout
the 7th century. There is also evidence of the presence of the Carolingian kings
(the second dynasty) - Pépin le Bref, Charlemagne, Louis le Debonnaire, Charles
le Chauve. With the Norman invasion in the 9th century came total destruction,
and it was not until a century later, once Hugues Capet had secured for himself
and for his descendants the throne of France, that the reconstruction of the palace

was envisaged. It took several generations to complete. In 1298 the extravagant
Philippe le Bel ordered the reconstruction of a new palace, ‘the most beautiful
that anyone in France ever saw’. Its Great Hall has survived and is today’s Salle
des Pas Perdus on the first floor. It was a vaster palace too, which enabled him to

concentrate the administration, treasury and justice of the kingdom in one place.
The Salle des Gens d’Armes

also dates from that time, while the Salle des

Cuisines was added by Jean II le Bon around 1353. Both are open to the public
but must be entered through the quai de l’Horloge.
There was no Boulevard and no wrought-iron gate at the time, but a moat and a
drawbridge (some vestiges of this fortification can be seen in a tunnel at Métro
Cité) secured its defence. These did not prove sufficient during the bloody revolt
led by the provost of merchants, Etienne Marcel in 1357. With Jean II le Bon, the
founder of the Valois dynasty, held captive in England, and reckoning on the support of the English, Etienne Marcel believed he could overthrow the monarchy.
On 22 February the Dauphin (the future Charles V) was sitting with two of his
counsellors when the provost’s men erupted into the palace and slew his counsellors before his very eyes. The Dauphin was unhurt, but the gushing blood of the
victims stained his clothes, an experience he was not going to forget. A prudent
politician, deservedly known as le Sage, he left the palace one night stealthily by
way of the river and moved to the more remote H6tel de Saint-Pol in the Marais,
meanwhile arranging for himself a residence within the safer walls of the Louvre,
where he spent time from 1368 on. The kings of France never returned to the
island and the premises were taken over by the the parliament, then the kingdom’s court of justice.
The entrance to the Palais de Justice and la Sainte-Chapelle is through the
courtyard, la Cour de Mai, so called because a May tree was planted here on May
Day by members of the Basoche, the celebrated community of law students and
clerks. The Basoche was founded in 1303 as a professional association, but it
soon became an entertainment troupe, famous for its satirical performances. The
celebrations of May Day were popular in the Middle Ages, to which testifies a
painting showing the daughter of the Duc de Berry dressed in green as the Queen
of May.


The arcade on the right was the entrance to the Conciergerie before 1825. During the Revolution 2,278 victims of the Revolutionary Tribunal passed through it
to the jeers of delighted tricoteuses huddled on the perron.
The Palais de Justice is open to the public. Miles of underground corridors join
the cells to the judges’ offices, to Commissaire Maigret’s memorable PJ (headquarters) on quai des Orfévres, and also to the courtrooms. You can visit the Salle
des Pas Perdus, where bustling lawyers in their black robes might remind you of
the world of justice as depictedd by cartoonist Honoré Daumier. It dates from the
1870s, the previous one having been burnt down during the Commune.
In the Middle Ages, when this was the Great Hall of the palace, it consisted of

two naves separated by eight pillars. It was a colourful hall, with a black-andwhite chequered floor and polychrome walls. Sumptuous, Gargantuan meals were
served on a huge marble table, which was also used as a stage for mystery plays,
farces and other entertainments in vogue. Nobody seemed to mind the horrific
skins of ferocious animals hanging from the vaulted ceilings; nor the barbaric
goings-on literally next door, in the adjoining prison of the Conciergerie. The
statues of the kings of France stood against the pillars, gloriously painted in azure
and gold - 58 in all by 1618, when a fire burnt down the hall with all its contents.

Even after the monarchy had deserted the palace, each new king had his statue
added to its predecessors, the last one being Henri III, who used the last available

space. The Great Hall led to the parliament hall, also built by Philippe le Bel. In
1502 Fra Giocondo embellished it with a magnificent coffered ceiling which disappeared during the Revolution, when the Revolutionary Tribunal sat here. Today
this is the first chamber of the civil tribunal, restored roughly to its original
aspect, without Giocondo’s ceiling, however, and reduced in size.
The Sainte-Chapelle must be the highlight of this walk. So great is its aura that
it has completely overshadowed the existence of an earlier royal chapel, la
Chapelle Saint-Michel, which was built in the 12th century by Louis VII and
where Philippe-Auguste was baptized. It was still standing in 1781 and has been
commemorated

since across the river, on the Left Bank: the Boulevard, Place,

bridge, quai and fountain of Saint-Michel are all named after it. Admittedly, it
was but a rudimentary rectangular structure with a flat roof, no match for the
bejewelled Sainte-Chapelle, built by Saint Louis to house a piece of the Holy
Cross and the Crown of Thorns. He had bought them from Baudouin II, the last
Emperor of Constantinople, who was in desperate need of funds to defend his
city. The chapel was therefore designed to have the light, lacy aspect of a reliquary. The result was stunningly beyond expectation. It took its architect (Pierre
de Montreuil or, perhaps, Jean de Chelles) barely five years to build a masterpiece of harmonious proportions, delicate grace and equilibrium never attained
before.


Although the silver and gold reliquary containing the crown of thorns was dispatched to the Mint during the Revolution, its contents (whether genuine or not)
have miraculously survived and are now kept at Notre-Dame. Is it that even the
standard-bearers of the Revolutionary ideal did not dare to tamper with the most
holy of Christian symbols? The chapel was not shown the same consideration and
was used first to store flour, then as a depot for the court house archives; by
which time it was so dilapidated that it was put on the market for sale and demolition. In 1847 it still bore an inscription which read: ‘National property, for sale’.
Fortunately, some enlightened souls, aware of the disastrous crime about to be
committed against both art and history, called upon Viollet-le-Duc, Lassus and
other artists to restore the church to its ancient beauty. In 1853 Lassus erected a
new spire preserving the style of its 17th-century predecessor, demolished by a
fire. This is the fifth spire of the Sainte-Chapelle. The stained-glass windows
were likewise restored in the last century, 720 of the 1,134 original scenes having
been preserved: the result is magical, all the more to be cherished when one realizes that on 24 May 1871, barely four years after the completion of the restoration, the Communards had poured petrol over the Sainte-Chapelle, and only failed
to set it on fire for lack of time. Today the magical beauty of the Sainte-Chapelle
is enhanced at night, when chamber music concerts are held by candlelight.
Retrace your steps and turn left into the quai de l’Horloge, named after its clock
tower. The clock was ordered by Charles V around the year 1371 and is the oldest
clock in the capital. It was restored by Henri III, as may be deduced from its Latin
inscription, ‘He who already gave him two crowns will give him a third one’
(Henri III was King of France and Poland; the third crown refers to heaven) and

from the King’s monogram.
At n° 1 quai de |’Horloge is the entrance to the Conciergerie. Originally the seat
of the governor of the King’s palace - hence its name - it became a prison in 1391
and remained so until 1914. Not unlike the modern concierge who supplements
his income at New Year and many other such occasions, the Palace concierge
supplemented his thanks to the vendors who leased the many shops then located
within the Palace walls. In the 15th century the passer-by could still hear the
screams of tortured prisoners in the Tour Bonbec (the most westerly one). During
its restoration in 1828, two oubliettes, communicating with the river and spiked
with iron points, were found in its basement: needless to dwell on the fate of the
prisoners. The name bon-bec (‘prate‘ in the Middle Ages) probably alluded to the
interrogations that took place on the ground floor: a varied spectrum of torture
methods was devised to make the victim confess and denounce his accomplices.
‘Among the notorious prisoners of the Conciergerie in later years were Ravaillac, the assassin of Henri IV; the mass poisoner La Marquise de Brinvilliers
(1630-1676), who had eliminated the better part of her numerous household; and


Cartouche (1693-1721), the most notorious bandit of his age, the terror of Paris.

In order to be admitted into his prestigious gang one had to be proved an expert
cutpurse. Candidates were made to practise on dummies covered with little bells,
until they could strip them without the slightest tinkling. All three prisoners
awaited execution at the Conciergerie.
During the Revolution the Conciergerie boasted an impressive list of illustrious
prisoners awaiting their deaths: Madame Roland, who had supported the Revolution but sided with the Girondins at the wrong time; Marie-Antoinette, who occu-

pied a dreary cell from 2 August to 16 October 1793, when she was taken to the
guillotine on Place de la Révolution (Concorde); later Danton, Robespierre and
Saint-Just were detained here in their turn, Danton and Robespierre occupying the
cells adjacent to the queen’s. Today one visits the Conciergerie for the sake of
French history, but the impressive Gothic halls and kitchen fire-places deserve to
;
be visited for their architectural merit.
dark
the
to
leading
North of these halls was located a section of the prison
prison cells, known as ‘rue de Paris’, so named after the Great Executioner, Mon-

sieur de Paris. This post was held by seven successive generations of the Sanson
family, from 1688 to 1847, transmitted from father to son. Shortly before the
Revolution Louis XVI had set his heart on improving their plight and granted
Charles-Henri Sanson an annual fee of 16,000 pounds plus 2,000 crowns for the

upkeep of the scaffold and pillory, undoubting he would become his own executioner! Being a royalist, Charles-Henri had no desire to carry out that deed. On 15
August 1792 he had been arrested as ‘the despot’s employee’; with each execution he would be dispatched to Place du Carrousel, where the guillotine was then
erected, and afterwards would be taken back to his cell. At first, executions were

few, but when the guillotine began to work at full swing and his expert hand
could not be dispensed with, he was released. However, he retired soon after he

had executed his sovereign. His son Henri held the position during the Terror, and
throughout the following precarious regimes, until 1840, well into the reign of
Louis-Philippe. It seemed extraordinary to the film-maker Jean Renoir, that his
own grandfather (the painter’s father) should have known Henri’s chief assistant
during the Terror, a man who had lived at the time of periwigs and breeches and
who “may have passed Voltaire and Benjamin Franklin in the street, heard
Mozart play the harpsichord, and attended performances of Monsieur Beaumarchais!” Old Renoir met the chief assistant in 1845, the year the family had moved
up to Paris from Limoges, and when the last Sanson held the position. The two
men befriended each other — as a tailor, Renoir’s father shared with the latter the
pleasure of doing a good job. “After all, they were two good workmen: one cut
out cloth, the other cut off heads just as conscientiously.”
As you come out, continue along quai de |’ Horloge and take the first turn to the


left, rue de Harlay. You will reach the triangular Place Dauphine, one of Paris’s
romantic gems. Created by Henri IV in 1607 in honour of his son the Dauphin
and future Louis XIII, it was enclosed on all sides by arcaded brick-and-stone

houses, similarly to its contemporary Place des Vosges in the Marais. Bankers
and tradesmen could carry on their negotiations undisturbed, on a site conveniently located only a few steps away from the Louvre. In the 18th century talented
young artists, unable as yet to exhibit in the official Salons, were given an opportunity to hold an annual exhibition here. Today both business transactions and the
art trade have moved to other parts and Place Dauphine is a haven of peace surrounded by small boutiques and pretty eating-places, a provincial nest in the heart
of Paris. The restaurant Paul perpetuates this atmosphere, both on its terrace in
fine weather and indoors otherwise. Its food is succulent, though not inexpensive.
From Place Dauphine, do not omit to cross the Pont-Neuf for a glimpse of the
lovely garden at the tip of the island, le Square du Vert-Galant, just below the
Vert-Galant’s equestrian statue. On warm days the garden is popular with romantic lovers, on hot days it is invaded by too many sunbathers. In any kind of weather the view of the Hotel de la Monnaie (the Mint) and the dome of the Institut de
France on the left, the Louvre on the right, and the Pont-des-Arts ahead, is unforgettable: by night it is an enchantment, like Place Dauphine itself, lit up by its
lamp-posts like a shining diamond. No wonder such Parisians as Simone Signoret

and Yves Montand chose to make it their home.

FROM THE SAMARITAINE TO THE PALAIS-ROYAL
