with his mother an insalubrious, draughty flat at n° 10 rue du Gros-Chenet
(today’s rue Sentier in the 2nd arr.). She took ill in June and died wretchedly on 3
July. Mozart gives a heart-rending account of this sorrowful event in his Correspondence. Resentful and contemptuous of Parisian society, he left the city the
following September never to return.
The funeral service for the famous fable writer Jean de La Fontaine was also
held here; so was Moliére’s, though in riotous conditions: it took the intervention
of the King to persuade the clergy of Saint-Eustache to give this parishioner a
Christian burial - the clergy did not like ‘stage men’ and did not admit them into
its fold. All the more so because those ill-mannered louts would turn up in front
of the church during Sunday morning mass to announce their forthcoming play otherwise more exciting than mass - thus inevitably turning many souls away
from God.
Because of its remarkable acoustics, the names of several illustrious musicians
are associated with the church of Saint-Eustache. In 1855 Berlioz attended a performance of his uplifting Te Deum by 950 musicians and in 1886, Liszt’s majestic
Grand Mass was premiered here, also in the presence of its composer. The
famous choir of Saint-Eustache was directed by no other than Charles Gounod,
whose most outstanding pupil was a child by the name of Auguste Renoir.
Gounod had built great hopes in young Renoir, who, however, felt a deeper urge
to use his hands...
The strong musical tradition is still maintained and the church houses one of the
most fabulous organs in Paris, the work of the Dutch establishment Peter Jan Van
Den Heuvel. It was installed in 1989, while its beautiful case was designed in the

19th century by Victor Baltard, the architect of Les Halles. Equipped with both a
mechanical and an electronic transmission system, this is the biggest double
transmission organ in the world, most suitable for the performances of 20th-century music. As you make your way out through the northern aisle, you will notice
in the wall a colourful niche, depicting the life of the central market of Les Halles
- a touching tribute to its workers, the ‘good people of Paris’.
Outside the church, rue du Jour, rue Montmartre and rue Montorgueil have
retained some of this atmosphere. Although trendy boutiques are gradually taking
over, they have not as yet ousted the colourful displays of food that spill into the
streets (mainly on rue Montorgueil), ravishing the eye and delighting the palate.
(Food shops are closed between 1 and 4pm, on Sunday afternoons and all day


Monday). At n° 6 rue Coquillére Le Pied de Cochon has preserved its Belle
Epoque setting and still serves onion soup.
Retrace your steps to Porte du Jour and walk down the steps into the New
Forum, in front of the rotunda of the Bourse de Commerce, of which more later.

You could spend endless days at the Vidéothéque where the entire memory of
Paris is preserved in video archives (both fiction and documentary), appropriately
situated on the site where the organic heart of Paris once beat. To experience this
vicariously, the viewer need only press a button and the city comes to life on the
screen. Of late, private homes have had links installed to the Vidéothéque, sparing the owners the bother of going out, while at the same time disconnecting them

from their real environment.
Next to the Vidéothéque, le Parc Océanique Cousteau is yet another world of
visual illusion. In this gigantic aquarium, the video has replaced both the ocean’s
waters and its creatures so as to prevent the fish languishing in boredom in an
artificial environment. The expensive technology entailed accounts, perhaps, for
the exorbitant admission fees. The receipts, however, are used for the protection
and improvement of the quality of life on our planet. The gift shop next door is
run by the Cousteau Society, for the same cause. The New Forum also houses an
auditorium, a snooker club and a large swimming-pool. A greenhouse with lush
tropical plants helps to enhance this environment of artificial Edens.
Back in the fresh air retrace your steps to the Old Forum along rue Berger. Turn
right into rue des Prouvaires which will lead you to rue Saint-Honoré. A major
artery in pre-Revolutionary days, leading to the Louvre and to the Palais-Royal,
the street is still lined with 17th- and 18th-century houses. For a brief period it
was the sinister route of the tumbrils, on their way from the Conciergerie prison
to the guillotine on Place de la Révolution (Concorde). Thus on 16 October 1793,

the painter David was posted on the corner house balcony of rue des Prouvaires

of Marieand 54 rue Saint-Honoré, on your right, from where he had a good view

he
Antoinette carried to her doom, her hands tied behind her back, a tragic sight
é.
Saint-Honor
rue
into
right
Turn
captured in his shattering portrait of the Queen.
closed his
On the day of Marie-Antoinette’s execution, the apothecary at n° 93
trading
was
apothecary
earlier
An
mourning.
of
shop Au bourdon d’Or as a sign
de la
rue
ng
neighbouri
the
on
stabbed
was
IV
Henri
here on 14 May 1610, when
saved.
be
not
could
but
here
rushed
was
Ferronnerie. The King
the Fronde,
Continue to the corner of rue Vauvilliers where the first episode of
began in August
the revolt against Louis XIV’s mentor and Minister, Mazarin,
your right, was the birth1648. The corner house at 2 rue Sauval further down on

hed and replaced by the
‘place of Moliére in 1622. The house was later demolis
n° 115 was situated the
At
1839.
in
one still standing today, where Wagner stayed
to have obtained the
d
believe
is
Fersen
pharmacy where the Swedish Marshal


invisible ink for his correspondence with Marie-Antoinette during her sequestration at the Conciergerie. A close friend of the royal family, Fersen had tried to
help them escape. Evidence of the existence of thepharmacy goes back to 1715.
Retrace your steps and continue across rue des Halles, Place Marguerite de
Navarre and walk into rue de la Ferronnerie, today a wide trendy street lined with
clothes shops which cater to the young clientele of Les Halles. However, in the
13th century, this was the stronghold of the iron trade after which it was named, a
natrow, congested street, cluttered with blacksmiths’ and iron mongers’ stalls. It
was still much the same on 14 May 1610, when the royal coach was held up with
the King aboard, on his way from the Louvre to the Arsenal, near the Bastille,

where his minister Sully was residing. The King was absorbed in a letter when a
man named Ravaillac jumped on to the coach and stabbed him. The assassin was
declared mentally deranged but was nevertheless sentenced to be quartered on
Place de Gréve (today’s Place de 1’Hétel-de-Ville), a sentence speedily carried
out, thirteen days after the crime.
This was not the first murder attempt made on the life of the King; for while his

early amorous adventures had gained him the affectionate nickname of le Vert
Galant (the amorous youth), the charm faded as he grew older. The population
resented the fact that he had dozens of bastard children scattered throughout the
kingdom, which all but plunged France in civil strife yet again. Furthermore, he
had expressed his intention to marry his favourite, Gabrielle - an outrage to the
raison d’état. Only the latter’s premature death prevented this infamy. In the
kingdom of France, as Femme Ladoucette had expressed it in her letter to the

Queen, one separated the sheep from the goats.
Turn left into rue Sainte-Opportune, past rue des Innocents to Place Joachim
Du Bellay. Its impressive fountain, the only Renaissance fountain in Paris, was
designed by Pierre Lescot and sculpted by Jean Goujon in 1549, the greatest
sculptor of his time. Known as the Fontaine des Innocents, it commemorates the
old cemetery of Paris, the cimetiére des Innocents, that was here until 1787/8,
when it was replaced by a colourful fruit, vegetable and herb market. The fountain, however, stood at the corner of rue Saint-Denis and the present rue Berger at
the time, against the church of Saints-Innocents which was demolished when the

cemetery closed down.
The fountain had three arcades and a balcony at the time, where prominent figures took shelter during royal processions. Indeed, it was inaugurated on 16 June
1549, on Henri II’s solemn entry into the city. The market was demolished in
1855, the fountain shifted, altered and restored a couple of times, and today its
dashing waters, the crowds of young people who gather around it, the street per-

formers and the sunny terrace of Café Costes across the Square, make this the
most lively spot of the Forum.

{|

Goo a


E

\


YELL

-

(ee

-

vhj b;

¥4
>

"

Vey

AN

SNS

:
tR

|

T atYT

A

NY
NE

Ca

.,

cg

jell) a
peaOri

r


Say

i

‘

fy

iw:

Jian

AE

“J

RENN ae
RS.f

Reese:
©
PeBX
Bo

ge

SQ)


SS " ‘ea

=

Le
AN

La Fontaine des Innocents

SNe

hie = Ary\)
ds

*
=

\ e

.

PAILS A

SNS N\A

2NSQ

/ s ESPON

| AR) ~AR en

=

z


ES

ae

Ye

NSA

79) GN Mee

SS

kaw. Sa

Se7M

SS

:

Sees
aS:
SES
Se

:

San
X

Yiog ny

4 pt

hy

ay


