ur exploration of the southern part of the arrondissement starts in front of La
Closerie des Lilas, the café on the corner of Boulevard du Montparnasse and
Avenue de |’Observatoire. Despite its name, La Closerie has never had lilacs, not
even when it was a stopping-place for the stage-coaches on their way to
Fontainebleau. Instead it had plane trees, providing shade to the customers of the
modest guinguette (an outdoor tavern) that first opened here in 1853. The lilacs
belonged to another establishment across the Boulevard, from which La Closerie
borrowed the name.
In 1905 La Closerie des Lilas was put on the map, when Montparnasse was
launched from here as the centre of gravity of the world of art. The idea was the
brainchild of two men, André Salmon and Paul Fort, who, launched a new maga-

zine called Vers et Prose, and at the same time sent out invitations to artists to
come to La Closerie and help promote that project. Endowed with overflowing
imagination, André Salmon claimed to have sent out 23,000 letters, Paul Fort, a
more modest 10,000. The numbers were probably nearer hundreds, but it is of no

consequence, for the goal was achieved, whether through their initiative or not:
Montparnasse did become the world’s centre of art, and La Closerie des Lilas,
swarming with customers sipping absinth, became the centre of gravity of Montparnasse - not that it had been overlooked in the 19th century, when Baudelaire,

Verlaine, Strindberg, Oscar Wilde and many others frequented the original
guinguette, conveniently situated on the edge of the Latin Quarter. It was on the
occasion of the 1900 Universal Exhibition that it was refurbished and took on its
present aspect, but the main café terrace then faced the Avenue de |’ Observatoire.
In 1912 Paul Fort was elected ‘Prince des Poétes’ and thereafter every Tuesday night he presided over an assembly of up to 200 writers, painters, musicians,
critics and journalists, who converged on the place from all over, even from
Montmartre. Francis Carco, Dorgéles, Léon-Paul Fargue, Paul Claudel, Picasso,


cs

74NINGVZ


ki|

ay iS2

Lf

(os

“A L3ZIVaS § INDIHdWAOOLAVD NOILVWSINW3a

a YNosawav>)
OSSVDId “Id


Max Jacob, Apollinaire, all engaged in passionate discussions here into the early
hours of the morning, in a jovial hubbub, washed down with green absinth. Paul
Fort, all in black, contrasted with the rainbow-coloured Delaunays. Alfred Jarry
would turn up with a pistol. On one occasion he drew it, pointed it at the mirror
and pressed... Turning to a horrified young woman he said, “Now that the mirror
[a pun on ‘glace’ meaning both ‘mirror’ and ‘ice’] is broken, let us talk!” When
the last customers were pushed out at 2 am, they would head for the Boul’ Mich’
(Boulevard Saint-Michel), where their heated discussions continued. By 1912 the
entire colony of painters had also invaded the place, including Bonnard, Vlaminck, Derain, Léger and Modigliani. The latter was engaged in a fiery but shortlived relationship with the English poetess Beatrice Hastings, who arrived here
dressed up as a Louis XV ‘shepherdess’. But these were the last hours of glory of
La Closerie des Lilas: within a year the colony had migrated to a new centre of
gravity at the newly-opened Carrefour Vavin, one block further west.
When Hemingway, back from Canada with the newborn Bumby, discovered
the Closerie in 1924, he found it quiet and melancholy, as depicted by Paul Fort
in Café des ombres; but this suited Hemingway perfectly: he lived a few houses
down, at n° 113 rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, over a sawmill, and came here to
escape the noise and concentrate on his writing, notably on his novel The Sun
Also Rises. He did, however, socialise and meet friends, among them Scott
Fitzgerald, who asked him to read his manuscript of The Great Gatsby, and John

Dos Passos to whom he read parts of his own manuscript of The Torrents of
Spring.
Outside the Closerie stands the statue of Maréchal Ney, Prince of the Moskova,

one of France’s greatest heroes during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars,
affectionately nicknamed ‘le Brave des braves’. During the Restoration, however,
the authorities never forgave him for having joined forces with Napoleon during
his Hundred Day return. The Tribunal of Peers, assembled at the Palais du Luxembourg, accused him of high treason and sentenced him to death, despite a brilliant defence by the renowned lawyers, Dupin and Berryer. On 7 December 1815,
Ney was led to the present corner of Avenue de |’Observatoire and Boulevard du
Port-Royal and shot by a firing squad, to the horror of many. His statue by Rude
was inaugurated under a different regime, on 7 December 1853. It was erected on
the site of his execution (level with n° 43 of Avenue de l’ Observatoire), but with

the opening of the railway station of Port-Royal it was moved to its present location, where Hemingway liked to contemplate it on the way to the Closerie: “my
old friend, the statue of Marshal Ney with his sword out.”
Before turning left into rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, continue north along the
Avenue de |’Observatoire for a glimpse at Carpeaux’s impressive fountain, The
Four Corners of the World, standing in the centre of the the Marco Polo Garden.


Walk into rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs. Today, the sawmill and n° 113 are
both gone, and the street numbers now jump directly from n° 111 to to n° 115 bis.
When Hemingway found the flat he informed Ezra Pound of it in a letter dated 10
February 1924: “We have trouved (found) an appt at 113 Notre Dame des
Champs...” The street began originally as a winding country lane, leading to a
chapel by the same name. At the time of Catherine de Medici it was used for the
transport of stones from the quarries south of Paris to the building site of the Tuileries, her new palace under construction. In the second half of the 19th century,

when artists, writers and professors began to move to these countrified parts on
the edge of the Latin Quarter, rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, lying in an area dotted with convents, assured them respectability. And yet, not much earlier Balzac
had reported that “robbery was the least of dangers one encountered there.” To
the Right Bank bourgeois the entire area that lay across the river was a den of
vice, and even as late as the early 20th century, Madeleine Renaud’s mother was
horrified when her daughter crossed the Seine to join the troupe at the Odéon theatre. As a matter of fact, the street was full of honest people living ‘bourgeoisement’, side by side with nuns and a lot of cheerful schoolchildren. At this end of
the street, at n° 109, is still the entrance to the prestigious Ecole Alsacienne,

which was founded in 1874. Emphasizing the humanities, openness and tolerance, but without sacrificing high academic targets, the school attracts members
of the intelligentsia and of the arts who find here an alternative to the rigid education offered elsewhere. The school opened in Strasbourg (hence its name) as a
Protestant establishment and was founded partly to resist Catholic hegemony. In
the early days André Gide was among its students. At the other end of the street,
at n° 22, the traditional Catholic Collége Stanislas is more in keeping with the
values and aspirations of the average French middle classes. A well-known guidebook to the 6th arrondissement, published in 1986, devotes one line to the Ecole
Alsacienne, but is effusive in its praise for the Collége Stanislas, concluding with

a flourish: “How many of its pupils have suffered its harsh discipline which
shapes the best minds!” Among its pupils was writer Roger Wild, who remembered having served at mass one day with a 14-year-old boy named Charles de
Gaulle. This was back in 1904, the year de Gaulle passed his baccalauréat!
Walk into rue Le Verrier on your right, just for the pleasure of seeing some
attractive houses, where fashionable artists lived at the end of the 19th century.

Back on rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, n° 86 was the last Parisian home of the
American painter Whistler, who lived here from 1892 until his return to America
10 years later. His studio on the top floor offered a magnificent view of the Luxembourg Gardens, which largely compensated for the seven-floor climb up the
narrow, twisting staircase. Turn right into rue Joseph-Bara, the mecca of Montparnasse in the 1920s, specifically n° 3 on your right. Its agglomeration of artists’


studios climbs up erratically from street-level to the roof, in an otherwise bourgeois street. The top studios even have sunny terraces overlooking an enchanting
courtyard at the back, nowadays barred to outsiders. Its typical pitched-grey roof
and its attic, even its crooked gutter, add to the quaint charm. If the facade is
cleaned up, it will retrieve the bright fresh aspect it had in 1913, when the painter
Kisling moved here. His studio was in the attic under the roof, romantically picturesque, yet uncomfortable in hot or cold weather. However, this was luxury

compared with what most fellow artists had to put up with across the Boulevard
Montparnasse, in the 14th or 15th arrondissements. His attic became the social
hub of Montparnasse, especially during the crazy years: Modigliani, Zborowski,
Cocteau, Radiguet, Max Jacob and Pascin were all present when he threw parties.
Pascin, Zborowski and Modigliani were living in the same house (Modigliani
having been put up by his art dealer Zborowski, so that he should have where to
work), and only had to climb up the stairs. André Salmon, on the other hand,
moved out of n° 3 when he got married and settled with his wife across the street,
on the ground floor of n° 6, then a recent building (1892). It still has a charming,
sculpted, curly head of some Greek divinity over its entrance door, framed by
branches of olive trees. Climbing the stairs to get to Kisling was no problem but
tottering down after the wild parties was a different matter. Kisling was once
heard to complain the next day: “They have peed on my sketches!” But he was a
good-natured fellow, full of joie de vivre and everyone loved him for it.
Turn left into rue d’Assas. Across the street are the botanic gardens of the science faculty of the University and a picturesque rustic brick house that now
belongs to it, reminiscent of a rural past. Continue to n° 100 bis on your left, the
home and studio of the sculptor Ossip Zadkine, another oasis converted into a
museum. Zadkine hated the life of destitution he was forced to live during his
first years in Paris, and never idealized it. Fifteen years later, in 1924, he could

afford to buy this picturesque, provincial house, tucked away behind the
respectable rue d’Assas, from where he never budged. The place is a joy, richly
endowed with the works he has bequeathed to the city of Paris and with its
charming garden filled with the song of birds.
Retrace your steps along rue Joseph-Bara and turn right into rue Notre-Damedes-Champs, then left into rue de Chevreuse. At n° 6 are the superb premises of
Reid Hall, so called because it was originally sponsored by Mrs Whitelaw Reid,
the wife of the American ambassador to France in the late 19th century. At the
time this was the American University Women’s Paris Club, a hall of residence
for American women students, usually art students. Today it welcomes American
students from various universities on a programme in Paris. The exquisite premises and garden must be the envy of many fine hotels and are open to the visitor
who wishes to look around. At the corner of rue de Chevreuse and Boulevard du


Montparnasse, further on, is the restaurant Le Batifol, part of a chain that tries to
maintain traditions by serving regular French dishes. However, it is a very pale
substitute for the celebrated Jockey, the shrine of Montparnasse night-life
between 1923 and 1927. The Jockey was decorated to look like a Wild West
saloon. Nobody minded its cramped space, its cluttered mess - its cowboy-turnedpianist was an excellent performer and the two Hawaiian guitarists swept everyone into a langorous dance of blues. And Kiki, the most famous model and
female character of Montparnasse, subjugated them with her harsh grating voice,
as she sang her own composition which began as follows:
Un apache avec sa lame
M’a ouvert le ventre en long;
(“An ‘Apache’ with his blade/Slit my belly open
lengthwise;”)

One could not exactly say that her verse soared to great poetic heights, but in
that smoke- and alcohol-impregnated atmosphere everyone was thrilled. After the
theatre shining limousines ejected the smart set in their evening garb, who came
over to rub shoulders with bohemia.
Turn right into Boulevard du Montparnasse, then right again into rue de la
Grande-Chaumiére, named after a fabulous 19th-century open-air dance hall,
across the Boulevard (in the 14th arr.). This little street became the indispensable
school of the artists of Montparnasse, where they were allowed the freedom of
expression denied them at the Beaux-Arts school, specifically at the Académie de
la Grande-Chaumiére at n° 14 and at Colarossi at n° 10. La Grande-Chaumiére
was the most famous of Montparnasse’s art schools and when it opened in 1902
Whistler and Rodin were among its teachers. Later, all the Russian and Polish

members of the Ecole de Paris received guidance here under Bourdelle. Furthermore, a 20-minute tuition session could be had for a modest 50 centimes. A
‘models’ fair’ was held every Monday on the corner of Boulevard du Montparnasse and rue de la Grande-Chaumiére,

where artists came to choose models

among a varied population of Italians from Calabria or Apulia (their elders in the
19th century had done likewise on Place Pigalle). While the men posed for allegorical figures that embodied contemporary values such as ‘Work’, the women
were models for the ‘Holy Virgin’, ‘Virgin and Child’, but also for ‘the Birth of
Venus’ and ‘Bathers’. There was a fixed price of 5 francs for a three-hour session,

a luxury that only the established artists could afford; struggling artists from Eastern Europe had to content themselves with girls picked up on café terraces, which
was not necessarily a bad deal. A generation later Alberto Giacomeiti and
Fernand Léger numbered among the Academy’s teachers.
The Villa des Artistes hotel at n° 9 has been entirely renovated to suit a well-to-


do clientele, offering air-conditioning, cable TV and a night valet, as well as a
charming garden with a fountain at the back. The destitute artists who occupied
its once run-down premises, then called Libéria, are remembered

only in the

name and the palette it uses as a logo. The unobtrusive Hotel des Académies,
which you passed by at n° 13, has retained more authenticity. That rue de la
Grande-Chaumiére has preserved its artistic atmosphere due to Pierre and Iréne
Charpentier who saved the Académie de la Grande-Chaumiére by buying it in
1958, since when it has expanded into the neighbouring rue Jules-Chaplin (n° 2).
The street’s old shops have accordingly also survived and continue to supply
paints, brushes, frames and canvasses. However, the Polish restaurant Wadja, the
last remaining ‘canteen’ in Montparnasse, where Kisling used to dine for 3 francs
50, has recently closed down.
Back on rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs, turn left. The attractive building at n° 73
was the home of the painter Othon Friesz between 1914 and 1949, when he died.
His huge studio had previously been occupied by Bouguereau, a highly-regarded
Pompier* painter and teacher at the conservative Beaux-Arts, who must have
turned in his grave when his home was taken over by one of those wild painters
known as fauves (=literally ‘wild animals’)! Continue to rue Vavin and turn left.
Ahead is a lovely street junction, which has almost preserved its old setting intact.
Four benches and six trees are neatly disposed around this provincial ‘village
square’, with its Wallace fountain and old street-lamp. Even traffic has been kept
within bearable limits. And although some elegant shops are making an appearance little by little, the food shops, café and tabac still predominate and add to the
local colour of the place. A striking feature is the extraordinary building at n° 26,
put up by the architect Sauvage in 1912. Entirely covered with white and blue
ceramic tiles, like those that used to decorate the Métro stations, it has been
dubbed ‘Carreaux Métro’. The café terraces are a fine place to enjoy a truly
Parisian atmosphere, but not before walking up to Dominique, the Russian restaurant at n° 19 rue Bréa and to La Rotonde at the corner of Boulevard du Montparnasse and Boulevard Raspail.
After 60 odd years, Dominique is still going strong and is still in the hands of
the original family, although the decorations in the window have been somewhat
stylized of late, and the Russian dolls are arrayed in a more clinical fashion than
hitherto. The restaurant was created to serve the ‘white’ Russian community that
streamed to Montparnasse after the October Revolution. The Rotonde started as a
shoe shop, which was bought by Libion in 1911, then turned into a café. Libion
loved his ever-hungry artist clientele and pretended not to notice when a croissant
or the tip of a baguette was spirited away, nor did he mind his customers sitting
*Uncreative academic painter in the second half of the 19th century


for hours in front of an empty cup. He even took out subscriptions to foreign
newspapers on their behalf. On the other hand, he asked them to bring him their
paintings, which he hung on the walls, thus creating this special atmosphere that
soon distinguished Montparnasse. When, however, he extended his protection to
the Russian Revolutionaries, such as Lenin and Trotsky, and refused to play
informer to the police on the eve of the Russian Revolution, he brought about his
own ruin. The police, looking for an excuse to close down his café, found one
when they caught him buying American cigarettes for his ‘artistes’. He was also
heavily fined. One day Libion was not at his place behind the bar: he had sold the
Rotonde and moved to Denfert-Rochereau further south. Libion died, a broken
man, not long after his protégé, Modigliani, and cheated out of the paintings the
latter had given him. The Rotonde was never the same again, just another café.

rue Vavin


