THE 5th ARRONDISSEMENT
omantic myths of Left Bank intelligentsia revolving around the venerable
RR Sstome are brutally shattered on the Boulevard Saint-Michel, the main
artery of the Latin Quarter, where the 5th and 6th arrondissements meet.
The Sorbonne is still there, just off the Boulevard, but the forlorn chime of its
chapel bell, which has punctuated the studies of generations of scholars, is
drowned out by the din of the traffic and the general hubbub of this age. Nor do
the young people who stream past Place de la Sorbonne ever bother to glance at
its 17th-century chapel and its graceful dome. The proliferation of junk clothes
and junk food outlets along the Boulevard cater more appropriately to their needs,
foreshadowing yet another decline in the long history of the 5th arrondissement —
the longest in mainland Paris — a history of spectacular achievements and of dramatic setbacks.
It began during the Roman occupation of Gaul, when the growing population of
the Ile de la Cité spilled over on to the left bank, the right bank being covered
with marshes. Roman villas appeared on the slopes of Mount Leucotitius (now
the Montagne Sainte-Geneviéve), where the air was purer, soon to be followed by
more dwellings along the cardo (the north-south axis, now rue Saint-Jacques) that
led to Orléans. A secondary cardo ran roughly along what is now Boulevard
Saint-Michel, while the two decumani (east-west axes) ran along what is now rue
des Ecoles and rue Cujas.
By the end of the second century — a period of peace (pax romana) — this
became a desirable neighbourhood of beauty and luxury, as shown by archeological finds (e.g. the marble and polychrome mosaics in rue de la Harpe, the frescoes
in rue Amyot), some of which can be seen at Musée Carnavalet. At the foot of the
hill, where rue Soufflot now runs, lay the Forum, the political, economic and religious centre. The northern baths were those of Cluny (corner of Boulevard SaintMichel and Boulevard Saint-Germain); the eastern baths were on the site of the
present Collége de France at Place Marcel Berthelot; and the southern baths, also
known as the Forum baths as they were located in its vicinity, were on the corner
of the present rue Gay-Lussac and rue Le Goff. An aqueduct, which ran all the
way from the Rungis basin (near Orly airport) through parts of today’s 13th and
14th arr. (the Montsouris neighbourhood, rue de la Tombe Issoire, rue SaintJacques, etc.) supplied them with water. Sections of the aqueduct have been dis-

covered on rue Saint-Jacques, between rue Malebranche and rue Royer-Collard.
To the west, on rue Racine (now 6th arr.), was the semicircular amphitheatre
overlooking the Seine; the imposing arena, the second largest in the whole of


Gaul after that of Nimes, faced the east so as to take advantage of the natural eastfacing slope and the setting sun, which lit up the podium, and, in the background,
the pastoral Biévre meandering through green meadows towards the Seine.
The Germanic invasions of the mid-3rd century pushed the local population
back into the safety of the Ile de la Cité, not to return to the ravaged left bank
until a century later and never to enjoy its previous luxury. Rural dwellings now
clustered around the hill, vineyards grew on its sunny slopes. Outsiders of a new
creed, the early Christians, were arriving from the south and contributing to
undermine the stability of Rome. (A Christian cemetery has been discovered in
the area around the junction of rue Saint-Jacques and Boulevard Port-Royal.)
Rome was soon to crumble in any case - the sweeping waves of Goths and Vandals of the early 5th century proved irresistible, and in 451 Attila the Hun was at
the gates of Paris with his 700,000 men. Once more the terrified population was_
ready to flee the left bank, but the sweet and gentle Geneviéve bolstered up their
courage, prophesying that Paris would be spared.
In the 17th century Geneviéve was romanticized as a shepherdess, but the real
Geneviéve was in fact born in Nanterre to a well-to-do Roman father and a Greek
mother, although she did lead an ascetic life devoted to the poor and the sick. As
she also performed miracles and as her prophecy concerning Attila came true, she
naturally acquired a great following and eventually became the patron saint of
Paris. Moreover, since it was under her guidance, as much as through the influence of his wife Clotilde, that King Clovis converted to Chrisianity and made

Paris his capital. These were the two decisive factors in bringing about the unity
of France, which was to be marked with a Christian temple to God, again under
the auspices of Geneviéve. The basilica of Saint-Pierre-Saint-Paul, built on top of
the hill, on the site of the present parish church of Saint-Etienne-du-Mont, was
thus the nucleus of what was to become the abbey and borough of SainteGenevieve and, more broadly, of the Latin Quarter and the future arrondissement.

It was completed in 510, just in time for its crypt to receive the remains of King
Clovis, who died that year, aged 46, and of Geneviéve, who died in 512, aged 89.
When Queen Clotilde died in 543, aged 70, she was also buried in this crypt. By.
sheltering the remains of these three figures who had shaped ancient Gaul into the
united, Christian kingdom of France, with Paris as its capital, the basilica is also
in a sense the most important historic and spiritual shrine in Paris. For generations
the kings of France valued this symbol of the legitimacy of their rule and each
went to pray at Geneviéve’s tomb after his coronation.
Geneviéve’s reliquary, which remained the object of the utmost veneration up
to the French Revolution, was fashioned in 630 by the famous Saint Eloi, the
patron of goldsmiths and later minister and treasurer to King Dagobert I. Chiselled in gold and studded with gems, it lay in the stone sarcophagus of Genevieve.


In times of invasion it was hidden outside the city; in times of floods, epidemics
and other calamities, following a day of penitence and fasting, it would be carried
in a procession to Notre-Dame through streets decked with multicoloured drapery
and strewn with flowers, to the continuous chiming of all the city’s church bells.
The story goes that when the reliquary was brought out in 1130 because of a raging epidemic, all were cured but three sceptics who would not prostrate themselves when it passed by and therefore died. By the year 1725 there had been 114
such processions. Needless to say, so much handling of the delicate reliquary was
bound to damage it over the centuries. Also, various sovereigns found it flattering
to their egos to have it redecorated. Thus, when in 1625 it left its original resting
place in the crypt for its present position behind the altar, it was heavily bejewelled, bearing the marks of the reign of Marie de Medici; nothing was left of the
artistry of Saint Eloi.
In November 1793 the reliquary was stripped of its precious stones and sent to
the Mint to be melted down. Against all logic, the remains of Saint Geneviéve
were burnt on Place de Gréve (4th arr.), and the ashes thrown into the Seine,

watched by a mob of gleeful tricoteuses. In one fell swoop, the French Revolution outdid the formidable Norsemen and destroyed twelve hundred years of
devotion to the virtuous Geneviéve, who had fed the poor, restored sight to the

blind and even life to a dead man, a national figure who had embodied precisely
the same ideals as those of the Revolution, a heroine as patriotic as Jeanne d’ Arc!
Somehow, the wooden sculptures of the reliquary have survived (now in the
Louvre), although they have lost their arms. In 1803 a fragment of the Saint’s sarcophagus was discovered in the crypt. It was put into a reliquary and placed, like
the original one, above the altar of the church of Saint-Etienne-du-Mont, where it

still is.
The Revolution also swept away the great abbey that bore her name, founded in
the 7th century by a group of monks who came to settle next to her holy shrine.
Only the square church tower on rue Clovis remains in situ. The few other surviving vestiges are now part of the Lycée Henri IV: the medieval vaults, kitchens
and refectory, the cloister, the grand staircase dating from the 18th century and
the dome of the abbey’s magnificent library. The abbey was a great place of
learning, closely bound up with the University in the Middle Ages. Its abbot
therefore also held the post of chancellor and presented the University diplomas
to graduates. Fortunately most of the volumes of its library were rescued by the
monks at the time of the Revolution and are now preserved at the Bibliothéque
Sainte-Geneviéve, at 10 Place du Panthéon.
In the 13th century the Latin Quarter became the centre of learning not just of
France but of the whole of Western Europe. The Norse attacks of the second half
of the 9th century forced the terrified population back to the original cradle of the

Ile de la Cité; when they ventured out again a hundred years later, they headed for
the right bank, sealing its destiny as the economic nerve of the city (see chapter
on 4th arr.). Philippe-Auguste had wished to see~equal development on both
banks and in 1210 he financed the extension of the city walls to the left bank in
order to attract new settlers, but the bourgeois and merchants who lived near the
harbour of Place de Gréve refused to move. The religious orders, by contrast,

were happy to settle on the left bank, which was rich in fertile land and also carried shrines and memories from early Christian days. Since education was then
entirely in the hands of religious institutions, it was on the left bank that learning
developed and thrived. By 1115 a renowned centre of learning had been established in the abbey of Saint-Victor (on the site of the present University of Paris
VI and VII at Jussieu) by its first abbot, the eminent theologian Gilduin, who had
moved here from Notre-Dame and was later succeeded by Pierre Abélard. In
Rabelais’ story, set three centuries later, the hero, Pantagruel, comes to study in ©
Paris and naturally visits the world-renowned library of Saint-Victor; on the eve
of the French Revolution, this contained nearly 40,000 volumes and over 20,000

manuscripts.
The University was established barely a decade after the completion of the left
bank section of the city walls. The first official written reference to the
Universitas Magistrorum et Scolarium Parisiensium dates from 1221. At the
beginning it did not have a permanent home and while its headquarters shifted
from the church of Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre to the convents of rue Saint-Jacques,

the teaching took place in the open air, on Place Maubert, and mainly on rue de
Fouarre near by. The teachers stood on wooden trestles, while the students
brought along their own fodder to sit on (fowarre in old French), hence the name
of the street which soon became synonymous with the University as a whole.
Brawls, uproar and political and religious agitation were also daily occurrences in
rue de Fouarre, to such extent that in 1358 the Regent and future Charles V had
the street barred with chains on both sides. The neighbourhood taverns, low dives

and brothels supplied this rowdy population with cheap wines fit to ‘boil the potted heads of wolves’. This was the Latin Quarter that Francois Villon roamed a
century later and of which Rabelais gave a saucy account. Placing fried turds in
graduates’ hoods and pinning fox-tails or hare’s ears to students’ buttocks were
favourite pranks. Nor was the rest of the population spared — shop signs would
disappear, hysterical dogs would run about with pots and pans tied to their tails,
maidservants were pestered or worse... Above all, the church was a special target
among these roguish, anticlerical, even heretical youths.
Nonetheless, the Latin Quarter was first and foremost a prestigious seat of
knowledge. In order to attract newcomers, Philippe-Auguste granted the left bank
considerable autonomy. With the presence of three powerful abbeys — Sainte-


Geneviéve, Saint-Victor and Saint-Germain (now in the 6th arr.) - Rome was
bound to step in and take over. Thus, the newly founded University, whose teaching, it must be remembered, was strictly limited to theology, was under the direct

tutelage of the Pope, who said of Paris that it was the oven where the intellectual
bread of the Latin world was baked. Elsewhere one fed newborn babies, here one
fed robust minds. The greatest theologians and thinkers came to teach in the Latin
Quarter and helped to make it the intellectual centre of the world: the German
Albert, on Place Maubert (the name is possibly a contraction of Maitre Albert);

his Italian disciple Thomas Aquinas, perhaps the most prominent medieval theologian; the Florentine Brunetto Latini and master of Dante Alighieri, on rue de

Fouarre. Dante himself came to study in rue de Fouarre in the early 14th century,
as his Paris-born countryman Boccaccio tells us.
Little by little permanent colleges superseded the makeshift places of earlier
days, first providing accommodation and later teaching. One such college was
founded in 1253 on the present rue du Sommerand, by Robert, the chaplain and
confessor of Saint Louis. Born to a humble family in the village of Sorbon in the
Ardennes, he became so great a scholar that the King had him dine at his table: “Ji
Roy le faisoit mangier a sa table (“The king had him eat at his table”). The college became the seat of the faculty of theology and was known as La Sorbonne,
after the native village of its founder. Its expansion was so spectacular that it soon
overshadowed the other institutions and many foreigners still mistake it for the
entire University of Paris.
When the Hundred Years’ War broke out, the University, which had gradually
lost the privileges granted it earlier by the throne, sided with the English against
the King of France and, later, against Jeanne d’ Arc. Paris was in ruins, the territo-

ry of wolves, and the Montagne Sainte-Geneviéve had become an ‘annexe of
Oxford’. In due course peace was restored and in 1437 the University submitted
to the secular authority of Charles VII.
The Italian campaigns of 1515 heralded the advent of the Renaissance, impressing upon Francois I the artistic and intellectual achievements of Italy as against
those of the University of Paris, by then a fossilized body. In 1529, in order to
counteract its dogmatic and strictly theological teachings and propagate the
humanistic ideal of the Italian Renaissance, he founded the Collége de France,

next to the Sorbonne (just off rue des Ecoles). It was first known as Le Collége
des Trois Langues, as Hebrew and Greek were taught there besides Latin, but it
was soon renamed the Collége du Roi after its founder. Lectures were given in
French — a revolution in itself. The French language was given a further boost at
the time of Henri II, when the poets Ronsard and Du Bellay and their friends
founded the group called la Pléiade to crusade in defence of the French language.
In their manifesto, Défense et illustration de la langue frangoise, written by Du


Bellay in 1549, they called for the development of a national literature, like in
Italy, to be supported by an enriched French language, and discarded Latin as
obsolete.
F
Over the centuries the number of chairs created at the Collége de France
increased from the initial three to over 40 today, but its principles have remained
unchanged: it has always been, and still is, independent of the University of Paris
and the lectures have always been, and still are, free of charge and open to the
public. Among its illustrious professors will be mentioned the historian Michelet;
Champollion who had deciphered the Egyptian hieroglyphs; the mathematician
and physicist Ampére; the historian and writer Renan; and the philosopher
Bergson.
The Collége du Roi was not the only modernistic institution to threaten the ret- ~
rograde Sorbonne and the other institutions of the Latin Quarter. Le Jardin du Roi
(now Jardin des Plantes) opened at the time of Louis XIII further east, on the

sunny side of the future 5th arrondissement, was an even greater menace. Back in
the 13th century some members of the nobility had magnificent country houses in
this pleasant area watered by the Biévre, notably on the site of the present rue du
Fer-a-Moulin, then known appropriately as Bourg-Riche. On its northern side lay
the enchanting estate of the Hétel Clamart, through which flowed the Biévre,
shaped into artificial lakes and reaches, meandering through rocks, caves and
waterfalls. Later on, however, the monks of Saint-Victor damaged the Biévre by
repeatedly deviating its course for their agricultural needs, but even in 1640 the
area was still sufficiently pleasant for Louis XIII to choose it as a site for a botanic garden for medicinal herbs, as suggested to him by Jean Hérouard, his famous
physician. The Jardin Royal des Plantes Médicinales, as it was then called, had a

pedagogical funtion too: 1,800 different plants were gathered to be used also by
medical students. Once more, the University was deprived of its monopoly of
teaching, not this time just by rival ancient languages but by botany, chemistry
and, from 1643 on, by anatomy — a very serious threat to its authority. For two
centuries, scientists of world renown contributed to the development and propagation of natural science, notably Cuvier (1769-1832), the father of paleontology,
and Buffon (1707-1788), the administrator of the Jardin des Plantes and member
of the Académie des Sciences, who devoted 40 years of his life to the much popularized, 44-volumed Histoire Naturelle. Thouin, Tournefort, Linné, Geoffroy
Saint-Hilaire, the Jussieu family, Daubenton and Lacépéde, all contributed to the

glorious scientific reputation enjoyed by the south-eastern part of the arrondissement, and are now honoured in its street names.

No doubt the withered Sorbonne needed to be revivified. Like the rest of the
Latin Quarter, it had suffered from the Hundred Years’ War and from the wars of
religion in the latter half of the 16th century. The enterprising Richelieu, who had


once been a student at the Sorbonne and was now its dean, undertook its renovation, laying the cornerstone of its chapel in 1625. His project, however, was purely architectural and little was done to reform the curriculum, which, until the

Revolution, remained restricted to theology. No wonder, therefore, its beautiful
compound, the work of Lemercier and Le Brun, was given a rough time by the
anti-clerical Revolutionaries: some of its marble was stolen, part of the chapel
dome was left to crumble, and weeds to invade the courtyard. In the early 19th
century the Sorbonne was used as living quarters by several dozen artists who had
formerly lived in the Louvre. During the Restoration a new scheme for the renovation of the Sorbonne was put forth and was carried out step by step throughout
the 19th century. The Sorbonne was entirely reconstructed and expanded, to
include the faculties of science and of letters as well as the school of librarians,
the Ecole des Chartes, and the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes. The extended

compound, a rectangle bounded by rue de la Sorbonne and rue Victor-Cousin, rue
Cujas, rue Saint-Jacques and rue des Ecoles, surmounted by an observatory tower
on rue Saint-Jacques, was inaugurated in 1901 and has retained the same architectural aspect ever since. It has also retained the pompous pompier* murals painted
by Puvis de Chavanne, the official artist of the Third Republic.
It was not just the Sorbonne that was changing. Napoleon, a great reformer in
matters of higher education, had already restructured the University and founded
the celebrated Grandes Ecoles, for the training of France’s future engineers, outside the framework of the university; these still enjoy immeasurable prestige and
overshadow the university. The Ecole Polytechnique, the most prestigious of
them ail, trains France’s top mathematicians to become the nation’s elite and is
still a military school, whose cadets, the celebrated ‘X’, take part in the military
parade down the Champs-Elysées on 14 July. Until 1977 it was located in the
heart of the Latin Quarter, in the premises of the medieval Collége de Navarre on
rue de la Montagne-Sainte-Geneviéve. Its transfer to the southern suburb of
Palaiseau, has somewhat deprived the Latin Quarter of some of its festive pomp,
for previously, on ceremonial occasions its cadets could be seen passing by in
their Napoleonic uniforms, bearing their traditional slender swords. Just as prestigious intellectually is the Ecole Normale Supérieure, founded in 1794 to provide
the nation with highly cultivated and competent teachers. The greatest scientists
of France, precisely those now commemorated in the streets names of the
arrondissement, numbered among its professors. Today the Ecole Normale
Supérieure has expanded beyond the Latin Quarter and even to the provinces, but
the premises on rue d’UIm, south of the Place du Panthéon, remain the most prestigious ones.
*Uncreative academic painter in the second half of the 19th century


The Revolution had made a clean sweep of the abbeys of Sainte-Geneviéve and
Saint-Victor and of many of the smaller institutions. The social and economic
evolution of 19th-century France completed the transformation of the 5th. Its educational calling meant that it could not become industrialized. Nor could it
become residential: a plebeian population of tanners and butchers sprawled since
the time of Louis XIV along the Biévre, while Place Maubert - ‘la Maube’ - had

been home to rowdy students and other hot-headed ruffians since the Middle
Ages, a place of crime, vice and public executions, the “cesspit of la Maube’, as

Erasmus called it. In the early 20th century it was frequented by terrifying
‘Apaches’ and other hoodlums and louts. The neighbourhood around rue Mouffetard was no more inviting. In Down and Out in Paris and London, written in

1928, George Orwell gives a frightening account of the neighbouring rue du Potde-Fer (Orwell himself lived at n° 6, where no policeman would venture on his
own after dusk. He describes his street as “a ravine of tall, leprous houses, lurch-

ing towards one another in queer attitudes, as though they had all been frozen in
the act of collapse”. Amidst a population of destitute Arabs, Poles and Italians,
and unhindered by the noise and dirt, “lived the usual respectable French shopkeepers, bakers and laundresses and the like, keeping themselves to themselves
and quietly piling up small fortunes.” This was the social composition of the area
in a nutshell. Haussmann had already endeavoured to keep the plebeian segment
of this population in check by bulldozing rue Monge, rue Gay-Lussac and Boulevard Saint-Marcel. However, whereas in other parts of the city, he had created
radiating avenues so as to facilitate the circulation of government troops in the
case of street riots, his plan in the 5th was to isolate each potential hotbed of

social unrest from its neighbour.
Along the newly opened streets rose the usual hygenic, Haussmannian blocks
of flats, ready to accommodate the intelligentsia, who, being less prejudiced than
the prim and proper bourgeois, did not mind rubbing shoulders with the lower
classes who added a touch of local colour to the neighbourhood. The 5th thus
became the most characterful and diversified arrondissement, with its share of
medieval streets, colourful marketplaces and neighbourhood shops, multitudes of
bookshops and Left Bank cabarets... It was also the most youthful arrondissement, with scores of thousands of students blending daily into the picturesque
local population.
Then, in 1968, a wind of revolt blew across the planet, from the Latin Quarter

to Prague, from Berkeley in California to China. There was no premeditated political motivation on the part of the students when, during the month of May, they
transformed the Latin Quarter into a battlefield. Rather it was a vague discontent
with an amalgamation of capitalism, imperialism (including the Vietnam War, of
course), budding consumerism, the rigidity of bourgeois values and hidebound


—

tradition. ‘L’imagination au pouvoir’ (‘let imagination rule’), one of their
favourite slogans, was scribbled on many a wall. Barricades were erected on all

the main arteries to fend off the forces of the riot police, advancing in close order,
and cobblestones were dug out of ancient streets and hurled at them. The trees
along the boulevards were not spared, and those who had foolishly left their cars
in the Latin Quarter overnight retrieved burnt-out wrecks the following day.
By the end of June, the summer holidays had begun, always a period of hibernation in the Latin Quarter, and by the following autumn the students’ riots had
died out like a flash in the pan. But the State had drawn its lessons from the riots
and proceeded to ‘dismantle’ and decentralize the University. The great actor
Jean-Louis Barrault, who had supported the students, was banished from the
Odéon theatre (in the 6th arr.). The main victim of the événements de mai, however, was the mutilated arrondissement itself, which lost its old cobbled streets

(too threatening to an authoritarian state, which replaced them with dull asphalt)
and the better part of its student population, exiled and scattered all over the Paris
area, packed into ugly, ramshackle premises, often in seedy neighbourhoods. To
crown it all, these new rootless compounds were given numbers instead of names
- Paris I, Paris Il, Paris III... up to XIII, all in the name of modernity. The participants in the événements grew either into disillusioned bourgeois known as exsoixante-huitards or into frustrated misfits known as soixante-huitards attardés.
Fortunately the excellent Lycées Henri IV, Louis-le-Grand and Saint-Louis are
still there, as is the Ecole Normale Supérieure on rue d’Ulm. But the University
has suffered beyond repair and its students have often become second-class citizens, superseded by the élite who have been creamed off by the Grandes Ecoles.
The arrondissement has meanwhile been ‘cleaned up’ and gentrified like many
other parts of Paris and is not disdained by top academics, writers and politicians.
Even President Mitterand has taken up residence on rue de Biévre off the onceseedy Place Maubert. This bourgeoisie lives in discreet seclusion away from the
beaten track of Boulevard Saint-Michel, where a junk bazaar has replaced most of
the bookshops that went the way of the students. Today the Boulevard SaintMichel stands for what the students of spring 1968 vaguely sensed, rejected and
desperately resisted — the inexorable triumph of the consumer age.

WHERE TO WALK...
FROM PLACE SAINT-MICHEL TO THE SORBONNE
Ra’ permitting, the 5th arrondissement can be visited at a push in one intensive day, but a couple of leisurely days would be preferable, if you wish to
take in the atmosphere of its different neighbourhoods. Place Saint-Michel by the


Seine is a convenient arrival spot and is at its best in the morning when it is less
crowded. As you walk east along the quai Saint-Michel, you will see Notre-Dame
across the river in all her stunning beauty, washed by the rays of a morning sun.
Turn right into rue Xavier-Privas, part of a medieval enclave but now proliferating with cheap Greek and North African restaurants and catering to tourists predominantly from the northern hemisphere; only the odd French native wanders
around here. Most of the houses date from the 17th century, when the street was
erroneously named rue Zacharie (street signs indicating the name Zacharie could
still be seen recently at n°s 9 and 13), a distortion of its medieval name, Sachalie,

from sacs-d-lie (‘bags of dregs’); dregs of wine were dried up and burnt to cinders here before being used to dress cloth and leather. Turn right into rue de la
Huchette, already famous in the 17th century for its roasts and for its cutpurses, as
witnesses Berthod in 1652:
Vers la rue de la Huchette
Mais prends bien garde 4G tes pochettes!
(Round rue de la Huchette/Watch out for your purse).
The street remained disreputable into the 20th century and in the 1920s boasted
three brothels, the most famous of which, Le Panier Fleuri, was on the south-east-

ern corner of rue Xavier-Privas. A laundry on the opposite corner served as a
clandestine annexe, where a client could choose from among the three laundresses without jeopardizing his reputation. Rue de la Huchette also has a famous jazz
club, le Caveau de la Huchette, at n° 5. It was once a meeting-place of the Templars of the Rose Croix, then taken over in 1772 by the Freemasons, who turned it

into a secret lodge, complete with an underground passage to the Chatelet and
another one running under the cloister of Saint-Séverin. During the Revolution
the building was requisitioned by the Convention and used as a court of justice and
prison. The most prominent players in the Revolution were brought here for trial Marat, Danton, Robespierre - and their effigies still decorate the walls. In the late
1940s and 50s the Caveau de la Huchette was a mecca of jazz, which, after the Nazi
repression, became the musical expression of the avant-garde, with Coleman

Hawkins, Art Blakey, Lionel Hampton and Memphis Slim among the performers:
The 50s were also a time of literary turmoil and avant-garde theatre productions. In
the Théatre de la Huchette at n° 23, Ionesco’s Cantatrice Chauve and La Legon
have been showing since 1957, the longest run recorded in Paris.
Retrace your steps, turn right and continue along rue Xavier-Privas, then turn
right into rue Saint-Séverin and left into rue de la Harpe, an important artery of
Roman Lutetia, the secondary route that ran parallel to the cardo (now rue SaintJacques). In medieval times it continued as far as the city gate, where Boulevard
Saint-Michel and rue Monsieur-le-Prince now meet. The Boulevard Saint-


Wd 13

JIOS
3AZINIVd

Wd-AT-NINNS-LS
JAN
'N 13949039 * INDIHdVADOLAVD NOILWSIW3a"

3S1193


TaHSIW-LS “Id


Michel supplanted it at the time of Haussmann, in 1855. The harp of the name is
said to come from a 13th-century street sign that showed King David playing the
harp; this indeed used to be a Jewish enclave with its own synagogue (on the corner of the present rue Monsieur-le-Prince) and cemetery (round the south-western
corner of Boulevard Saint-Michel, in the 6th arr.). In the course of its history rue
de la Harpe was named several times after its Jewish population: Vetus Judearia,
Vicus Judeorum, rue de la Juiverie, rue de la Vieille-Juiverie and, indeed, Vicus

Reginaldi dicti le Harpeur, King David, of course.
Retrace your steps and turn right into rue des Prétres-Saint-Séverin. On your
left is the church of Saint-Séverin, most of which, including the spire, dates from

the 15th century, which accounts for its characteristic, flamboyant, Gothic style.
However, the first three bays of its nave, the three bays of its southern aisle and

its church tower date from the 13th century. It is not quite clear whether the
patron saint of the church was the Séverin who had covered the ailing King
Clovis with his cloak, or his contemporary, Saint Séverin the Solitary,
who had lived in a neighbouring oratory dedicated to Saint Martin, the holy
man who had shared his coat with a pauper. The church of Saint-Séverin was in
fact connected with Saint Martin, as illustrated by the 19th-century bas-relief of
the tympanum above the tower door, which depicts him sharing his coat with a
pauper, and a relic of that famous coat was believed to have been kept in the
church. Because Saint Martin was the patron saint of travellers, it was the custom

to hang horseshoes here on returning home from a journey, as a token of thanks.
The church garden with its cloister - a haven of bliss - lies on the site of the parish
churchyard, which was reached through the church. In the 17th century the following implacable lines were inscribed at its entrance:
Tous ces morts ont vecu, toi qui vis, tu mourras;
L’instant fatal est proche et tun’y penses pas.
(All these dead men once lived, you who live shall die; the
fatal moment is near at hand and you do not think of it).

Turn into rue de la Parcheminerie, the stonghold of scribes and manuscript
copyists in the 13th century, when it was known as rue des Escrivains. In the 14th
century it was taken over by the parchment dealers and consequently renamed rue
des Parcheminiers. The dealers prospered thanks to the Latin Quarter’s abundant

population of masters and students, but towards the end of the 15th century were
severely hit by the import of paper from China. However, the book trade
remained the main calling of the street throughout the 17th century, and it was
this that drew the playwright Pierre Corneille here in 1673, even though it was a

long way from his home on rue de Cléry (now in the 2nd arr.) and he was then 73
years old, poor and ailing. A relative from Rouen accompanied him on this expe-


dition when Corneille’s shoe came unstitched and needed to be repaired.
Corneille paid out his last three coins, too proud to accept his friend’s assistance.
“T cried to see so a great genius in this state of destitution”, reported the friend.
Turn left on rue Saint-Jacques, the ancient cardo that led to Orléans in Roman

days, the pilgrims’ route to Santiago de Compostela in Spain in the Middle Ages,
when accordingly it was given its present name. Several churches and inns were
erected at the time along the road to serve the pilgrims. As a token of their successful journey, the pilgrims would bring back scallop shells from Compostela,
which is near the sea. Eventually craftsmen took to carving shell designs on the
stones and furniture of the churches, some of which have survived. This is also

how the celebrated Coquille Saint-Jacques, a prized gourmet dish, found its way
into French cuisine.
Cross over and turn left into rue Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre. It will take you to the
little church by the same name, one of the three oldest churches in Paris, along

with Saint-Germain-des-Prés and Saint-Pierre-de-Montmartre. A 12th-century
well in front of the entrance adds to the rusticity of the church, further enhanced

by the pretty Square René Viviani. Here is another of those charming fountains
known as Wallace fountains in honour of Sir Richard Wallace who donated them
to Paris in 1872. At the time, however, passers-by would stop to drink their water
from small cups attached to chains. An ancient robinia tree (so called after the
botanist Robin who had introduced it from North America in 1601), one of the
two oldest trees in Paris (the other is in the Jardin des Plantes), leans wearily

against a buttress, unable to support its own weight, adding to the atmosphere of
ancientness that prevails.
The story of Saint Julien le Pauvre was narrated in the 13th century by Jacques
de Voragine in La Vie des Saints, La Légende dorée. However, it is Gustave

Flaubert’s Trois Contes that made it more widely known to modern readers.
Julien killed his parents unwittingly, as had been prophesied by a stag whose doe
and fawn he had killed in the hunt. Julien went into exile, in the hope of avoiding

his fate, but in vain. However, unlike his pagan Greek predecessor Oedipus, our
Christian hero was redeemed by Christ, after having devoted his life to the poor.
A 14th-century stone carving at n° 42 of the neighbouring rue Galande shows him
and his wife helping a pauper cross the river in a barge. The pauper turns out to
be Christ, the river is the Seine and the site of Julien’s dwelling is, of course, the
site of the future church. It so happened that the dwelling was located, most conveniently, at the junction of the road that led to Orléans and Spain and the one
leading to Lyons and Italy. An oratory and a hostelry were erected in the 6th century, when France became Christian under the rule of King Clovis and when the
first oratory dedicated to Saint Geneviéve was also built. Both were swept away
by the Norsemen in the 9th century.


The better part of the present church goes back to the 12th and 13th centuries
and has retained its rudimentary aspect, devoid of bell-tower and transept, which
adds to its charm. Since 1899 it has been a place of worship for the Greek
Catholic community, the Melchites, which accounts for the icons hanging in front
of the altar. The authorities of the Third Republic, intent like Haussmann on shaping Paris into a modern city and improving the flow of traffic, earmarked the
church for demolition in 1877. The practical-minded technocrats of the new age
were unperturbed by the destruction of the historical seat of the medieval open-air
university in the neighbouring rue de Fouarre, along with the parish church of its
illustrious masters - Maitre Albert, Thomas Aquinas, Dante and Petrarch: rue
Lagrange, opened as an extension to Haussmann’s rue Monge, was meant to run
through the site of the church and on to rue Saint-Jacques! Fortunately, a general
outcry averted the disaster, making Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre the only survivor out
of 20 churches that once stood here.
To the right of the church, at 52 rue Galande, is a well-known

cabaret, le

Caveau des Oubliettes, where you can spend a pleasant evening listening to old
French songs in the setting of the medieval oubliettes (in the company of other
fellow tourists, which should not necessarily deter you). The next-door horror
museum has closed down, but its guillotine, on which J.F. Kennedy inclined his
head in 1960, is now on display in the establishment’s bar. At n° 42 rue Galande,
now a well-known repertoire cinema, is the oldest street sign in Paris, a bas-relief
dating from the 14th century, which depicts the miraculous meeting between
Saint Julien and his wife with Christ, whom they help across the Seine. A century
earlier, when this was still a rural area covered with vineyards, there was a Jewish

cemetery here. It was opened in 1198, when the Jews were allowed back to
France after their expulsion in 1882 but was closed down by Philippe III, le Hardi
in 1270.
Rue Galande will take you to what is left of rue de Fouarre, a tiny chunk of a
street, wedged between rue Lagrange and rue Dante, four houses in all. It was
already the artery that led from Ile de la Cité to rue de Fouarre in the Middle
Ages, as well as to the various colleges of the Latin Quarter and the two abbeys
of Sainte-Geneviéve and Saint-Victor. Here in the open air, although there is
nothing left to remind you, the great minds of Europe, mounted on wooden trestles,
dispensed their teaching to rowdy students seated on piles of hay. The students were
assembled in four colleges according to their national origins: Normandy at n° 8,
France at n° 10 and Picardy and England at n° 17 (hence the neighbouring rue des
Anglais further down rue Galande). The school of Picardy was still open at the time
of Louis XV and its chapel was pulled down only in 1182.
Continue on rue Lagrange towards the Seine, turn left on quai de Montebello,

providing yet another splendid view of Notre-Dame. Beyond Square René168

Viviani is rue de la Bicherie, called after its medieval harbour where the logs of
wood (biiches), which were floated into the capital, were unloaded. At n° 37 the
antiquarian bookshop Shakespeare and Company is a wonderfully dusty place,
irresistibly inviting. Its owner, the American George Whitman, named his shop
after the historic ‘Shakespeare and Company’ on rue de |’Odéon (in the 6th arr.),
which belonged to his friend Sylvia Beach. Like Sylvia, who supported artists and
first published James Joyce’s Ulysses, Whitman too has extended his support to
writers and the premises look as much like a home as like a shop. On Sunday you
may even be offered a cup of tea and many an expatriate has found here a welcoming roof.
Retrace your steps and continue on rue de la Biicherie across rue Lagrange.
You will have entered a gentrified enclave of picturesque narrow streets, unspoilt
as yet by mass tourism. Not so long ago this was still a disreputable area. N° 15,
on the corner of rue de |’Hétel-Colbert, was the site of the first medicine faculty
of Paris, established in 1472, before which medicine was taught in the open air,

on rue de Fouarre. For centuries knowledge of medicine remained very limited,
largely through the fault of the church. Supersition prevailed, bodies for the study
of anatomy were unavailable (except when bribe could obtain one of the bodies
dangling from the gallows of Montfaucon). On the other hand, instruction in medicine was accompanied by elaborate ceremonial; the ludicrous attire of the faculty
was satirized by Moliére in his Malade Imaginaire. Surviving dissertations that
have reached us bear testimony to the gross ignorance of the time, treating such
issues as whether a foetus resembles the father or the mother, and the use of sour
herring for driving away fleas. The school was reconstructed several times over
the generations but remained here until the Revolution. In 1745 it was expanded
by the Dane Winslow, who founded the Anatomy Amphitheatre in the elegant
hotel that is still standing. In 1775, after the law faculty had moved to new
premises on Place du Panthéon, its vacated premises on rue Jean-de-Beauvais
were annexed by the growing faculty of medicine. It was only after the Revolution that the medicine faculty moved to its present location in the 6th arrondissement (but has meanwhile expanded elsewhere again).
Ahead is the triangular, tree-planted Place Frédéric-Sauton, at the junction of
rue de la Biicherie, rue des Grands-Degrés, rue Frédéric-Sauton and rue du Haut-

Pavé overlooking Notre-Dame — a charming spot where you can stop for a drink
or a bite. Turn right on rue Frédéric-Sauton and left into the leafy, placid Impasse
Maubert. At n° 4 was Exili’s laboratory where, some 350 years ago, Monsieur
Godin and his mistress, the notorious Marquise de la Brinvilliers, experimented

"on various poisons before setting out to eliminate her family (see chapter on 4th
arr.). Retrace your steps and turn left on rue Frédéric-Sauton, then left at a sharp
angle into rue Maitre-Albert, right into quai de Montebello, where another charm-


ing tree-shaded junction, albeit less secluded, will welcome you to a café. Turn
right again into rue de Biévre. While the peaceful, almost deserted rue Maitre-

Albert commemorates the great German master of the Middle Ages, rue de
Biévre is called after the diversion canal of the river Biévre, which was dug by

the monks of the abbey of Saint-Victor in the 12th century to work their mills and
water their magnificent gardens (to the outrage of the rivalling abbey of SainteGeneviéve). The canal flowed alongside the present street, then a country lane,
and into the Seine. Some 200 years later, it was incorporated into the moat of

Philippe-Auguste’s city walls and before long became a putrid sewer. Chroniclers
report that rue de Biévre and rue Maitre-Albert were the filthiest streets in the
capital, the public latrines of the University; yet they had such prominent residents as the poet Crébillon (1674-1762), Restif de la Bretonne (1734-1806),

observer of 18th-century Paris, and possibly Dante who may have begun The
Divine Comedy here. Today President Frangois Mitterand resides at n° 22 but the
sewer now flows underground.
Both streets lead to Place Maubert, best seen on market days - Tuesday, Thursday or Saturday morning. In the 13th century, Place Maubert, like rue de Fouarre,
served as an open-air university. Its most illustrious master was the Maitre Albert,
hence probably the contracted name Maubert, although some people believe the
square was named after Jean Aubert, appointed abbot of Sainte-Geneviéve in
1161, when all this area was part of the abbey’s domain. In the 15th century, students and masters vanished to the permanent colleges established on the hill and
Place Maubert became the gory site of public executions, especially at the time of
Francois I, who relentlessly hunted down the budding sect of Lutherans. The cruelty and savagery with which Lutherans were tortured before being burnt alive
were such that even the Pope tried to intercede on their behalf. Until the middle of
the 18th century, Place Maubert remained a horrific place of public executions,
surrounded by a vast mire, ‘the cesspit of Maubert’ as Erasmus referred to it, a
gathering-place of rowdy youths, beggars, tramps and louts. In 1588, during the
student insurrection against Henri de Guise, this was also where the first barri-

cades in Paris were erected.
Cross Place Maubert and turn left into rue Monge and left again into rue SaintVictor where the church of Saint-Nicolas-du-Chardonnet is situated. Named after
the blue thistles (‘chardon’) that once grew here, the church is the shrine of the
most fundamentalist French Catholics, members of the National Front and others
of the extreme right.

Back in the 16th century, at the time of the War of Religions, this was already a
centre of Roman Catholic piety and reaction. In the 17th century the reconstructed church was decorated by Charles Le Brun, the master painter of Versailles,
who was later supplanted by Mignard. He died a broken man in 1690 and was


buried in this, his parish church. Both his tomb and his mother’s can be seen inside.
Next to the church, at n° 24 rue Saint-Victor, stands the Palais de la Mutualité,

the headquarters of the Fédération Mutualiste Parisienne, inaugurated in 1931 by
the President of the Republic, Paul Doumer. The building houses a health centre
but is known mainly for its large meeting hall, which has hosted performances by
France’s top singers, including Charles Trenet, Georges Brassens, Juliette Gréco
and the Belgian Jacques Brel. Groups from abroad have sung here more recently,
Simple Minds, the Pogues, UB 40, among others. Its principal claim to fame,
however, has been its progressive political gatherings, led by such historic figures
as Pierre Mendés-France and held, ironically, next door to the centre of reac-

tionary activity of Saint-Nicolas-du-Chardonnet. During her visit to Paris in 1981
Indra Ghandi came to the Mutualité to honour the place where her father, Jawaharlal Nehru, had attended the Peace Conference in 1938.

Continue left on rue des Ecoles up to rue du Cardinal-Lemoine. An elegant
house, the Hétel Lebrun, stands at n° 49. It was built in 1700 by the famous Bof-

frand for Charles Le Brun’s nephew (the painter’s name is spelt both ways). A
succession of prominent residents followed, notably the painter Watteau, in 1718,

and Buffon who moved here in 1766, devoting the better part of his time to his
monumental 20-volume Histoire Naturelle.
Retrace your steps into rue des Ecoles and turn right into rue de la MontagneSainte-Geneviéve. At n° 4 the police museum is located on the second floor of the
police station. It is a very exciting place where the history of Paris is brought to
life, thanks also to the wax figures scattered around. Your visit, however, will be

more enlightening, if you can come back once you have explored the rest of Paris.
A 17th-century map of Paris, for example, even shows the notorious Cour des
Miracles (see chapter on the 2nd arr.). There are portraits of notorious criminals
such as la Brinvilliers, La Voisin and Ravaillac; a menu seized by the police during the siege of Paris in 1870 is also on display, listing gastronomic dishes of dog
and cat meat. The massive door that used to guard the death cell of the prison of
La Grande-Roquette in the 11th arrondissement is also on display, just on the way
out.

Turn left into rue Basse-des-Carmes, then right into rue des Carmes and left
into rue du Sommerand, which leads to the Hétel de Cluny opposite the Square
Paul Painlevé, the Parisian pied-a-terre of the abbey of Cluny in Bourgogne, a
gem of a Renaissance mansion and a sole reminder of so much architectural beauty that has been lost. A sundial in the courtyard reads ‘Rien Sans Nous’, referring,
not surprisingly, to Louis XIV. The scallop shells (coquilles Saint-Jacques)
' sculpted on the front wall are inspired by the shells the pilgrims used to bring
back from Compostela. Today the mansion houses the museum of medieval art
whose exquisite selection of objets d’art blends harmoniously into the architec-


ture. The jewel in its crown, however, is the set of six gorgeous tapestries of the
Lady and the Unicorn, undoubtedly among the most splendid and graceful in the
world and on no account to be missed.
Adjacent to the museum are the remains of the Roman baths (les Thermes),
where fragments of sculpture from Gallo-Roman Lutetia can also be seen, notably
the Pilier des Nautes, the oldest piece of sculpture discovered in Paris (see chapter on the 4th arr.).

Square Paul Painlevé represents the history of the Latin Quarter in a nutshell,
starting with a sculpture of the she-wolf that suckled Romulus and Remus; a
replica of the one in the Capitol, it was a gift to Paris from the city of Rome, a
homage to Gallo-Roman Lutetia. The sculpture of Montaigne, the Renaissance
essayist, embodies the intellectual spirit of the Latin Quarter at a time when it
broke down the barriers of theology; while the statues of Nénot, of Puvis de
Chavanne and of Octave Gréard (by the same Nénot) commemorate the Sorbonne
of the Third Republic that still stands: Nénot was its architect, Puvis de Chavanne
its painter and Octave Gréard its rector.
The Sorbonne stands across the street, bounded by rue des Ecoles, rue de la

Sorbonne and rue Victor-Cousin, rue Cujas and rue Saint-Jacques. A walk around
this monumental mass reveals little of interest but you may wish to know that the
observatory on the corner of rue Saint-Jacques and rue des Ecoles was erected on
the site of the church of Saint-Benoit, one of the oldest churches in Paris, which

disappeared, like so many others, during the Revolution. The church had been
nicknamed ‘la mal tournée’ (‘badly turned’) because its altar had been oriented to
the west instead of the east, but after this had been put right in the 15th century, it
became known as Saint-Benoit-la-Bistournée (‘la bien tournée’). It was here that
one of its chaplains at the time, Guillaume Villon, raised his adopted nephew
Frangois, the famous poet. When Francois Villon, the archetypal rowdy student,
fell foul of the law, he took refuge here. Visiting the Sorbonne (enter through 17
rue de la Sorbonne) may not prove easy, as much of it is often closed to the public, notably its 2,700-seat Grand Amphithéatre, which is only opened for special
events. The more the pity for it shelters Puvis de Chavanne’s mural, Le Bois

Sacré, so characteristic of the academic style that was in favour during the first
decades of the Third Republic and left no room for the Impressionists and that
came to be known as Pompier.
Despite its appalling acoustics, the amphitheatre is often used for cultural
events and concerts. During the socialist era of the 1980s, the authorities used it
to covene the international intelligentsia to a four-day conference to meditate
upon and discuss the prospects of peace on this planet, watched from the top of
their marble pedestals by the ponderous Robert de Sorbon, Richelieu, Descartes,


Pascal and others. In early September 1992, shortly before the French referendum
on the Maastricht treaty, President Mitterand also chose the symbolic setting of
the Grand Amphitéatre for his historic televized confrontation with the right-wing
opponent Philippe Séguin, who objected to the treaty. No detail was spared to
arouse pro-European sentiments among viewers - even the carpet under the President’s feet was studded with twelve gold stars against a regal blue background,
oddly reminiscent of the Ancien Régime... More followed in October 1992, in a
two-day gathering entitled Recontres de la Sorbonne, when such topics as ‘art
and liberty’, ‘the spirit of solidarity among the French’ and other favourites like
‘peace’, ‘tolerance’ and ‘rights of man’ were discussed by a hotch-potch of
celebrities.
Richelieu’s chapel also merits a visit. However, it is open only during temporary exhibitions and on special occasions. It houses the Cardinal’s tomb, which
was designed by Le Brun and executed by Girardon. The pendentives of the dome
were painted by Philippe de Champaigne, the court’s portrait painter. On the
other hand, Lemercier’s classical architecture can be appreciated at all times, both
from the courtyard of the Sorbonne (enter through n° 12 rue de la Sorbonne) and
from the bustling Place de la Sorbonne.

FROM THE PANTHEON EASTWARDS
