THE 2nd ARRONDISSEMENT
H:: nearly two centuries, the Paris stock exchange, La Bourse, has stood

imposingly in the heart of the 2nd arrondissement, marking it as the financial centre of the capital. To honour the nascent capitalist era, Napoleon
commissioned his architect Brongniart to endow the city with a new temple of
finance, emulating those of ancient Greece. Napoleon, however, was not to see
the completed monument, which was inaugurated only in 1825, 10 years after his
downfall. Originally, the Tribunal of Trade was also located here, but it was
transferred to Boulevard du Palais on Ile de la Cité during the Second Empire.
The stock exchange remained on the site and drew to the arrondissement a wide
spectrum of financial establishments, both French and foreign, thus confirming
the position the 2nd had long held as the centre of financial transactions and other
communications.
Lying
on the northern periphery of Paris, the 2nd was always an intermediary
territory between the capital and the outside world. Originally lying outside the
city walls, it was incorporated by successive stages into the growing city. Thus,
the rue Tiquetonne on its south-eastern edge runs along the site bounded by the
first city walls, /’enceinte Philippe-Auguste (1190); the diagonal rue d’ Aboukir
runs along the site of the second one, bounding /’enceinte Charles V (1383); rue

des Jefineurs and rue Feydeau run along the routes of the inner and outer roads of
the enceinte Louis XIII (1636). In 1676 Louis XIV, fortified by his military victories, did away with the walls and laid out a tree-lined promenade instead, emulat-

ing the Cour-la-Reine (now the 8th arr.), the promenade planted by his
grandmother Marie de Medici along the Seine. These Grands Boulevards (the
word comes from the German Bollwerk, meaning the top surface of a rampart)

ran in a circular arc from the Madeleine to the Bastille, a long stretch that took a
hundred years to complete and marked the northern boundary of Paris (and consequently of the present 2nd arrondissement).

On the eastern edge of the arrondissement bustling traffic had, since Roman
days, been going in and out of the capital by way of rue Saint-Denis, which led to
the villages of Saint-Denis and Pontoise, and on to Rouen. Saint Genevieve, the
venerated patron of Paris, gave it a further boost in the 5th century by promoting
' it as a pilgrimage route to the shrine of Saint-Denis, hence its name rue de Monsieur Saint-Denis. From the 8th century on it became the royal highway through
which the kings and queens of France entered solemnly ‘the good city of Paris’


on their way to the cathedral of Notre-Dame - notably after their coronation in
Reims - a tradition maintained for over a thousand years, right up to the coronation of Charles X on 27 September 1827. Such occasions were celebrated by lavish festivities against the backdrop of triumphant arches, of rich silks draped from
the house fronts and of fountains flowing with milk and wine. The royal procession with its sumptuous canopy, the colourful attire of its participants provided a
splendid spectacle which thrilled the crowds. Royal funerals also went past rue
Saint-Denis, departing from Notre-Dame and heading north to the burial site of
the basilica of Saint-Denis.
Being the main thoroughfare of the capital, rue Saint-Denis attracted religious
institutions, hostels and inns, where kings, pilgrims and other travellers found
hospitality, notably in the H6pital Saint-Jacques on the site of the present n°s
129-135, which was opened by the brotherhood of Saint-Jacques in the early 14th
century for the benefit of pilgrims heading for Compostela. The Hépital de la ©
Trinité had opened a century earlier (at the present n°s 142-164) to offer shelter to
latecomers who found the city gates locked after nightfall. Even those travelling
to their deaths found solace here on their way to the gallows of Montfaucon
(now’s 10th arr.). The tumbril carrying them from the prison of the GrandChatelet would pause to allow them to kiss the wooden cross of the convent of
the Filles-Dieu (n°s 223-239). The convent’s inmates, reformed prostitutes,

would welcome them to a share of holy water, three morsels of bread and a glass
of wine, and could even save their necks by consenting to marry them. It is said
that one prisoner, who was offered rescue by a generous yet hideously ugly
‘daughter of God’, urged the hangman to proceed with his task and deliver him
from a still worse fate. This may be the origin of the expression passer la corde
au cou — ‘to put someone’s head in the noose’, or to trap a man into marriage.
Parallel to rue Saint-Denis to its west, the medieval rue Poissonniére calls to
mind the fresh catch from the Pas-de-Calais that was carried through here to the
central market of Les Halles. Files of donkeys used to be seen plodding along the
street carrying their load and the salty smell of the sea. When the new royal road
to the north was completed in 1730, the donkeys were replaced by faster horsedrawn carts. In 1850 the railway replaced these in its turn.
A third route cut across these rural, outlying parts, the diagonal rue Montmartre, opened in the early 13th century to connect Paris with the abbey of Montmartre. When, in the early 19th century, France’s prosperity called for a better
public transport system, the newly created Messageries, the nationwide network

of mail-coach service, set up its central station in the cul-de-sac Saint-Pierre
(between the present 115 rue Montmartre and 28 rue Notre-Dame des Victoires).
This radiating network perpetuated the calling of the arrondissement as the capital’s centre of communications.


Because of its geographical situation, the 2nd arrondissement drew in the most
destitute segment of society, particularly between the 15th and 17th centuries.
The Hundred Years’ War and the Black Plague had left one sixth of the population of France homeless and starving. Deserting the desolate countryside, they
made their way into the capital and huddled within Charles V’s city walls. They
were hardly likely to be disturbed in this tangle of narrow streets and blind alleys
next to the city walls, reeking of the open-air sewer, a perilous no man’s:land, a
long way from the city, as some street names testify - rue du Temps Perdu (‘vanished times’; now rue Saint-Joseph) and rue du Bout du Monde (‘world’s end’;
now Léopold Bellan), for example. The newcomers became the terror of the

town, organized into fearsome bands with their own language and laws. At the
time of Frangois I their head was known as ‘le Ragot’, a word later distorted into
argot (slang). By day they spilled out into the streets of Paris, metamorphosed
into ‘blind’ or ‘maimed’ beggars, and preyed upon passers-by. By night they vanished into the neighbourhood’s dead-end alleys, where they laid aside their
crutches and ‘miraculously’ recovered their eyesight and missing limbs. Thus
these alleys came to be known as ‘Cours des Miracles’, the most notorious one

being situated on rue Neuve-Saint-Sauveur (roughly on the site of the rue du Nil,
rue des Forges and rue de Damiette), and ran conveniently along the city walls,
the gaps of which provided exits in case of emergency.
Victor Hugo’s novel Notre-Dame de Paris brought worldwide notoriety to the
Cour des Miracles of rue Neuve-Saint-Sauveur, “a gutter of vice and beggary, of
vagrancy that spills over into the streets of the capital [...] immense changingroom of all the actors of this comedy that robbery, prostitution and murder play
cn the cobbled streets of Paris.” Hugo, however, took the liberty of tampering
with history by transposing this den of thieves from the 17th century to the late
Middle Ages, to suit contemporary Romantic fancy. The rabble of the ‘Cour des
Miracles’ made the streets of Paris so unsafe that in 1667 Louis XIV ordered his
police lieutenant Nicolas de La Reynie to clean up this hotbed of banditry. This
was no easy task, for its occupants put up a heroic resistance. Once defeated,
many ended up in the galleys of the king’s growing fleet; this was one way of
tackling the problem of homelessness, which afflicted one tenth of the population
of Paris or 40,000 souls.
As Victor Hugo observed, the proximity of the city walls had brought an influx
of prostitutes to the neighbourhood. They took up residence in the south-eastern
section of the arrondissement, close to the abundant reservoir of clientele provid-

ed by the central market of Les Halles, and left the mark of their trade by way of
street names: rue Tire-Boudin (‘sausage-jack’; now Marie-Stuart), rue Gratte-Cul
(‘bum-scraper’; now Gaston Dussoubs)... Attempts to do away with prostitution

were made once in a while, but these were usually half-hearted and ineffectual


and largely dependent on the inclinations of the individual monarch. Thus, at the
time of Louis XV, who was by no means averse to the pleasures of the flesh, the

neighbourhood flourished into a breeding-ground of courtesans for the upper
classes. It was in Madame Gourdan’s glamorous establishment on rue de la
Comtesse d’ Artois (now rue Montorgueil), that the notorious pimp Jean du Barry
discovered the enticing Jeanne Bécu, Mademoiselle Lange by her trade name.
Having set her up as procuress in the bordello Dupressoir on rue de Damiette, he
threw her into the arms of the Duc de Richelieu, the Cardinal’s great-nephew,
who, hoping to promote his own interests, threw her into those of the King. A true
professional, Jeanne introduced the licentious monarch to a realm of unsuspected
pleasures, all the more appreciated since her predecessor, the Pompadour, had
long lost her sexual appetite. In order to make her socially acceptable, Jean du
Barry married her off to his brother, Comte Guillaume du Barry, who was com- _
pensated substantially for the deal and left for Toulouse, while the new Comtesse
du Barry became the last of France’s royal favourites to the outrage of the scandalized court. In his Lent sermon the abbot of Beauvais bluntly censored the
depraved Louis XV, using the transparent disguise of King Solomon, who, having
had “his fill of voluptuous pleasures [...] ended by seeking new ones in the base
remains of public licence.” Outside the court, the people of France were infuriated by the Comtesse’s prodigal spending, squandering the country’s revenue on
finery and on her sumptuous new mansion at Louveciennes. When the time came
for revenge, a vindictive nation sent for her in her retreat at Louveciennes and
dispatched her to the guillotine.

By the time Emile Zola was born in 1840, at 10 rue Saint-Joseph, this had long
ceased to be a no-man’s-land but had become a working-class neighbourhood at
the heart of the capital, dominated by the teeming bustle and din of the press
industry, which had first settled here during the Revolution, when Pére Duchesne
published a lewd, anarchical paper on rue de Damiette. It was in the tiny area
enclosed by rue Saint-Joseph, rue du Croissant and rue des Jefineurs that the political destiny of France was largely determined. Thus, it was Adolphe Thiers and
the journalists of his newly founded Le National, together with the representatives
of eleven other papers, who brought about the fall of the Bourbon dynasty. After
the freedom of the press was abolished on 26 July 1830, Thiers launched a protest
movement, which culminated in the three-day July Revolution, known as ‘Les

Trois Glorieuses’, and in the abdication of Charles X. Similarly, the conflict

between the authorities and the progressive press over a banned reformist banquet
scheduled for 22 February 1848 triggered off the 1848 Revolution that led to the
definitive overthrow of the French monarchy.
On 31 July 1914, the eve of the Great War, Jean Jaurés, the founder of the


socialist paper /’Humanité, was shot dead through the window of La Chope du
Croissant, a hang-out of papermen on the corner of rue du Croissant and rue
Montmartre, by Raoul Villain, a 24-year-old nationalist. Jaurés who had tried desperately to prevent the outbreak of the war, ironically, became its first French victim. His assassin benefited from the ‘confusion of the time’, in other words, from

the prevailing nationalist hysteria, and was acquitted.
The neighbourhood with its abundant cheap labour provided an ideal location
for the booming press industry of the 19th century; it was also close to the Grands
Boulevards, virtually the ‘high street’ of Paris up to World War I, to which everyone flocked — the rich to the west of rue Montmartre, the poor to the east. Every
afternoon hordes of hawkers stormed into the Boulevards shouting out the tantalizing, freshly printed news that would replenish the boulevard-goers with enough
gossip to fill up the rest of their day, while they in their turn became the subject of
scandal sheets and ferocious cartoons.
While the men were busy nightly at the printing presses, helping unwittingly to
unsettle the establishment, the women were worked to the bone for a wretched

wage by the burgeoning haute couture houses that had settled in the western section of the 1st and 2nd arrondissements. Crammed into tiny rooms where daylight
never penetrated, these anaemic seainstresses produced finery to adorn their
social betters, which was nonetheless preferable to prostitution which, in 19th‘century Paris, was the lot of one tenth of the female population.
Meanwhile the privileged few were enjoying themselves on the Grands Boulevards, west of rue Montmartre, to which the centre of entertainment had shifted
from Palais-Royal after the puritanical Louis-Philippe had shut down its shady
establishments. They were already present west of rue Montmartre in the 17th
century, for when Richelieu took up residence in the Palais-Royal, opposite the
Louvre, they in their turn, built themselves homes as close as possible to his.
Thus France’s leading figures - from the King’s ministers Colbert and Louvois to
his physician Thévenin and, above all, Richelieu’s successor Mazarin - moved to

magnificent palatial homes, built for them by such great architects as Mansart or
Le Vau. Whereas Richelieu had acquired the vacant site north of the Louvre, and

had pulled down the city walls to make room for his gardens, Mazarin built his
palace on the extensive grounds lying north of Richelieu’s. However, with the
rapid growth of the city, the area soon became crammed and was abandoned for
the more airy Faubourg Saint-Honoré and Faubourg Saint-Germain. The mansions were torn down, giving way to a new network of streets, and few vestiges
have survived to testify to their short life. Even the National Library, which occupies part of its founder Mazarin’s palace, was reconstructed in the 19th century

beyond recognition.


With the aristocracy gone, the area became home to the rising bourgeoisie,
whose fortunes were largely made on the stock exchange, “a hazardous ladder”,
as Dickens put it, affording dizzying climbs and equally brutal falls, which could
end with a desperate jump into the Seine. Zola referred to “the mysterious turn of
the wheel of fortune” and both writers marveled at the spectacle of the greedy “all
howling and haggard with speculation”, according to Dickens again. The successful ones were now on the town, enjoying the fun on the Grands Boulevards, the
playground of the new privileged classes and the heart of the modern capital, as
symbolized by the first omnibus line, which plied along them between the
Madeleine and the Bastille.
This was the golden age of the theatre and 14 houses were scattered around the
2nd arrondissement, rightly claimed to be the birthplace of the theatre. For in the
H6pital de la Trinité on rue Saint-Denis the first mysteries had been staged for the
religious edification of the spectators. The glamorous audience of the 19th century had other priorities: they went to the theatre to see and to be seen, equipped
with opera-glasses and posted in the strategic vantage-point of their private boxes.
The theatre punctuated the life of society; everyone went to the theatre, including
all Balzac’s and Stendhal’s heroes. On Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays one
went to see the Italian troupe, the rage from 1841 to 1870, after whom the Boulevard des Italiens was named. One went to applaud the legendary sopranos, la
Pasta, la Malibran, la Grisi, the legendary tenors Rubini and Mario and to have

one’s heart-strings tugged by Rossini, Bellini, Donizetti and Verdi.
Different emotions were aroused at the winter Bouffes Parisiens (the summer

Bouffes Parisiens were on the Champs-Elysées), where Jacques Offenbach’s
works were performed, later at the Variétés. In 1864 La Belle Héléne created an
unprecedented wave of adulation for the composer and for the leading lady, Hortense Schneider, who scored an even greater triumph in 1867, as La Grande
Duchesse de Gérolstein. The greats from all over the world, who were all in Paris

to visit the Universal Exhibition, came to admire her at the Variétés. After the
show William I of Prussia, Alexander II and Alexander Tzarevitch of Russia and
Bismarck went to dine at the Grand Seize, the private restaurant of the prestigious
Café Anglais on the Boulevard des Italiens. The menu of that celebrated dinner
can still be seen in the museum of the restaurant La Tour d’ Argent (in the 5th
arr.).

Obviously the celebration of the palate was part of the entertainment and the
Café Anglais, so called because it was frequented by English officers when it first
opened during the Amiens Peace in 1802, was considered the best gastronomic
establishment in the capital during the Second Empire, but was already known
during the Restoration when Balzac in Le Pére Goriot set the first téte-a-téte
between Rastignac and Delphine de Nucingen at the Café Anglais.


Artists were also present on the Boulevards, including those rejected by the
established order. In 1874 the first Impressionist exhibition took place at 35
Boulevard des Capucines within the framework of the Salon des Indépendants.
The photographer Nadar lent his painter friends his studio for the occasion. The
press, however, was less sympathetic and described their works as ‘black dribbles’, ‘slip-bang, swish-swash’, done by ‘hoaxers’ or ‘lunatics’, the result of

‘mental derangement’. It was all too much for the bourgeoisie of the nascent
Third Republic.
World War I tolled the bell for Belle Epoque Paris and for the Grands Boule-'
vards. Eventually the elegant fashion houses on rue de la Paix disappeared, as did
the setters and polishers on rue Vivienne and rue du Mail who worked for the
prestigious jewellers on rue de la Paix and Place Vend6me. Little is left of that
glorious past, just a few theatres, such as the Opéra-Comique, also known as Salle
Favart (once the renowned Théatre des Italiens), and the restaurant Drouant on

Place Gaillon, where, every third Monday of November, the prestigious Goncourt
literary prize is awarded, to the accompaniment of a gastronomic dinner. The venerable Bibliothéque Nationale, the arrondissement’s only cultural institution of
international note, is scheduled to move to its new controversial home in the 13th
arrondissement in 1996, leaving behind only its art section. Fortunately, the pretty
Place de Louvois opposite the library is there to stay. This was the site of the
Opera House of Paris during the Restoration and the scene of the assassination of
the Duc de Berry, heir to the throne, on 13 February 1820, during a performance
of the Carnival of Venice. The King ordered the theatre to be razed to the ground
so as to eradicate the memory of the evil deed, which provided the congested
arrondissement with its only open-air garden.
Most of the press has now also migrated elsewhere, leaving the neighbourhood
to the cheap clothing industry and to sex. The ‘Sentier’ quarter is first and foremost a gigantic traffic jam, a chaotic jumble of wheeled carts loaded with huge
rolls of fabric, pushed by members of the destitute international community,
delivery vans and, at times, a wayward bus. This is the stronghold of the Paris rag
trade, much of it in the hands of cheerful, self-confident North African Jews, who

make no bones about their spiralling success and their enjoyment of it. Thanks to
hard work, astuteness and inexhaustible energy, the ‘Sentier’ dresses the better
part of France, and even beyond, unintimidated by fearsome competition from
Taiwan and elsewhere. Currently, however, there is talk of transferring the entire
trade to the suburbs, thus putting an end to the havoc, and turning the area into a
pedestrian precinct, a further step towards making the 2nd a more salubrious yet

soulless and less picturesque arrondissement.

pacing the
On the other hand, the streetwalkers on rue Saint-Denis are still


same beat as their predecessors of hundreds of years ago, motivated, like them, by
hunger and poverty. The only difference is that today the street is lined with glaring neon lights and sex shops and, on weekend nights, jammed with customers,
lined up in their cars, bumper to bumper. The 2nd arrondissement has also preserved its role as the capital’s link with the outside world, being the site of dozens

of travel agents and airline offices. Facing each other on Place de la Bourse, significantly, are the head office of the Club Med, the most famous recreation club
in the world, and the stock exchange, two institutions that reflect the values and

answer the needs of the middle classes of contemporary France.

WHERE TO WALK
EAST OF RUE MONTMARTRE

;

walk into the plebeian eastern section of the 2nd arrondissement is not aesthetically gratifying or spiritually uplifting, but it can be exciting and of historical interest. Avoid coming here on Sunday when, deprived of its teeming
bustle, it tends to resemble a ghost town.
We shall start from the northern end of rue Saint-Denis and follow in the footsteps of travellers of yore, who entered the city along this route. Honoured by
royalty, it was also selected for the celebrations on 30 June 1878 of the young
Third Republic, as depicted in Monet’s painting Rue Saint-Denis (now in the
Musée des Beaux-Arts in Rouen), bursting with a riot of tricolours. The Republic
needed a ritual to enforce its legitimacy but was careful to avoid celebrating
Bastille Day so as not to arouse revolutionary feelings only seven years after the
civil war of the Commune. A national holiday was proclaimed to coincide with
the Universal Exhibition, which was bound to draw large crowds.
On normal days, rue Saints-Denis was just the bustling high street of Paris,
leading from the city gate to the market of Les Halles and to the Chatelet provostship and prison. With so much coming and going, prostitution could not be far
off, and today still is as conspicuous as it ever was. Don’t let this deter you from
venturing here, for rue Saint-Denis is essentially a colourful slice of old Paris.

The Porte Saint-Denis at its northern end had been the gateway to the city since
the reign of Charles V. In 1672, Louis XIV, confident that the city no longer
needed to be defended after his spectacular victories, had Blondel replace the

14th-century gate, a crenellated construction complete with towers and drawbridge, with the present one for the sole purpose of glorifying his person. At n°s
224-226 on your left stood a religious institution, Les Filles de 1’?UnionChrétienne, which provided an education for poor orphan girls and also a home

for wives on the brink of marital separation. The wealthier ones occupied the 18thcentury house in the courtyard. Despite the additional storeys, which somewhat


NOILVSITW3a

ANDIHdWADOLaVD
*
LNOWNG
“S$



spoil it, the original building retains its elegant proportions, but the lovely gardens
in which it stood are gone. A workshop was opened here in the 17th century, providing work for 200 lacemakers, the first of its kind in Paris. After the Revolution

the premises found different commercial uses and at one point became a printing
house belonging to Monsieur Michelet, the father of the great historian Michelet
who was born on this site. The present building was put up in the first half of the
20th century. At n° 237 stood the wooden cross of the convent of the Filles-Dieu,
where the tumbril would stop on its way from the Grand-Chatelet prison to the
gallows of Montfaucon, to let the prisoner kiss the cross. The convent, which
extended all the way to the present n° 223, disappeared in the wake of the Revolution and was replaced a few years later by the Passage du Caire, now strongly
redolent of an exotic oriental Bazaar and worth a detour.
Rue du Ponceau on the left (n° 188) replaced the famous medieval fontaine de
Ponceau, then supplied with the pure waters of Saint-Gervais (in today’s 19th
arr.) by way of an aqueduct. On special occasions milk and wine replaced the
water to the joy of the merrymaking populace.
N°s 174 and 176, on your right, have gables facing the street, rare examples of
a characteristic feature of medieval Paris. As a hygienic measure, these were done
away with from the 15th century on, to prevent rainwater from stagnating
between roofs, as a result of which Paris was altered beyond recognition, as can
be seen from old engravings. The houses stand on the site of the medieval cemetery of the Hépital de la Trinité, which is a couple of yards ahead. During the
Hundred Years’ War, which opposed the Bourguignons and their English allies to
the Armagnacs, a number of butchered bodies of the latter were dumped here, as

well as those of victims of the Black Plague. The H6pital de la Trinité extended
between the present n°s 164 and 142, to which bears witness today the Passage de
la Trinité at n° 164. It was set up originally to provide for belated travellers,
unable to enter the city after curfew. In 1402 the Confréres de la Passion were let
a hall here and began to produce religious ‘mysteries’, telling the life and feats of
Jesus, probably to amplify the stories from the Old Testament that were enacted
on the street during royal processions. So popular were these that the H6pital de
la Trinité became the capital’s centre of entertainment and the birthplace of its
theatre. In the 16th century it became a girls’ orphanage known as Les Enfants
Bleus because of the blue uniforms of its inmates. The girls were taught a craft
from a very young age, an initiative which generated a flourishing arts and crafts
tradition in the area up to the Revolution. The fountain at n° 142, called Fontaine
Greneta or de la Reine was also supplied by the aqueduct of Saint-Gervais but has

long been dried up. Built in 1502, it is one of the oldest fountains of Paris.
Ahead of you to the right (n° 145) is yet another arcade, le Passage du GrandCerf where a famous hostelry by the same name (‘the big hart’) was situated


before the Revolution. This was also the Paris terminal of the royal mail-coach
service to the north and east. The arcade has been recently renovated and now
reflects the elegance of a newly gentrified Paris.
N° 135, a pedestrian stretch between rue de Turbigo and rue Etienne Marcel,

marks the site of the first gate of Saint-Denis, the one built by Philippe-Auguste
at the end of the 12th century. It was surmounted by a Holy Virgin to suit the religious fervour of the times. Francois I, a man of the Renaissance, had the gate
demolished, but spared the Virgin who was put on a pedestal and moved to the
facade of the corner house of the Impasse des Peintres on your left, where it can
still be seen. The Impasse des Peintres, probably named for its resident painters
who lived here, skirted the old city walls and still has a 16th-century house at n°
4. In the Middle Ages, this was the site of the Hépital Saint-Jacques where pilgrims stopped on their way to Compostela. It soon became notorious, however,
for the misbehaviour of its brothers, and a royal edict of 1388 banned them from

“playing cards and dice, going to the tavern in their choir gown, leaving the
church during mass in order to converse outside”, and from indulging in “indecent laughs, facetious stories and their quarrels.” Worse was to come: in the 15th
century the institution’s chaplains were forbidden to employ young chambermaids.
Rue de Turbigo, which you have just crossed, and rue Etienne-Marcel to your
right, bear the mark of Baron Haussmann, who carved them through the neighbourhood’s tangle of medieval alleys. Rue Turbigo was opened in order to speed
up the transfer of troops to Place de la République, in case of insurrection among
the working-classes, in the eastern part of Paris. Rue Etienne-Marcel was opened
just south of the site of Philippe-Auguste’s rampart. On the other side of the rampart, level with the present n° 20, Robert d’ Artois, the nephew of Saint Louis
built himself a Adtel in 1270. Some 50 years later it passed over to the house of
Bourgogne, when the two houses were allied through marriage. A century later
Charles V moved the city walls further north, which enabled the Duc de Bourgogne to extend the property to the south and make it appealing enough to
become his Parisian home. In early 1408 Jean sans Peur, Duc de Bourgogne, was
back in Paris after a year’s absence following the assassination by his men of his
cousin, Philippe Duc d’Orléans. Knowing he had many foes, he built himself a
defence tower within the walls of his property and slept on the fourth and topmost
floor, sandwiched between his squire, who slept on the third, and a squad of

crossbowmen on the look-out on the crenellated roof. The tower still stands at n°
20, but cannot normally be visited, the only vestige of the Hétel de Bourgogne
-and Paris’s only military medieval tower to have survived in its entirety (except
for the roof, which dates from the 18th century). The Spanish Ambassador persuaded Henri III to spare the tower, while the rest of the property had been parcelled up by Francois I (hence the neighbouring rue Frangaise, originally named

aT

Francoise). Jean sans Peur’s room can be reached by a spiral staircase, of which
the first section is in a square turret adjoining the tower and is protected by an
iron gate. At its top the proliferating branches of an oak tree are carved into the
stone, symbolizing the power of the House of Bourgogne. A second iron gate
once protected the last and narrower section of the staircase in a corbelled turret.
In spite of these precautions, destiny caught up with Jean sans Peur, even though
it took his assassin eleven years to get him. He was killed on the bridge of Montereau, south-east of Paris, at the confluence of the Seine and the Yonne. The

murderer - in a perfectly balanced Shakespearean conclusion - was Tanguy du
Chatel, head of the Armagnacs, the supporters of his murdered cousin Philippe
d’ Orléans.
Further down and across the street, at n° 29, was the Théatre de 1’H6tel de

Bourgogne, the first theatre of Paris. The site is in the present 1st arrondissement, _
but for the convenience of sightseers and for historical coherence it is mentioned
here. In 1548 the Confréres de la Passion were expelled from the Hopital de la
Trinité and took possession of this site, vacated by Frangois I. Hard times forced
them to let the premises to different troupes, two of which went on to make history. The first one was the Comédiens du Roi who, through wily lobbying, enjoyed
the patronage of Louis XIV, to the detriment of the rivalling Théatre du Marais,
which staged Corneille’s plays, and Moliére’s Théatre Illustre. The Hétel de
Bourgogne produced Racine’s work. In 1680 Louis XIV, increasingly bent on
imposing his authority, ordered the three troupes to merge into one and to settle
on the Left Bank. The only other troupe he tolerated was the Italian one, which
was allowed to take over the Hotel de Bourgogne, delighting Parisians with the
adventures of Harlequin, Colombine and Scaramouche. But when in 1697 the
troupe derided Madame de Maintenon, thinly disguised as La Fausse Prude, she
had the theatre closed down. When the fun-loving Regent, Philippe Duc
d’Orléans succeeded Louis XIV in 1715, he put an end to the oppressive austerity
that shrouded the last years of his reign and swept Paris back into the ring of pleasure. The Italian troupe was invited again to the Hotel de Bourgogne, where they
entertained the audience with Marivaux’s light-hearted comedies, the mirror of
their own society.
With the growing popularity of the Italian opera, in 1762 the troupe obtained
from the Opéra the privilege of creating a new genre in the same vein as the Italian Opera Buffa, the Opéra-Comique - less noble a genre and therefore of little
threat to the Opéra. Presiding over the new entertainment were Charles Simon
Favart, the playwright and director of the theatre (the Opéra~-Comique is often
still referred to as Salle Favart), and his wife, née Justine Duronceray, the leading

singer. The Italian troupe stayed here till 1783, when they moved to new premises
just off the up-and-coming Boulevard des Italiens, named after them. The Hétel


de Bourgogne was replaced by a new leather market, more in keeping with the
economic activities of the area.
Turn right into rue Montorgueil, a picturesque pedestrian artery lined with
colourful food stalls (closed between 1 and 4 pm and on Monday all day). Since

the fresh sea catch from the north used to arrive here, this became the fish section
of the market of Les Halles and also the central oyster market of Paris until 1866.
The sales office of the Société des huitres [oysters] d’Etretat et de Dieppe was
located at n° 61/63 from 1780 until the middle of the 19th century and was called
Au Rocher d’Etretat, after the famous coastal landmark in Normandy. The town
of Fécamp had its sales office further south on rue Tiquetonne. Rue de Montorgueil was also a gourmet’s mecca in the last century, famous for such restaurants as Philippe at n° 54 and Le Rocher de Cancal at n° 59 until 1845, then
across the street, at n° 78. Balzac considered Le Rocher de Cancal “the meeting
place of the best society of Paris and the establishment which best honours

French cuisine.” All the heroes of La Comédie Humaine dined there, but also
Balzac’s contemporaries - Dumas Pére, Eugéne Sue and Théophile Gautier
among others. The building still stands with the name of the restaurant engraved
on the shabby facade. If only it were restored to its glorious past.
Turn right into rue Saint-Sauveur. The 17th-century corner house at n° 12 and
n° 23 rue Dussoubs was La Gourdan’s notorious brothel, where she settled in

1774. It was on her earlier premises on rue Montorgueil that Jeanne Bécu had
first met the notorious pimp Jean du Barry, through whom she became the royal
mistress, the Comtesse du Barry. La Gourdan catered to a select clientele from

both court and town and moved to this corner house because it offered more discretion. Madame Gourdan even devised a secret exit so as to prevent unnecessary
embarrassment: having chosen from among the wealth of costumes in the firstfloor changing-room to cloak their identity, clients could leave through a door
hidden in a cupboard, which opened on to a staircase ending in the ground-floor
antique shop at n° 14 rue Saint-Sauveur. The main entrance of the brothel was on
rue Dussoubs till 1865, when it was walled up, but its portal was preserved and
moved to rue Saint-Sauveur, where it still stands. Inside, the elegant architecture
of the hall and the wrought iron staircase have also been preserved.
Continue along rue Dussoubs, turn left into rue du Caire and left again into rue
des Forges and rue de Damiettes. You will have entered the one-time realm of the
underworld, the notorious Cour des Miracles, a safe refuge for its population of
_cutpursés and cutthroats who could vanish like shadows in these narrow streets.
But today one is struck rather by the oriental atmosphere enhanced by some of the
street names that commemorate Napoleon’s Egyptian campaigns and the fervent
Egyptomania that ensued - rue d’ Aboukir, d’Alexandrie, du Caire, du Nil...


Hence also the astonishing imitation Egyptian sculptures on the picturesque Place
du Caire adjoining the old Cour des Miracles.
Rue de Cléry, across the Place du Caire, runs on the site of the counterscarp of
Charles V’s city walls. It is named after a splendid 16th-century mansion, home

of elegant people, indifferent to the proximity of the rabble at its doorstep and
heedless of the stench that emanated from the nearby open sewers and from the
rubbish dump, roughly in the triangle formed by rue de Cléry, Boulevard de
Bonne-Nouvelle and rue Poissonniére. These putrid exhalations (mofettes) gave
this section of the street the name Mouffetard (like the famous rue Mouffetard in
the 5th arrondissement). Similarly, rue du Beauregard, which branches off rue de
Cléry, is reminiscent of the rubbish heap that offered a commanding view of the
city. This insalubrious environment did not deter members of the upper class
from settling here and some elegant dwellings have survived, albeit sorely in need
of a face-lift. The corner of Boulevard Bonne-Nouvelle is the spot where, on 21

January 1793, the Baron de Batz and some of his supporters waited for the royal
tumbril on its way from the Temple, where Louis XVI had been sequestrated, to
the guillotine on Place de la Révolution (Concorde), by way of the Grands Boulevards. Batz had hoped to kidnap the King and save his head, but his plot failed
and two of his accomplices were massacred on the spot. Batz managed to escape
and devised a scheme to save Marie-Antoinette, then detained at the Conciergerie.
Towards the end of his life, Pierre Corneille lived in the rue de Cléry. After the
death of his patron, the Duc de Guise, Corneille had to vacate the apartment given
him in his patron’s palace in the Marais and consequently solicited his sovereign
to allow him to move to the artists’ quarters in the Louvre. Although he took the
trouble to couch his request in rhyme and pepper it with all the customary florid
flattery, the King turned a deaf ear, a deplorable attitude as most of those granted
accommodation in the Louvre were base courtiers and parasites. Corneille’s star
was in the decline and his plays had become outmoded: of all those he wrote on
rue de Cléry, Psyché alone proved a success. Written to the music of Lully, in
collaboration with Quinault and Moliére, it sealed Corneille’s friendship with the
latter and offered him some comfort. Meanwhile, however, Louis XIV had paired

with the bigoted Madame de Maintenon and was losing interest in the theatre.
Moreover, the resumption of the Spanish wars meant that he was in need of substantial funds. He cut off altogether the pension of the playwright who had given
him so much pleasure in his younger days. On 1 October 1684 Pierre Corneille
died a pauper on rue d’Argenteuil (now between Avenue de |’Opéra and rue

Saint-Honoré), to which he had moved from rue de Cléry two years before. Six
days later, Psyché was taken up again at the Opéra, so great was its success.
Several arty and intellectual members of society lived on rue de Cléry in the


18th century. André Chénier, the greatest French poet of his time, lived at n° 97.
Although few read his poems, he has gone down in history as one of the most
tragic figures of the Revolution, having been guillotined only two days before the
downfall of Robespierre. A friend of the Revolution at the start, he later condemned its excesses, notably the death sentence of Louis XVI. Siding with Charlotte Corday after her murder of Marat also got him into trouble. Of all the
street’s inhabitants Jeanne Poisson was unquestionably the one destined to the
most glorious future. Born to an unknown father, roughly on the site of the present n° 29, she was educated by the Farmer General (the King’s tax collector) Le
Norman de Tournehem. When she was 24 she won the heart of Louis XV and
became the celebrated Marquise de Pompadour, to the indignation of the court
and of its scandalized ladies. At n° 23 lived the poet Ducis, now an obscure figure, yet in the 18th century he cut a figure in intellectual Paris. It was he who
introduced Greek drama and Shakespeare’s plays to France, and after Voltaire’s
death he was appointed to his seat at the Académie Francaise. Louis XV’s private
secretary Gabriel Herbault, lived at n° 44 across the street. In the 17th century
Robert Poquelin, a priest and doctor from the Sorbonne, and also brother of

Moliére, lived in a modest house at n° 19/21. A century later a sumptuous property replaced it, stretching all the way to today’s rue du Sentier. It belonged to the
famous couple Lebrun-Vigée, both painters and art lovers, who were the first to
allow young artists to exhibit their works alongside those of established artists:
previously young artists had been able to exhibit their works only once a year in
the open-air Place Dauphine (in the 1st arr.). Thanks to the unflagging enthusiasm
of the Lebrun-Vigée many great works of art were discovered and are now hanging in the nation’s museums. After her husband’s death in 1813, Madame LebrunVigée remained one of the most sought after ladies in Paris, until her own death

in 1842, at the age of 87. These days it is hard, in this congested commercial
neighbourhood, to picture the ‘Greek’ soupers to which Madame Lebrun-Vigée
invited the upper crust of finance, politics and the arts. Dressed as Athenians, they
would loll around the table drinking Cypriot wine that was passed round to the
sound of lyres. Madame Lebrun-Vigée would preside over the soupers dressed as
Aspasia, the influential mistress of Pericles.

Turn right at a sharp angle into rue du Sentier, which has given its name to both
this rag-trade neighbourhood and to the mentality of its occupiers (l’esprit Sentier). It leads to rue Saint-Joseph on the left, where Emile Zola was born in 1840,

at n° 10. At that time, this was the stronghold of the press, where most of the
major newspapers were printed - Le Siécle, La Patrie, among others. Turn right
into rue Montmartre, the medieval road that led to the abbey of Montmartre. At

n° 140/144 on the right, between rue Saint-Joseph and rue du Croissant, was the
cemetery of Saint-Joseph, where Moliére was buried on 21 February 1672. It took

four days of tough negotiations and the intervention of the King to persuade the
recalcitrant clergy of Saint-Eustache, in Les Halles, who regarded the theatrical
profession as an insult to the church, to agree to the burial. For a long time it was
erroneously thought that the fable writer La Fontaine was also buried here. There
was also confusion as to the exact site of Moliére’s grave. Consequently, when

the Revolutionary authorities ordered the remains of the two illustrious writers to

be exhumed and honoured elsewhere, other remains were dug up in their stead
and eventually found their way to the cemetery of Pére Lachaise (now in the 20th
arr.), where they still receive undue homage. The cemetery was replaced by a
market in 1806, and that in turn in 1882 by a building where, until 1914, several
major newspapers were published - La Patrie, Le Radical, La Presse and
L’Aurore. You can still see the building with the names of Le Journal du Soir and
La France engraved on its facade, supported by four female sculptures. On 13
January 1898 L’Aurore ran on its front page the dramatic headline J’accuse!, followed by Emile Zola’s historic open letter to the President of the Republic, Félix
Faure, in defence of Alfred Dreyfus, of truth and justice and a direct accusation
against members of the General Staff. 300,000 copies were hawked that day on
the streets of Paris and France at large. Tried for libel and sentenced to one year’s
imprisonment and a heavy fine, Zola fled to England, like other members of
France’s intelligentsia, before and after, who voiced unacceptable opinions
(Voltaire, Victor Hugo, Charles de Gaulle...) But Zola’s manifesto polarized
French opinion on the Dreyfus case. There were mass riots and street duels fought
with swords and pistols. Ten years later the fury against Zola had not abated and
his enemies had not disarmed. On the occasion of his pantheonization in June
1908 - the greatest posthumous honour bestowed on the Republic’s heroes - they
marched through the streets shouting “Spit on Zola ! Death to Zola !”, while

Dreyfus himself was shot in the arm in an attempt on his life. On 30 September
1902 Zola’s body was found suffocated in his house, officially an accidental
death, although many, including Zola’s son, have always believed it was murder.
By 1914 the nationalist fever was channelled entirely against the boches (Germans). On 31 July 1914, at around 9.30 pm, Jean Jaurés was having an animated
dinner with fellow journalists from his paper L’Humanité, seated by an open window at the the café La Chope du Croissant on the corner of rue du Croissant on
your right. Raoul Villain, standing outside, drew the curtain, aimed at Jaurés and

fired twice: Jaurés was dead for having opposed the war. Inside the café is dis-

played a copy of the next morning’s front page of L’Humanité announcing the
death of Jaurés, along with cuttings from other papers. Jean Jaures’s table is there
too, with a blood stain that never came off. Periodically, faithful disciples of Jean

Jaurés gather here for dinner and even strike up the Internationale before breaking

up. Although the place has been refurbished beyond recognition, you may consider stopping in this historic restaurant for a basic French meal in a genuine neighbourhood atmosphere.

WEST OF RUE MONTMARTRE
