Harlem & Upper Manhattan
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping
Sports & Activities

Harlem & Upper Manhattan
MORNINGSIDE HEIGHTS | HARLEM | EAST HARLEM | HAMILTON HEIGHTS & SUGAR
HILL | WASHINGTON HEIGHTS & INWOOD | HAMILTON HEIGHTS | INWOOD

Neighborhood Top Five

1 Cathedral Church of St John the Divine Exploring the fine artistry and

hidden treasures inside the gloriously epic yet still-unfinished St John the
Divine, the largest house of worship in the US.
2 Studio Museum in Harlem Seeing the world through African American

eyes at this small but thoughtfully curated museum.
3 Met Cloisters Taking a fantastical journey into the Middle Ages at this

monastic reconstruction, replete with Flemish tapestries and other medieval
masterpieces.
4 El Museo del Barrio Catching cutting-edge exhibitions from the Latin

American diaspora in East Harlem.
5 Apollo Theater Joining the celebratory crowds at this venerable concert

hall in the heart of Harlem.

Explore Harlem & Upper Manhattan
The top half of Manhattan is a lot of territory to cover, with many points of
interest a distance away from one another and no subways to take you
across town (the bus is an option). So pick a neighborhood (or, better yet, a
couple of contiguous neighborhoods) and stick to it. If you like your cities
to feel a little bit country, then head to Inwood, which has parks with
Hudson River views and a spectacular museum. Work your way down the
West Side to the gargantuan Cathedral Church of St John the Divine and the
environs of Columbia University, where academics roam. The university’s
massive new Manhattanville campus, along with City College, is separated
from Harlem proper by St Nicholas Park.
Prefer an urban vibe? Then it’s all about Harlem and Hamilton Heights, a
bastion of African American culture jammed with hopping bars, soulstirring churches and a few architectural treats. Malcolm X Blvd at 125th St
is the heart of Harlem.

It’s worth noting that many of Harlem’s major avenues have been
renamed in honor of prominent African Americans; however, many locals
still call the streets by their original names. Hence, Malcolm X Blvd is still
frequently referred to as Lenox Ave.

Local Life
Get your chic on Hit Harlem Haberdashery for eye-catching apparel,
Flamekeepers Hat Club for classic men’s caps and hats, and Atmos for
stylish one-of-a-kind sneakers.
A

Tune in For off-the-beaten-path musical events, nothing beats
Morningside Heights. Riverside Church, the Cathedral Church of St John
the Divine and Columbia University all host regular concerts.
A

Take a hike New Yorkers jogging, hiking and biking are what you’ll find
at Inwood Hill Park on any given sunny day. Tie those laces and get
moving.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway Main drag 125th St is just one stop from 59th St–Columbus
Circle in Midtown on the A and D trains. Other areas of Harlem and
northern Manhattan can be reached on the A/C, B/D, 1/2/3 and 4/5/6 trains.
A

Bus Numerous lines run between Upper and Lower Manhattan along all
the major avenues. The M10 bus provides a scenic trip along the western
side of Central Park into Harlem. The M100 and the M101 run east to west
along 125th St.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
Manhattan’s uptown communities tend to be locally minded, with bars, restaurants and shops
catering to a neighborhood crowd. These establishments tend to be sleepiest on weekday
mornings and liveliest in the evenings and on weekends.
To make the most of your visit, hit one of the museums or historic sights in the afternoon,
then stick around for dinner when these areas come to life.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Red Rooster
A Seasoned Vegan
A Dinosaur Bar-B-Que
A Sylvia’s
A BLVD Bistro

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Silvana
A Shrine
A 67 Orange St
A Ginny’s Supper Club

For reviews, see here
3 Best Live Jazz
A Marjorie Eliot’s Parlor Jazz
A Apollo Theater
A Ginny’s Supper Club

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE
CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF ST JOHN THE DIVINE
The largest place of worship in America has yet to be completed – and
probably won’t be anytime soon. But this glorious Episcopal cathedral
nonetheless commands attention with its ornate Gothic-style facade,
booming vintage organ and extravagantly scaled nave – twice as wide
as London’s Westminster Abbey.

DON’T MISS
A Portal sculptures
A Great Rose Window
A Great Organ
A Keith Haring Triptych

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , B6
A % tours 212-316-7540
A www.stjohndivine.org
A 1047 Amsterdam Ave, at W 112th St, Morningside Heights
A adult/student $10/8, highlights tour $15, vertical tour $20/18
A h 9am-5pm Mon-Sat, 12:30-2:30pm Sun
A b B/C, 1 to 110th St-Cathedral Pkwy

Visiting the Cathedral
Hour-long Highlight Tours are offered at 11am and 1pm Monday through
Friday, and 11am Saturday. One-hour Vertical Tours take you on a steep
climb to the top of the cathedral (bring a flashlight) at 10am Monday, noon
on Wednesday and Friday, and noon and 2pm on Saturday. Two services
worth experiencing are the Blessing of the Animals, a pet-owner pilgrimage
held on the first Sunday of October; and the Blessing of the Bikes, which
takes place on a Saturday in mid- to late April – local roll in on everything
from slick road bikes to chill beach cruisers.

Keith Haring Triptych
Behind the choir is the white-gold and bronze triptych Life of Christ, carved
by ’80s pop artist Keith Haring (1958–90). It’s one of the last works of art

he produced prior to succumbing to an AIDS-related illness aged 31.

Great Organ
The cathedral’s Great Organ – one of the world’s most powerful – was
originally installed in 1911. It was expanded in 1952 and now contains
8500 pipes arranged in 141 ranks. A 2001 fire damaged the instrument, but
a five-year restoration resurrected it.

The Nave
Illuminated by the Great Rose Window (America’s largest stained-glass
window), the nave is lined with two magisterial sets of 17th-century
tapestries. The Barberini Tapestries depict scenes from Christ’s life, while
the Mortlake Tapestries, based on cartoons by Raphael, show the Acts of the
Apostles.

CIVIL RIGHTS
The cathedral was involved in the Civil Rights movement as far back as the early 1950s
and has regularly worked with members of the community on issues of inequity. It is also
a long-running cultural outpost, hosting holiday concerts, lectures and exhibits, and it has
been the site of memorial services for many famous New Yorkers, including trumpeter
Louis Armstrong, poet and activist Audre Lorde, and artist Keith Haring.
TAKE A BREAK
Join the Columbia University student crowd for delicious American fare at Community
Food & Juice.

Hit the well-loved Tom’s Restaurant ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-864-6137;
www.tomsrestaurant.net; 2880 Broadway, at 112th St; mains $10-15, sandwiches $69.50; h 7am-1am Tue-Thu, 24hr Fri-Mon; W ; b 1 to 110th St) for diner food.

The Portal Sculptures

Two rows of sculptures carved in the 1980s and ’90s by British artist Simon
Verity frame the cathedral’s western entrance. Its central pillar features St
John the Divine himself, who penned the Book of Revelation; you’ll see the
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse beneath his feet. Depictions of
devastation abound – among the most frightful is a statue of Jeremiah, third
on the right, on a base that portrays the New York City skyline – Twin
Towers included – being destroyed.

An Unfinished History
The first cornerstone for the cathedral was laid on St John’s Day in 1892,
but construction was hardly smooth. Engineers had to dig 70ft in order to
find bedrock to which they could anchor the building. Architects died or
were fired, and in 1911, the initial Romanesque design was exchanged for a
bigger, Gothic-inspired plan.
Depleted funds have seen construction regularly halted. The north tower
remains unbuilt, and a ‘temporary’ domed roof, constructed out of terracotta tile in 1909, still rises above the epicenter of the church. A raging fire
in 2001 caused significant damage, including to the north transept, which is
yet to be rebuilt.
If it is ever completed, the 601ft-long cathedral will rank as the world’s
third-largest church, behind Rome’s St Peter’s Basilica and Côte d’Ivoire’s
Basilica of Our Lady of Peace at Yamoussoukro.

TOP EXPERIENCE

STUDIO MUSEUM IN HARLEM
For more than 40 years, this treasured museum has showcased
influential African American artists. Yet it’s not just another art display
center – it is a significant point of connection for a breadth of Harlem
cultural figures, who enjoy a rotating selection of exhibitions, film
screenings, gallery talks and more.

DON’T MISS
A Rotating art exhibitions
A Photography by James VanDerZee
A The well-stocked gift shop

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , C5
A % 212-864-4500
A www.studiomuseum.org
A 144 W 125th St, at Adam Clayton Powell Jr Blvd, Harlem
A suggested donation $7, Sun free
A h noon-9pm Thu & Fri, 10am-6pm Sat, noon-6pm Sun
A b 2/3 to 125th St

Collecting African American Artists
The permanent collection is small (just under 2000 objects), but it is rich.
The Studio Museum has been an important patron to African American
artists, and the collection features work by more than 400 of them. This
includes important pieces by painter Jacob Lawrence, photographer Gordon
Parks and collagist Romare Bearden – all of whom are represented in major
museum collections in the US. Additional works include those by a new
generation of artists, such as Nigeria-born Njideka Akunyili Crosby, who
was awarded a MacArthur Genius Award in 2017 for her large-scale collage
and photo transfer-based paintings that navigate the cultural complexities of
the transnational experience.

A New Beginning

The current museum is being dismantled to make way for a new building,
which is scheduled to emerge on the present location in 2021. The
museum’s temporary programming space, Studio Museum 127, is located at
429 W 127th St between Amsterdam and Convent Aves. Hours are
Thursday through Sunday from noon to 6pm.

SIGHTS

Latino culture is the focus of East Harlem’s El Museo del Barrio, while
Harlem’s Studio Museum and Schomburg Center for Research in
Black Culture fly the flag for African American expression. During the
Harlem Renaissance, the northern edge of the neighborhood was
dubbed ‘Sugar Hill’ as it was here that the Harlem elite lived the ‘sweet
life.’ Columbia University and America’s largest cathedral dominate
Morningside Heights, while Washington Heights takes its name from
America’s first president, who set up a fort here during the
Revolutionary War. Topping the lot is Inwood, home to the
Metropolitan Museum of Art’s medieval booty.

Morningside Heights

CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF ST JOHN THE DIVINE
( MAP

CATHEDRAL

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

UNIVERSITY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.columbia.edu; Broadway, at W 116th St, Morningside Heights;

b 1 to 116th St-Columbia University)

Founded in Lower Manhattan in 1754 as King’s College, the oldest
university in New York is now one of the world’s premier research
institutions. In 1897 the Ivy League school moved to its current location
(the site of a former asylum), where its stately, gated campus offers plenty
of cultural happenings.
The principal point of interest is the main courtyard (located on either side
of College Walk, at 116th St), which is surrounded by various Italian
Renaissance–style buildings. In the northern half, you’ll find the statue of

the open-armed Alma Mater seated before the Low Memorial Library. On
the eastern end of College Walk, at the corner of Amsterdam Ave, is
Hamilton Hall, a key site during the famous student uprising of 1968.
Your best bet for navigating the grounds is to download architectural
historian Andrew Dolkart’s self-guided audio tour
(www.columbia.edu/content/self-guided-walking-tour.html) from the
Columbia University website.
GENERAL ULYSSES S GRANT NATIONAL MEMORIAL

MEMORIAL

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-666-1640; www.nps.gov/gegr; Riverside Dr, at 122nd St,
Morningside Heights; h 10am-5pm Wed-Sun; b 1 to 125th St) F

Popularly known as Grant’s Tomb (‘Who’s buried in Grant’s Tomb?’
‘Who?’ ‘Grant, stupid!’ goes a classic joke), this landmark holds the
remains of Civil War hero and 18th president Ulysses S Grant and his wife,
Julia. Completed in 1897 – 12 years after his death – the imposing granite
structure is the largest mausoleum in America. A gallery covers key events
in Grant’s life. Rangers lead guided tours at various times throughout the
day and answer questions about the general and statesman.
Seventeen Gaudí-inspired mosaic benches, designed by Chilean artist
Pedro Silva in the 1970s, surround the mausoleum. It’s a downright
hallucinatory installation – and a good spot to contemplate the musings of
the late, great comedian George Carlin, who was known to light up here
back in the day.
RIVERSIDE CHURCH

CHURCH

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-870-6700; www.trcnyc.org; 490 Riverside Dr, at 120th St,
Morningside Heights; h 9am-5pm; b 1 to 116th St)

This imposing neo-Gothic beauty was built by the Rockefeller family in
1930. While the sparseness of the interior evokes an Italian Gothic style, the
stained-glass windows in the narthex are actually Flemish, dating back to
the 16th century. The church rings its 74 carillon bells with an extraordinary

20-ton bass bell (the world’s largest) at 10:30am and 3pm on Sunday.
Interdenominational services are held at 10:45am on Sunday, with free tours
offered immediately after (at 12:30pm).

TOP EXPERIENCE
APOLLO THEATER
More than simply historic, Harlem’s Apollo Theater is a swinging testament to Harlem’s
astounding musical legacy. Originally a whites-only burlesque joint, the neoclassical venue
reinvented itself in 1934 with ‘Jazz à la Carte.’ Soon after, virtually every major Black artist
was performing here, from Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong to Count Basie and Billie
Holiday.
The Apollo introduced the legendary Amateur Night in 1934. Its long list of then-unknown
competitors includes Ella Fitzgerald, Gladys Knight, Jimi Hendrix, the Jackson 5 and Lauryn
Hill. The event still kicks off every Wednesday night and its wild and ruthless crowd is as fun
to watch as tomorrow’s next big things. Beyond Amateur Night is a thriving year-round
program of music, dance, master classes and special events, with shows spanning Cuban salsa
tributes to Afro-Latin jazz suites.
While guided tours of the interior are available only for groups of 20 or more with advance
reservations, individuals are welcome to join group tours based on availability. Take the tour
and expect to see a fragment of the Tree of Hope, a long-gone elm performers would rub for
good luck before taking to the stage.

DON’T MISS
A Amateur Night A Guided tours A Tree of Hope

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP

GOOGLE MAP , C5

A % tickets 800-745-3000, tours 212-531-5337
A www.apollotheater.org
A 253 W 125th St, btwn Frederick Douglass & Adam Clayton Powell Jr Blvds, Harlem
A tickets from $24
A b A/B/C/D, 2/3 to 125th St

Harlem

STUDIO MUSEUM IN HARLEM
( MAP

MUSEUM

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
SCHOMBURG CENTER FOR RESEARCH IN BLACK CULTURE
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 917-275-6975; www.nypl.org/locations/schomburg; 515

MUSEUM

Malcolm X Blvd, at 135th St, Harlem; h 10am-6pm Mon & Thu-Sat, to 8pm Tue & Wed; b 2/3 to
135th St) F

The nation’s largest collection of documents, rare books and photographs
relating to the African American experience resides at this scholarly center
run by the New York Public Library. It’s named after Arthur Schomburg, a
Black Puerto Rican activist who amassed a singular collection of
manuscripts, slave narratives and other important artifacts. Regular
exhibitions, lectures and film screenings are held on-site.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE

555 EDGECOMBE AVE
When completed in 1916, this brick beaux-arts giant ( MAP ; 555 Edgecombe Ave, at 160th
St, Washington Heights; b A/C to 163rd St-Amsterdam Ave; 1 to 157th St) was Washington
Heights’ first luxury apartment complex, with a concierge, a separate workers’ entrance and no
fewer than three elevators. It was initially available only to whites, but the neighborhood’s
transformation from predominantly Irish and Jewish to African American saw the building’s
residents become mostly Black by the 1940s.
Its tenants would include some of New York’s most prominent African Americans, among
them boxer Joe Louis and music heavyweights Lena Horne, Count Basie, Duke Ellington and
Billy Strayhorn. Today the building’s cultural legacy lives on every Sunday afternoon, when
veteran musician Marjorie Eliot throws open the doors to her apartment, inviting anyone and
everyone into her living room for one of the city’s most enchanting jazz jams.

East Harlem
MUSEUM

EL MUSEO DEL BARRIO

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-831-7272; www.elmuseo.org; 1230 Fifth Ave, btwn 104th &
105th Sts, East Harlem; suggested donation adult/student/child $9/5/free; h 11am-6pm Wed-Sat,
noon-5pm Sun; b 6 to 103rd St)

Bienvenido to one of New York’s premier Latino cultural institutions, with
thoughtful rotating exhibitions that span all media, from painting and
photography to video and site-specific installations. The shows often
highlight El Museo’s strong permanent collection, which includes preColumbian artifacts, traditional folk works and a stellar array of postwar art
made by a wide range of Latino artists.
The museum includes pieces by well-known historical figures such as
Chilean surrealist Roberto Matta and established contemporary artists such
as Félix González-Torres and Pepón Osorio.

Hamilton Heights & Sugar Hill

HAMILTON GRANGE

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 646-548-2310; www.nps.gov/hagr; St Nicholas Park, at 141st St;

h 9am-5pm Wed-Sun, guided tours 10am, 11am & 2pm; b A/C, B/D to 145th St) F

This Federal-style retreat belonged to Founding Father Alexander Hamilton,
who owned a 32-acre country estate here in the early 1800s. Unfortunately,
Hamilton was able to enjoy his abode for only two years before his life was
cut short in a fatal duel with political rival Aaron Burr. Moved from
Convent Ave to its present location in 2008, the building is one of several
Hamilton-related sights seeing an increase in visitors – by some 75% –
thanks to Lin-Manuel Miranda’s musical, Hamilton.
HAMILTON HEIGHTS HISTORIC DISTRICT

AREA

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Convent Ave & Hamilton Tce, btwn 141st & 145th Sts, Hamilton
Heights; b A/C, B/D to 145th St)

Two parallel streets in Hamilton Heights – Convent Ave and Hamilton Tce
– contain a landmark stretch of historic limestone and brownstone town
houses from the period between 1866 and 1931. Wes Anderson fans may
recognize the turreted building on the southeastern corner of Convent Ave
and 144th St from the film The Royal Tenenbaums.

Washington Heights & Inwood

o MET CLOISTERS

MUSEUM

(% 212-923-3700; www.metmuseum.org/cloisters; 99 Margaret Corbin Dr, Fort Tryon Park; 3-day
pass adult/senior/child $25/17/12, pay-as-you-wish for residents of NY State & students from CT,
NY and NJ; h 10am-5:15pm Mar-Oct, to 4:45pm Nov-Feb; b A to 190th St)

On a hilltop overlooking the Hudson River, the Cloisters is a curious
architectural jigsaw, its many parts made up of various European
monasteries and other historic buildings. Built in the 1930s to house the
Metropolitan Museum’s medieval treasures, its frescoes, tapestries and
paintings are set in galleries that sit around a romantic courtyard, connected
by grand archways and topped with Moorish terra-cotta roofs. Among its
many rare treasures is the beguiling tapestry series The Hunt of the Unicorn
(1495–1505).
Also worth seeking out is the remarkably well-preserved 15th-century
Annunciation Triptych (Merode Altarpiece). Then there’s the stunning
French 12th-century Saint-Guilhem and Bonnefant cloisters, the latter
featuring plants used in medieval medicine, magic, ceremony and the arts,
and with views over the Hudson River.
Your ticket gives you three-day admission to the Cloisters as well as the
Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Met Breuer. Note that although the
Dyckman St subway station looks closest to the museum, there are steep

slippery steps between the station and the entrance; use 190th St station
instead and walk through the park.
INWOOD HILL PARK

PARK

(www.nycgovparks.org/parks/inwoodhillpark; Dyckman St, at the Hudson River, Inwood; h 6am1am; b A to Inwood-207th St)

This 196-acre oasis contains the last natural forest and salt marsh in
Manhattan and evidence suggests the land was used by Native Americans in
the 17th century. It’s a cool escape in summer and a great place to explore
anytime, as you’ll find hilly paths for hiking and mellow, grassy patches
and benches for quiet contemplation. It’s so bucolic that the treetops serve
as frequent nesting sites for bald eagles. On summer weekends, join locals
who barbecue at designated grills.
MORRIS-JUMEL MANSION MUSEUM

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-923-8008; www.morrisjumel.org; 65 Jumel Tce, at 160th St,
Washington Heights; adult/child $10/free; h 10am-4pm Tue-Fri, to 5pm Sat & Sun; b C to 163rd StAmsterdam Ave)

Built in 1765 as a country retreat for Roger and Mary Morris, this columned
mansion is the oldest house in Manhattan. It is also famous for having
briefly served as George Washington’s headquarters after it was seized by
the Continental Army in 1776. The mansion’s beautifully appointed rooms
contain many original furnishings, including a bed that reputedly belonged
to Napoleon. Hour-long guided tours run on weekends (Saturday at noon,
Sunday at 2pm; $12).
SYLVAN TERRACE

HISTORIC SITE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Sylvan Tce, Washington Heights; b C to 163rd St-Amsterdam Ave)

The wooden houses on storybook Sylvan Terrace – resplendent with their
high narrow stoops, dentiled canopies and boldly paneled wooden doors –
constitute NYC’s first attempt at building affordable abodes for workers.

The street itself is graced by its original late-19th-century gas lamps, while
its cobblestones are Belgian, not Dutch, as is the case in Lower Manhattan
and Brooklyn.
FULL PEWS: HARLEM GOSPEL CHURCH SERVICES
What started as an occasional pilgrimage has turned into a tourist-industry spectacle: entire
busloads of travelers now make their way to Harlem every Sunday to attend a gospel service.
The volume of visitors is so high that some churches turn away people due to space
constraints. In some cases, tourists have been known to outnumber congregants.
Naturally, this has led to friction. Many locals are upset by visitors who chat during
sermons, leave in the middle of services or show up in skimpy attire. Plus, for some, there’s
the uncomfortable sense that African American spirituality is something to be consumed like a
Broadway show.
The churches, to their credit, remain welcoming spaces. But if you do decide to attend, be
respectful: dress modestly (Sunday best!), don’t take pictures and remain present for the
duration of the service. Also, keep in mind that most churches will not allow large backpacks.
Sunday services generally start at 10am or 11am and can last for two or more hours. There
are roughly five dozen participating churches. The soulful Sunday gospel services at
Abyssinian Baptist Church ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-862-7474;
www.abyssinian.org; 132 Odell Clark Pl, btwn Adam Clayton Powell Jr & Malcolm X Blvds,
Harlem; h tourist gospel service 11:30am Sun mid-Sep–Jul; b 2/3 to 135th St) are the city’s
most famous. Arrive at least an hour before the service to queue up, and abide by the strict
entry rules: no tank tops, flip-flops, shorts, leggings or backpacks. Others include Canaan
Baptist Church ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-866-0301; www.cbccnyc.org; 132 W
116th St, btwn Adam Clayton Powell Jr & Malcolm X Blvds, Harlem; h service 10am Sun; c ;
b 2/3 to 116th St), a neighborhood church founded in 1932, and Convent Avenue Baptist
Church ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-234-6767; www.conventchurch.org; 420 W 145th
St, at Convent Ave, Hamilton Heights; h services 8am & 11am Sun; b A/C, B/D or 1 to 145th
St), which has been conducting traditional baptist services since the 1940s.
If you’re less interested in the preaching and more interested in the feel-good singing and
celebration, a number of Harlem spots offer Sunday gospel brunches, including Sylvia’s and
Ginny’s Supper Club.
