The City Skyline
New York’s architectural history is a layer cake of ideas and styles –
one that is literally written on the city’s streets. There are the revivals
(Greek, Gothic, Romanesque and Renaissance) and the unadorned
forms of the International style. But if there is one style associated with
New York beyond all others it is art deco, which was fused onto the
cityscape in the 1930s. Today, icons like the Chrysler and Empire State
are decadent reminders of that defining era.

Colonial Foundations
New York’s architectural roots are modest. Early Dutch-colonial
farmhouses were all about function: clapboard-wood homes with shingled,
gambrel roofs were positioned to take advantage of daylight and retain heat
in winter. A number of these have somehow survived to the present. The
most remarkable is the Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House in East Flatbush,
Brooklyn. Originally built in 1652 (with additions made over the years), it
is the oldest house in the entire city.
After the Dutch colony of New Amsterdam became the British colony of
New York in 1664, architectural styles moved to Georgian. Boxy, brick and
stone structures with hipped roofs began to materialize. In the northern
Manhattan district of Inwood, the Morris-Jumel Mansion from 1765 is an
altered example of this: the home was built in the Georgian style by Roger
Morris, then purchased by Stephen Jumel, who added a neoclassical facade
in the 19th century. Another British-colonial building of interest is the
Fraunces Tavern, where George Washington bid an emotional farewell to
the officers who had accompanied him throughout the American
Revolution. Today the structure contains a museum and restaurant.
On the ceremonial end is St Paul’s Chapel, south of City Hall Park. Built
in the 1760s, it is the oldest surviving church in the city. Its design was
inspired by the much bigger St Martin-in-the-Fields church in London.

Must-See Buildings
Chrysler Building (Midtown)
Grand Central Terminal (Midtown)
Morris-Jumel Mansion (Washington Heights)
Empire State Building (Midtown)
Temple Emanu-El (Upper East Side)
Guggenheim Museum (Upper East Side)

Architecture in the New Republic
In the early 1800s, architecture grew lighter and more refined. The so-called
Federal style employed classical touches – slim, columned entrances,
triangular pediments at the roofline and rounded fanlights over doors and
windows. Some of the best surviving examples are tied to municipal
government. City Hall, built in 1812, owes its French form to émigré
architect Joseph François Mangin and its Federal detailing to Americanborn John McComb Jr. The interior contains an airy rotunda and curved
cantilevered stairway.
Uptown on the Upper East Side, the 1799 Gracie Mansion is the official
residence of New York City’s mayor since 1942 It’s a fine example of a
Federal residence, with its broad, river-view porch and leaded glass
sidelights. This stretch of riverfront was once lined with buildings of the
sort – a sight that impressed Alexis de Tocqueville during his tour of the
United States in the early 19th century.
Other Federal-style specimens include the 1793 James Watson House at 7
State St across from Battery Park, and the 1832 Merchant’s House Museum,
in NoHo. The latter still contains its intact interiors.

Greek, Gothic & Romanesque: The Revivals
Following the publication of an important treatise on Greek architecture in
the late 1700s, architects began to show a renewed interest in pure, classical
forms. By the 1830s, becolumned Greek Revival structures were going up
all over New York. Manhattan contains a bevy of these buildings, including
the gray granite St Peter’s Church (1838) and the white-marble Federal Hall
(1842).
Starting in the late 1830s, the simple Georgian and Federalist styles
started to give way to more ornate structures that employed Gothic and
Romanesque elements. An early example was the Church of the Ascension
(1841) in Greenwich Village – an imposing brownstone structure studded
with pointed arches and a crenelated tower. The same architect – Richard
Upjohn – also designed downtown Manhattan’s Trinity Church (1846) in
the same style.
By the 1860s, places of worship were growing in size and scale. Among
the most resplendent are St Patrick’s Cathedral (1858–1879), which took
over an entire city block at Fifth Ave and 51st St, and the perpetually underconstruction Cathedral Church of St John the Divine (since 1911), in
Morningside Heights. Indeed, the style was so popular that one of the city’s
most important icons – the Brooklyn Bridge (1870–83) – was constructed à
la Gothic Revival by John Roebling and his son Washington, and later by
the latter’s wife, Emily Roebling.
Romanesque elements (such as curved arches) can be spotted on
structures all over the city. Some of the most famous include the Joseph
Papp Public Theater (formerly the Astor Library) in Greenwich Village,
built between 1853 and 1881, and the breathtaking Temple Emanu-El
(1929) on Fifth Ave on the Upper East Side.

Beaux-Arts Blockbusters
At the turn of the 20th century, New York entered a gilded age. Robber
barons such as JP Morgan, Henry Clay Frick and John D Rockefeller –
awash in steel and oil money – built themselves lavish manses. Public
buildings grew ever more extravagant in scale and ornamentation.
Architects, many of whom trained in France, came back with European
design ideals. Gleaming white limestone began to replace all the
brownstone, first stories were elevated to allow for dramatic staircase
entrances, and buildings were adorned with sculptured keystones and
Corinthian columns.
Game-changing architectural firm McKim, Mead and White’s Villard
Houses, from 1884 (now the Palace Hotel), show the movement’s early
roots. Loosely based on Rome’s Palazzo della Cancelleria, they channeled
the symmetry and elegance of the Italian Renaissance. Other classics
include the central branch of the New York Public Library (1911), designed
by Carrère and Hastings; the 1902 extension of the Metropolitan Museum
of Art, by Richard Morris Hunt; and Warren and Wetmore’s stunning Grand
Central Terminal (1913), which is capped by a statue of Mercury, the god of
commerce.

AIA Guide to New York (5th edition; 2010) is a comprehensive guide to the most significant
buildings in the city.

Reaching Skyward
By the time New York settled into the 20th century, elevators and steelframe engineering had allowed the city to grow up – literally. This period
saw a building boom of skyscrapers, starting with Cass Gilbert’s neo-Gothic
60-story Woolworth Building (1913), which was the world’s tallest building
for almost two decades.

Others soon followed. In 1930, the Chrysler Building, the 77-story artdeco masterpiece designed by William Van Alen, trumped the Woolworth as
the world’s tallest structure. The following year, the record was broken by
the Empire State Building, a clean-lined moderne monolith crafted from
Indiana limestone with a beautiful art-deco interior. Its spire was meant to
be used as a mooring mast for dirigibles (airships) – an idea that made for
good publicity, but which proved to be impractical and unfeasible.
The influx of displaced European architects and other thinkers who had
resettled in New York by the end of WWII fostered a lively dialogue
between American and European architects. This was a period when urban
planner Robert Moses furiously rebuilt vast swaths of New York – to the

detriment of many neighborhoods – and designers and artists became
obsessed with the clean, unadorned lines of the International style.
One of the earliest projects in this vein were the UN buildings (1948–52),
the combined effort of a committee of architects, including the Swiss-born
Le Corbusier, Brazil’s Oscar Niemeyer and USA’s Wallace K Harrison. The
Secretariat employed New York’s first glass curtain wall – which looms
over the ski-slope curve of the General Assembly. The city’s greatest
emblem of this architectural era is the controversial inverted ziggurat of the
Guggenheim Museum, which was completed in 1959 but conceived more
than a decade earlier.

The New Guard
By the late 20th century, numerous architects began to rebel against the
hard-edged, unornamented nature of modernist design. Among them was
Philip Johnson. His pink-granite 550 Madison Ave building (1984),
formerly the AT&T Building and later the Sony Tower, is topped by a
scrolled, neo-Georgian pediment – a postmodern icon of the Midtown
skyline.
What never became an icon was Daniel Libeskind’s twisting, angular
design for the One World Trade Center tower (2013), replaced by a boxier
architecture-by-committee glass obelisk. On the same site, budget blowouts
led to tweaks of Santiago Calatrava’s luminous design for the World Trade
Center Transportation Hub (2016). According to critics, what should have
looked like a dove in flight now resembles a winged dinosaur. An ongoing
WTC site controversy involves Two World Trade Center, its original Sir
Norman Foster design scrapped for one by Danish firm Bjarke Ingels Group
(BIG). According to the chief operating officer of 21st Century Fox, James
Murdoch, Foster’s design was too conventional for what will become the
media company’s new base. BIG responded with its trademark
unconventionalism: a tower of giant, differently sized boxes, soaring
playfully into the sky (estimated completion date: 2022–23).
Not that Sir Foster can’t do cutting-edge style. The British architect’s
Hearst Tower (2006) – a glass skyscraper zigzagging its way out of a 1920s
sandstone structure – remains a Midtown trailblazer. The building is one of
numerous daring 21st-century additions to the city’s architectural portfolio,
among them Brooklyn’s sci-fi arena Barclays Center (2012), Thom Mayne’s
folded-and-slashed 41 Cooper Square (2009) in the East Village, and Frank
Gehry’s rippling, 76-storey apartment tower New York by Gehry (2011) in
the Financial District.
Esteemed New York architecture critic Ada Louise Huxtable gathers some of her most important
essays in the book On Architecture: Collected Reflections on a Century of Change.

Starchitects on the Line
Frank Gehry’s IAC Building (2007) – a billowing, white-glass structure
often compared to a wedding cake – is one of a growing number of
starchitect creations appearing around railway-turned-urban-park, the High
Line. The most prolific of these is Renzo Piano’s Whitney Museum (2015).
Dramatically asymmetrical and clad in blue-gray steel, the building has
received significant praise for melding seamlessly with the elevated park.
In 2017 the area welcomed Dame Zaha Hadid’s apartment complex at
520 West 28th St. Rising 11 stories, the luxury structure was the IraqiBritish architect’s first residential project in the city, its voluptuous, sci-fi
curves complimented by a 2500-sq-ft sculpture deck showcasing art
presented by Friends of the High Line. Sadly the Pritzker Prize–winning
architect wasn’t able to see its completion; Hadid died aged 65 in 2016.
The redevelopment of the Hudson Yards area has revitalized the riverside
skyline. The final extension of the High Line loops around the Hudson
Yards, ending at 34th St. At the heart of the development, a huge public
space is anchored by the Vessel (2019) – an Escher-like steel structure by
Heatherwick Studio rising skywards. Its 2500 steps are fashioned into a
series of interlocking walkways and staircases designed for climbing; locals
have nicknamed it ‘the shawarma.’ Also newly minted in 2019 is The Shed,
an arts center with a 500-seat theater and retractable shell, designed by
Diller Scofidio + Renfro in collaboration with the Rockwell Group. An
outdoor observation deck on the 100th floor of 30 Hudson Yards opened to
vertigo-immune visitors in 2019; at 1100ft above ground, it’s the highest of
its kind in the Western Hemisphere.
Public Art: New York by Jean Parker Phifer, with photos by Francis Dzikowski, is an informative
guide to the city’s public monuments.

Queer City: From Stonewall to Marriage Equality
New York City is out and damn proud. It was here that the Stonewall
Riots took place, that the modern gay-rights movement bloomed and
that America’s first Pride march hit the streets. Yet even before the
days of ‘Gay Lib,’ the city had a knack for all things queer and
fabulous, from Bowery sex saloons and Village Sapphic poetry to drag
balls in Harlem. It hasn’t always been smooth sailing, but it’s always
been one hell of a ride.

Before Stonewall

Subversion in the Villages
By the 1890s, New York City’s rough-and-ready Lower East Side had
established quite a reputation for scandalous ‘resorts’ – dancing halls,
saloons and brothels – frequented by the city’s ‘inverts’ and ‘fairies.’ From
Paresis Hall at 5th St and Bowery to Slide at 157 Bleecker St, these venues
offered everything from cross-dressing spectaculars and dancing to back
rooms for same-sex encounters. For closeted middle-class men, these dens
were a secret thrill – places reached undercover on trains for a fix of
camaraderie, understanding and uninhibited fun. For curious middle-class
straights, they were just as enticing – salacious destinations on voyeuristic
‘slumming tours.’
As New York strode into the 20th century, writers and bohemians began
stepping into Greenwich Village, lured by the area’s cheap rents and
romantically crooked streets. The unconventionality and free thinking the
area became known for turned the Village into an Emerald City for gays
and lesbians, a place with no shortage of bachelor pads, more tolerant
attitudes and – with the arrival of Prohibition – an anything-goes speakeasy
scene. A number of gay-owned businesses lined MacDougal St, among
them the legendary Eve’s Hangout at number 129, a tearoom run by Polish
Jewish immigrant Eva Kotchever (Eve Addams). Police raided the place in
June 1926, charging Eve with ‘obscenity’ for penning her Lesbian Love
anthology, and deporting her back to Europe, where she ran a bookstore and
club in Paris, fought in the Spanish Civil War and was eventually
imprisoned and murdered in Auschwitz. Playwright Barbara Kahn wrote
Unreachable Eden about Kotchever’s life.

America’s first gay-rights rally was held in New York City in 1964. Organized by the Homosexual
League of New York and the League for Sexual Freedom, the picket took place outside the Army
Induction Center on Whitehall St, where protestors demanded an end to the military’s anti-gay
policies.

Divas, Drag & Harlem
While Times Square had developed a reputation for attracting gay men
(many of them working in the district’s theaters, restaurants and speakeasy
bars), the hottest gay scene in the 1920s was found further north, in Harlem.
The neighborhood’s flourishing music scene included numerous gay and
lesbian performers, among them Gladys Bentley, who was as famous for
her tuxedos and girlfriends as she was for her singing.
Even more famous were Harlem’s drag balls, which became a hit with
both gay and straight New Yorkers in the roaring ’20s. The biggest of the lot
was the Hamilton Lodge Ball, organized by Lodge #710 of the Grand
United Order of Odd Fellows and held annually at the swank Rockland
Palace on 155th St. Commonly dubbed the Faggots Ball, it was a chance for
both gay men and women to (legally) cross-dress and steal a same-sex
dance, and for fashionable ‘normals’ to indulge in a little voyeuristic
titillation. The evening’s star attraction was the beauty pageant, which saw
the drag-clad competitors vie for the title of ‘Queen of the Ball.’ Langston
Hughes proclaimed it the ‘spectacles of color’ and the gay writer was one of
many members of New York’s literati to attend the ball. It was attended by
everyone from sex workers to high-society families. Even the papers
covered the extravaganza; its outrageous frocks were the talk of the town.

Queer NYC on Screen
Torch Song Trilogy
(1988)
The Boys in the Band
(1970)
Paris Is Burning
(1990)

Angels in America
(2003)
Jeffrey
(1995)
The Normal Heart
(2014)

The Stonewall Revolution
The relative transgression of the early 20th century was replaced with a new
conservatism in the following decades, as the Great Depression, WWII and
the Cold War took their toll. Conservatism was helped along by Senator
Joseph ‘Joe’ McCarthy, who declared that homosexuals in the State
Department threatened America’s security and children. Tougher policing
aimed to eradicate queer visibility in the public sphere, forcing the scene
further underground in the 1940s and ’50s. Although crackdowns on gay
venues had always occurred, they became increasingly common.
Yet on June 28, 1969, when police officers raided the Stonewall Inn – a
gay-friendly watering hole in Greenwich Village – patrons did the
unthinkable: they revolted. Fed up with both the harassment and corrupt
officers receiving payoffs from the bars’ owners (who were mostly
organized-crime figures), they began bombarding the officers with coins,
bottles, bricks and chants of ‘gay power’ and ‘we shall overcome.’ They
were also met by a line of high-kicking drag queens and their nowlegendary chant: ‘We are the Stonewall girls, we wear our hair in curls, we
wear no underwear, we show our pubic hair, we wear our dungarees, above
our nelly knees…’ Their collective anger and solidarity was a turning point,
igniting intense and passionate debate about discrimination and forming the
catalyst for the modern gay-rights movement, not just in New York, but
across the US and in countries from the Netherlands to Australia. On the
one-year anniversary of the riots, the day was marked by the US’s first
LGBTIQ+ Pride march.

LGBTIQ+ Reads
Dancer from the Dance
(Andrew Holleran)
Last Exit to Brooklyn
(Hubert Selby)
Another Country
(James Baldwin)
City Boy

(Edmund White)
People in Trouble
(Sarah Schulman)
The House of Impossible Beauties
(Joseph Cassara)

In the Shadow of AIDS
LGBTIQ+ activism intensified as HIV and AIDS hit world headlines in the
early 1980s. Faced with ignorance, fear and the moral indignation of those
who saw AIDS as a ‘gay cancer,’ activists such as writer Larry Kramer set
about tackling what was quickly becoming an epidemic. Out of his efforts
was born ACT UP (AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power) in 1987, an
advocacy group set up to fight the perceived homophobia and indifference
of then-president Ronald Reagan, as well as to end the price gouging of
AIDS drugs by pharmaceutical companies. One of its boldest protests took
place on September 14, 1989, when seven ACT UP protesters chained
themselves to the VIP balcony of the New York Stock Exchange,
demanding pharmaceutical company Burroughs Wellcome lower the price
of AIDS drug AZT from a prohibitive $10,000 per patient per annum.
Within days, the price was slashed to $6400 per patient.
The epidemic itself had a significant impact on New York’s artistic
community. Among its most high-profile victims were artist Keith Haring,
photographer Robert Mapplethorpe and fashion designer Halston. Out of
this loss grew a tide of powerful AIDS-related plays and musicals that
would not only win broad international acclaim but would become part of
America’s mainstream cultural canon. Among these are Tony Kushner’s
political epic Angels in America and Jonathan Larson’s rock musical Rent.
Both works would win Tony Awards and the Pulitzer Prize.

Marriage & the New Millennium
The LGBTIQ+ fight for complete equality took two massive steps forward
in 2011. On September 20, a federal law banning LGBTIQ+ military
personnel from serving openly – the so-called ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’
policy – was repealed after years of intense lobbying. Three months earlier
persistence had led to an even greater victory – the right to marry. On June
15, the New York State Assembly passed the Marriage Equality Act. On
June 24, the very eve of New York City Gay Pride, the bill was signed into
law by New York Governor Andrew Cuomo. State victory became a
national one on June 26, 2015, when the US Supreme Court ruled that
same-sex marriage is a legal right across the country, striking down the
remaining marriage bans in 13 US states.
In the same year, organizers of New York City’s St Patrick’s Parade lifted
their long-standing ban on LGBTIQ+ groups, allowing
Out@NBCUniversal – a group consisting of gay, lesbian, bisexual and
transgender people working for NBCUniversal – to join the parade. The
lifting of the ban no doubt met the approval of New York City mayor Bill
de Blasio, who had famously boycotted the event in protest.
Despite these significant triumphs, New York City is not immune to
intolerance and prejudice. In 2013, New Yorkers reeled when a Brooklyn
man, Mark Carson, was fatally shot in Greenwich Village, one of
Manhattan’s most historically tolerant neighborhoods. Carson and a friend
had been walking along 8th St in the early hours of May 18 when, after a
short altercation with a group of men hurling homophobic abuse, the 32year-old was shot at point-blank range. The attack was a sobering reminder
that even in liberal New York City, not everyone is happy to live and let
live.
When President Trump took office in 2017, New York’s annual Gay
Pride march gained new purpose in the face of perceived anti-LGBTIQ+
sentiment from within the Trump administration. NYC Pride 2019, marking
the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall Riots, brought together 150,000

marchers – double the usual number – for the largest procession in the
event’s history.

LGBTIQ+ HISTORY
New York State amends a public-obscenity code to include a ban on the appearance or
discussion of gay people on stage in reaction to the increasing visibility of gays on Broadway.

Police officers raid the Stonewall Inn in Greenwich Village on June 28, sparking a riot that
lasts several days and gives birth to the modern gay rights movement.

ACT UP is founded to challenge the US government’s slow response in dealing with AIDS.
The activist group stages its first major demonstration on March 24 on Wall St.

New York’s Marriage Equality Act comes into effect at 12.01am on July 24. A lesbian couple
from Buffalo take their vows just seconds after midnight in Niagara Falls.

President Barack Obama declares a swath of the West Village, including the iconic Christopher
Park, a US National Monument, the first such designation honoring the LGBTIQ+ civil rights
movement.

The 50th anniversary of the Stonewall riots brings five million attendees to NYC’s Pride
events.
