Brooklyn
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping
Sports & Activities

Brooklyn
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS, DOWNTOWN BROOKLYN & DUMBO | BOERUM HILL, COBBLE
HILL, CARROLL GARDENS & RED HOOK | FORT GREENE, CLINTON HILL & BED-STUY |
PARK SLOPE, GOWANUS & SUNSET PARK | PROSPECT HEIGHTS, CROWN HEIGHTS &
FLATBUSH | WILLIAMSBURG, GREENPOINT & BUSHWICK | CONEY ISLAND &
BRIGHTON BEACH

Neighborhood Top Five

1 Brooklyn Bridge Park Running, cycling, lounging, skating, bouldering –

and more – at these 85 acres of multifarious parkland perfectly situated
along the East River.
2 Prospect Park Wandering through the 600 acres of woodlands, meadows,

lakes and more in the park that Central Park designers Vaux and Olmsted
considered their crowning achievement.
3 Brooklyn Museum Discovering the collections of Brooklyn’s largest

museum, from one of the nation’s finest exhibits of ancient Egyptian art to
groundbreaking feminist art from the 1970s.
4 Coney Island Riding a wooden roller coaster, strolling the boardwalk and

taking in colorful street art in murals in this fun-time, seaside district.
5 Brooklyn Flea Browsing through dozens of tables of vintage clothes, old

LPs, antiques, housewares and other interesting bric-a-brac at Brooklyn’s
favorite weekend arts/flea market.

Explore Brooklyn
Home to more than 2.6 million people spread across 71 sq miles, Brooklyn
is a universe unto its own. There’s much to see here, from charming
brownstone-lined neighborhoods and beautifully landscaped parks to
cutting-edge art galleries and seaside amusement parks.
For day-trips, it is best to pick a neighborhood and stick to it. South
Brooklyn, especially Brooklyn Heights and neighboring Dumbo, offers lots
of history and great Manhattan views. Prospect Park is just as magnificent a
green space as Central Park (and only slightly smaller), and many of the
neighborhoods surrounding it are great for architectural walks, window
shopping and cafe-hopping. In the same area are two other big draws: the
sprawling Brooklyn Museum and the Brooklyn Botanic Gardens.

Fans of vintage amusement parks and beachside strolls should head to
Coney Island. For nightlife, north Brooklyn is the place to be. The trendy
enclave of Williamsburg lies just a single subway stop from Manhattan and
is loaded with bars and restaurants. Greenpoint and Bushwick have more
indie cred, with atmospheric drinking dens and live-music spots.

Local Life
Rock and roll Hit the hot music spots in Williamsburg and Bushwick to
hear the latest indie sounds.
A

Park sloping Join the stroller brigade for a lap or two around Prospect
Park. Or go window-shopping and cafe-hopping on Fifth Ave.
A

Farmers markets Shop at the Saturday produce markets – Grand Army
Plaza, Fort Greene Park, Borough Hall and McCarren Park.
A

Recreation Brooklyn Bridge Park has ample amusement: pickup
basketball, idle strolls or bike rides, or just lying on the grass,taking in the
skyline views.
A

Getting There & Away
Seventeen lines travel to/from Brooklyn; all run through downtown.
Key routes from Manhattan include the A/C, 2/3, 4/5, B/D/F, N/R/Q and L
trains. The G runs only between Queens and Brooklyn, from Long Island
City to south of Prospect Park.
A Subway

Take the B61 or B57 for Red Hook. The B62 runs from downtown
Brooklyn to Williamsburg/Greenpoint.
A Bus

The NYC Ferry ( MAP ; www.ferry.nyc; S 10th St, off Kent Ave, Williamsburg; one-way
trip $2.75; g B32, Q59 to Kent Ave, b J/M/Z to Marcy Ave) runs services to Brooklyn
A Boat

from Manhattan’s Wall St and E 34th St, with stops including Dumbo,
Williamsburg, Greenpoint, Sunset Park and Brooklyn Navy Yard.
Apple-green Boro Taxis can pick up passengers only in Upper
Manhattan and the four outer boroughs (but can drop off anywhere in
NYC). Hail them on the street or request one through the Curb smartphone
app.
A Taxi

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
For a sense of the city as it was, wander around Brighton Beach. Under the elevated tracks on
Brighton Beach Ave, the bustling Russian district known as ‘Little Odessa’ is packed with
greengrocers and emporiums dispensing smoked fish and pierogi. On the street, you’ll find a
cross section of humanity – from grandmas to sulky teens – chattering in dozens of different
languages as the trains rumble overhead. It’s unmistakably New York.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Olmsted
A Modern Love
A Miss Ada
A Smorgasburg
A Juliana’s
A Zenkichi

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A House of Yes
A Brooklyn Barge
A Radegast Hall & Biergarten
A Union Hall
A Maison Premiere

For reviews, see here
1 Best Green Spaces
A Prospect Park
A Brooklyn Bridge Park
A Brooklyn Botanic Garden
A Fort Greene Park
A East River State Park

TOP EXPERIENCE

BROOKLYN BRIDGE
One of NYC’s most-photographed sights, and an engineering
masterpiece, Brooklyn Bridge opened in 1883. With a then-unequalled
span of 1596ft, it became the first land connection between Brooklyn
and Manhattan, as well as the world’s first steel suspension bridge.
This timeless example of urban design has inspired poets, writers and
painters – even today, it never fails to dazzle.

DID YOU KNOW?
A In May 1884, circus impresario PT Barnum marched 21 elephants over the bridge to prove to

skeptics that the structure was safe.

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , B1
A b 4/5/6 to Brooklyn Bridge-City Hall, J/Z to Chambers St, R/W to City Hall, b 2/3 to Clark

St, A/F to High St-Brooklyn Bridge Station

The Bridge’s Heavy Toll
German-born engineer John Roebling designed the bridge, but after
contracting tetanus when his foot was crushed by a ferry at Fulton Landing,
he died before construction even began. His son, Washington Roebling,
assumed responsibility for the project, which lasted 14 years. However,
Roebling junior also became a victim, contracting ‘the bends’ from working
underwater in a pressurized caisson. Bedridden within sight of the bridge
for many years, he relied on his wife, Emily Warren Roebling, herself a
mathematician and engineer, to oversee construction in his stead. She also
had to deal with budget overruns and unhappy politicians. Aside from the
Roeblings, at least 27 workers died during the bridge’s construction. And
there was one final tragedy to come: in 1883, six days after the official
opening, a massive crowd of pedestrians was bottlenecked at a stairway
when rumours of a collapse, possibly started in jest, set off a stampede in
which dozens were injured and 12 were crushed to death.

Crossing the Bridge
A stroll across the Brooklyn Bridge usually figures quite high on the ‘mustdo’ list for NYC visitors. The pedestrian walkway affords wonderful views
of Lower Manhattan, while observation points under the support towers

offer brass ‘panorama’ histories of the waterfront. It’s about a mile across
the bridge, which can take 20 to 40 minutes to walk, depending on how
often you stop to admire the view.

TOP EXPERIENCE

BROOKLYN BRIDGE PARK
A stunning example of industrial regeneration, this 85-acre, multi-use
waterfront park skirts the East River for 1.3 miles from Jay St in
Dumbo to the west end of Atlantic Ave in Cobble Hill. It has revitalized
a barren shore and its once-decaying piers into a scenic playground for
all-comers: local amblers, camera-toting tourists and families with kids
in tow.
DON’T MISS
A A stroll across the Brooklyn Bridge
A Taking photographs of NYC’s two most charismatic bridges
A Empire Fulton Ferry at sunset

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , A1
A www.brooklynbridgepark.org
A East River Waterfront, btwn Atlantic Ave & John St, Brooklyn Heights/Dumbo
A h 6am-1am, some sections to 11pm
A g B63 to Pier 6/Brooklyn Bridge Park, B25 to Old Fulton St/Elizabeth Pl, f East River or

South Brooklyn routes to Dumbo/Pier 1, b A/C to High St-Brooklyn Bridge, 2/3 to Clark St, F
to York St

Empire Fulton Ferry
This section of the park, between the Brooklyn and Manhattan Bridges in
the northern section of Dumbo, contains a sweeping grassy lawn with

stunning views of the East River. As well as the lovingly restored 1922
Jane’s Carousel, there are shrubby landscaped gardens and walking tracks
to find the best vantage point for that essential Brooklyn Bridge
photograph. The park is bordered on one side by the Empire Stores, a
cluster of Civil War–era warehouses that now house restaurants, shops and
acclaimed avant-garde theater St Ann’s Warehouse.

Pier 1
Picnicking, playgrounds and photography are all invited by the three lawns
on Pier 1, just south of the Brooklyn Bridge. The largest of the park’s piers,
this is the stage for free events from May through August, including free
films, screened against the stunning backdrop of Manhattan; plus dance
parties, group yoga classes, and kid-friendly activities; check the park’s
website for the event calendar. At the north end of the pier, you can catch
the NYC Ferry ( MAP ; www.ferry.nyc; Pier 1; adult one-way $2.75) South Brooklyn and
East River services to Manhattan.

Pier 6
At the southern end of the park, off Atlantic Ave, Pier 6 is kid central.
Between the flower beds and lawns are fantastic playgrounds: a sandbox,
water jets, water slides, swings and more!) Jog with Fido at the dog run, use
the beach-volleyball courts and relax at seasonal concessions (May to
October) like pizza place Fornino, which has a rooftop deck that’s perfect
for sundowners.

Other Areas
Main Street Park, just south of the Manhattan Bridge, has a bouldering wall, a

dog run, a nautical-themed playground, a pebble beach and the Park
Authority’s Environmental Education Center.
A direct pedestrian link to Brooklyn Heights, Squibb Park Bridge leads from
Columbia Heights between Middagh and Cranberry Sts directly down to

Pier 1. At the time of research, there were plans in motion to replace it by a
steel version.
Pier 2 is all about sweat, with a roller rink, an outdoor gym with free
fitness equipment, courts for bocce, handball, basketball and shuffleboard,
and free kayaking (thrice weekly, June through August). Pier 3 has more
lawns and granite steps for sitting and contemplating, while Pier 4 has a
small beach where you can launch a paddle boat or dip your toes in the East
River. Pier 5 has sports fields and cycling paths, a ‘picnic peninsula’ with
shade umbrellas and barbecues, and an Ample Hills ice-cream kiosk.

TOP EXPERIENCE

PROSPECT PARK
Though Central Park is New York’s most storied green space, its 19thcentury architects, Frederick Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, considered
Prospect Park their true chef d’œuvre. Between its looping bridges,
scenic lake, broad meadow and the only swath of forest in Brooklyn,
you might agree. Opened in 1867, 585-acre Prospect Park today
receives roughly 10 million visitors a year.
DON’T MISS
A Audubon Center Boathouse A Long Meadow A Lullwater Creek

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , E3
A www.prospectpark.org
A Grand Army Plaza A h 5am-1am A b 2/3 to Grand Army Plaza, F, G to 15th St-Prospect Park,

B, Q to Prospect Park, Q to Parkside Ave

Grand Army Plaza Carrying a distinctly Parisian feel, this
monumental plaza with its dominant ceremonial arch sits at the
intersection of Flatbush Ave and Prospect Park West, marking the
beginning of Eastern Pkwy and the entrance to Prospect Park. The
arch was built in the 1890s as a memorial to Union soldiers who
fought in the Civil War; there’s also a bust of John F Kennedy
nearby. The Greenmarket is held here Saturdays from 8am to 4pm
year-round.

Long Meadow Reaching for an unbroken mile, the longest meadow
in any urban park in the USA, this 90-acre expanse lies to the south
of the park’s formal entrance at Grand Army Plaza. Long Meadow
is a super area for strolling and lounging, filled with pickup ball
games, frolicking dogs and families flying kites. On the south end
is the Picnic House, with a snack stand and public bathrooms.
Children’s Corner Near Flatbush Ave, the Children’s Corner
contains a terrific 1912 carousel (per ride $2.50, open noon to 6pm
from Thursdays to Sundays and public holidays), originally from
Coney Island. The Prospect Park Zoo ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ;
www.prospectparkzoo.com; adult/child $10/7; h 10am-5pm Mon-Fri, to
5:30pm Sat & Sun Apr-Oct, to 4:30pm Nov-Mar) is also here, home to

sea lions, red pandas, wallabies and a small petting zoo. To the
northeast of the carousel is the 18th-century Lefferts Historic House
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.prospectpark.org/lefferts; adult/child $3/free;
h noon-5pm Thu-Sun Apr-Jun, Sep & Oct, to 6pm Jul & Aug, to 4pm Sat &
Sun Nov & Dec), where kids can imagine themselves on an 18th-

century Brooklyn Dutch farm.
LeFrak Center at Lakeside A 26-acre, all-season activity complex (
MAP ; www.lakesideprospectpark.com; 171 East Dr, near Ocean &

Parkside Aves; skating $7.25-10, skate rental $7, boat rental per hr $16-36,
bike rental per hr $13-38; h hours vary) provides a focus for locals

burning off energy in Prospect Park. From late March to midOctober there are kayaks and pedal boats to cast out on the lake,
plus there are walking trails, rental bikes, roller-skating and on
sunny summer days sprinklers flick on at the cooling kids’ play
area. In winter the center offers indoor and outdoor ice-skating. The
partly alfresco cafe is a shaded place for refreshments.

Audubon Center Boathouse Sitting on a northern finger of Prospect
Park Lake, the photogenic boathouse (aka Prospect Park Audubon
Center) hosts a range of pop-up events throughout the year: guided
bird-watching, free yoga, nature-themed art exhibitions, hands-on
craft activities for kids and more. From the boathouse, there’s a
trailhead for more than 2.5 miles of woodsy nature trails. The milelong route along Lullwater Creek is very scenic; a slightly shorter
trail plunges into the Midwood, offering views of the park’s oldest
trees. Check the website for directions or ask at the boathouse.

TOP EXPERIENCE

BROOKLYN MUSEUM
This five-story, 560,000-sq-ft beaux-arts building was designed in the
early 1890s by McKim, Mead & White, a leading architectural
powerhouse. It was conceived as the largest single-site museum in the
world – though it was significantly scaled back when Brooklyn was
incorporated into NYC (it’s now New York’s third-largest museum).
There is ancient art, lavish 19th-century interiors and cutting-edge
contemporary work.

DON’T MISS
A Egyptian funerary gallery
A The Dinner Party
A American art
A Visible Storage Center

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , F3
A % 718-638-5000
A www.brooklynmuseum.org
A 200 Eastern Pkwy, Prospect Park
A adult/child $16/free
A h 11am-6pm Wed & Fri-Sun, to 10pm Thu year-round, to 11pm 1st Sat of month Oct-Dec &

Feb-Au
A b 2/3 to Eastern Pkwy-Brooklyn Museum

Egyptian Art
A particular highlight is the excellent collection of Egyptian art, which
spans a period of 5000 years. Housed in the 3rd-floor galleries, it includes
bas-reliefs and Roman-era portraits, some of which are drawn from the
museum’s ongoing excavations in Egypt. A mummy chamber holds
sarcophagi and ritual objects. Seek out the Wilbour Plaque, a limestone
fragment showing the vivid profile of Queen Nefertiti facing a male figure,
likely Akhenaten (father of Tutankhamun) dating to 1352–1336 BCE.

American Art
Don’t miss a trip to the 5th floor to see the museum’s colossal collection of
American art, including an iconic full-length portrait of George Washington

by Gilbert Stuart; Childe Hassam’s celebrated 1900 urban landscape, Late
Afternoon, New York, Winter; and watercolors by late-19th-century
portraitist John Singer Sargent.

A Room of Their Own
This is one of the few mainstream arts institutions to devote permanent
space to showcasing the works of women artists. The 8300-sq-ft Elizabeth
Sackler Center for Feminist Art on the 4th floor exhibits an engaging mix of
one-person and historical shows ranging from radical Black women artists
to video installations and photography. At the gallery’s core, you’ll find
Judy Chicago’s absorbing 1979 installation, The Dinner Party, with place
settings for 39 mythical and historical women; it somehow succeeds in
being imposing and intimate.

Other Highlights
Housing more than 1.5 million objects, the museum has worthwhile
galleries devoted to African sculpture, Islamic design, Latin American
textiles and contemporary art. For a peek behind the scenes, head to the
Visible Storage and Study Center on the 5th floor to see glass cases stuffed
with everything from Tiffany lamps and Brooklyn-fashioned ceramics to
vintage bicycles and Spanish colonial artifacts.
On the first Saturday of every month except September, the museum
stays open until 11pm and hosts a free evening of art, performances and live
music (sometimes there’s even a dance floor set up). It’s a big draw for
families.

SIGHTS

Brooklyn Heights, Downtown Brooklyn & Dumbo

Brooklyn’s engines of industry are today a collection of waterside
neighborhoods. Former warehouses and piers have found new uses, but the
19th-century atmosphere is attractively preserved.
When Brooklyn ferry services started in the early 1800s, well-to-do
Manhattanites began building beautiful houses in Brooklyn Heights. The piers
are now recreational areas with lawns gazing towards Manhattan’s
skyscrapers. East lies cobblestone Dumbo (‘Down under the Manhattan
Bridge overpass’), beyond which Vinegar Hill hoards a few special
restaurants. South is the downtown area, where high-rise condos are the
backdrop to Brooklyn’s present-day money-making enterprises.
BROOKLYN BRIDGE
( MAP

BRIDGE

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
PARK

BROOKLYN BRIDGE PARK
( MAP

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
JANE’S CAROUSEL

HISTORIC SITE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-222-2502; www.janescarousel.com; Old Dock St, Brooklyn
Bridge Park, Dumbo; tickets $2; h 11am-7pm Wed-Mon mid-May–mid-Sep, to 6pm Thu-Sun midSep–mid-May; c ; b F to York St, A/C to High St-Brooklyn Bridge)

Behold the star attraction of the north end of Brooklyn Bridge Park: a
vintage carousel built by the Philadelphia Toboggan Company back in

1922. In 1984 it was purchased by Dumbo artist Jane Walentas, who spent
the next two decades faithfully restoring the vintage paint scheme on the
ornate, carved-wood elements before the carousel took up its current plum
spot beneath New York’s two most photographed bridges.
The carousel has 48 horses, two chariots and 1200 lights, and is the first
of its kind to be placed on the National Register of Historic Places. The
working treasure is housed in a clear acrylic pavilion designed by Pritzker
Prize–winning architect Jean Nouvel.
BROOKLYN HISTORICAL SOCIETY

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-222-4111; www.brooklynhistory.org; 128 Pierrepont St,
Brooklyn Heights; suggested admission adult/child $10/free; h noon-5pm Wed-Sun; b R to Court St,
2/3, 4/5 to Borough Hall)

Housed in a majestic, landmarked 1881 building with striking terracotta
details, this museum is devoted to all things Brooklyn. Its priceless
collection contains a rare 1770 map of NYC and a signed copy of the
Emancipation Proclamation. Exhibits on Brooklyn life and history rotate
regularly. Peek into the stunning 33,000-book Othmer Library, with its
original 19th-century balcony of black ash.
The lobby gift shop (open noon to 5pm daily) is a fantastic resource for
Brooklyn-themed books and upscale gifts.
The society also organizes regular exhibitions and neighborhood walks;
check the website for details.
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS PROMENADE

VIEWPOINT

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nycgovparks.org; btwn Orange & Remsen Sts, Brooklyn Heights;

h 24hr; b N/R/W to Court St, 2/3 to Clark St, A/C to High St-Brooklyn Bridge)

Six of the east–west streets of well-to-do Brooklyn Heights (such as
Montague and Clark Sts) lead to the neighborhood’s number-one attraction:
a narrow, paved walking strip with breathtaking views of Lower Manhattan
and New York Harbor that is blissfully removed from the busy Brooklyn–

Queens Expwy (BQE) over which it sits. This little slice of urban beauty,
over 1800ft in length, is fiercely defended by locals against development
proposals. A great spot for a sunset walk.
An innovatively designed footbridge called the Squibb Park Bridge, just past
the northern end of the promenade, links it with the shoreside Pier 1 in
Brooklyn Bridge Park.
MUSEUM

NEW YORK TRANSIT MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-694-1600; www.mta.info/mta/museum; 99 Schermerhorn St, at
Boerum Pl, Downtown Brooklyn; adult/child $10/5; h 10am-4pm Tue-Fri, 11am-5pm Sat & Sun; c ;

b 2/3, 4/5 to Borough Hall; R to Jay St-MetroTech)

Occupying an old subway station built in 1936 (and out of service since
1946), this kid-friendly museum takes on 100-plus years of getting around
town. The best part is the downstairs area, on the platform, where you can
climb aboard 20 original subway and elevated train cars dating to 1907.
Temporary exhibitions highlight the subway’s fascinating history, from its
grueling construction to the art of map design.
EMPIRE STORES

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.empirestoresdumbo.com; 53-83 Water St, Dumbo; h 8am7:30pm; g B25 to Water/Main Sts, b F to York St, A/C to High St-Brooklyn Bridge)

Built just after the Civil War, the Empire Stores are a vestige of Brooklyn’s
historic waterfront, which once supported 3 miles of brick warehouses
stacked with coffee, sugar and tobacco. Retaining its original structure and
features, it’s been rehabilitated as an upscale hub of commerce and culture
across 360,000 sq ft. Time Out’s chic food market, complete with avocado
toast, Mexican fusion and Michelin-star ramen, is the highlight; head to the
5th floor for remarkable views and alfresco tables.

Boerum Hill, Cobble Hill, Carroll Gardens & Red
Hook

Cobble Hill and Boerum Hill (respectively, west and east of Court St) are light

on sightseeing but brimming with home-style restaurants, disarmingly
friendly bars and attractive 19th-century houses. Genteel Carroll Gardens
(south of here) is also a trove of brownstones, restaurants and tree-lined
streets.
Further south, comparatively isolated Red Hook was one of the first parts
of Brooklyn settled by Europeans (the Dutch dubbed it ‘Roode Hoek’
because of its tapered shape and ruddy soil). Galleries occupy old
warehouses, while seafood and barbecue restaurants are a sticky-fingered
highlight.
RED HOOK WINERY

WINERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 347-689-2432; www.redhookwinery.com; 175 Van Dyke St, Pier 41,
Suite 325a, Red Hook; h noon-6pm; b F to Smith-9th Sts then g B61 to Van Brunt/Beard Sts)

Sip wines from across New York in this stripped-bare tasting room, lined
with barrels and crowded with chardonnay-sipping locals every weekend.
Though the grapes are plucked from Finger Lakes and Long Island
vineyards, every drop is produced right here. At this waterside winery, the
cabernet sauvignon and riesling tastes even better looking out over the
water.
COFFEY PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nycgovparks.org/parks/coffey-park; Verona St, btwn Richards &
Dwight Sts, Red Hook; h 6am-1am; c ; b F to Smith-9th Sts then then g B61 to Van Brunt/King Sts)

F

This neighborhood park in the heart of Red Hook is flanked by hedges and
trees, with lawns where families picnic, adjacent basketball courts and a
kids’ playground with swings.

Named for an Irish-American former district leader, Coffey Park also
hosts NYC Summer Stage concerts and other free events.
INVISIBLE DOG

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 347-560-3641; www.theinvisibledog.org; 51 Bergen St, btwn Smith
& Court Sts, Boerum Hill; h 1-7pm Thu-Sat, to 5pm Sun; b F, G to Bergen St) F

In a converted factory dating to 1863, the Invisible Dog is an
interdisciplinary arts center that embodies the spirit of Brooklyn’s
creativity. Check the calendar on their website to be sure something is
showing in this airy, three-story space; there are frequent free exhibitions on
the ground floor, where the unadorned warehouse backdrop makes art
shows pop.

LOCAL KNOWLEDGE

MANHATTAN BRIDGE VIEW
Crowds gather where Front St meets Washington St to point their cameras at Manhattan
Bridge, which frames the Empire State Building between its mighty girders. The view is
appealing, but the elbow-to-elbow photo shoots aren’t – go early if you’re set on snapping this
specific view, or better yet seek out other angles from the parks between Brooklyn and
Manhattan Bridges.

Fort Greene, Clinton Hill & Bed-Stuy

Stately brownstone buildings, cultural attractions and an enviable food
scene give these neighborhoods their charm, though their industrial
histories are soaked in sweat and blood.
Spreading eastward from Downtown Brooklyn beyond Flatbush Ave,
leafy Fort Greene is home to a cultural lightning-rod, the Brooklyn Academy
of Music. North lies the Brooklyn Navy Yard, a historic shipbuilding site
brought to new lustre. Moving east is neighborly drinking and dining in
Clinton Hill, poet Walt Whitman’s old stomping ground, while BedfordStuyvesant (aka Bed-Stuy) is the heart of African-American culture in
Brooklyn.
MUSEUM OF CONTEMPORARY AFRICAN DIASPORAN ARTS
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; MoCADA; % 718-230-0492; www.mocada.org; 80 Hanson

MUSEUM

Pl, at S Portland Ave, Fort Greene; adult/student/child $8/4/free; h central galleries noon-7pm Wed,
Fri & Sat, to 8pm Thu, to 6pm Sun, exterior galleries 10am-7pm Mon-Fri; b C to Lafayette Ave,
B/D, N/Q/R, 2/3, 4/5 to Atlantic Ave-Barclays Center)

This small museum in a brownstone building hosts thought-provoking,
multidisciplinary installations exploring social and political issues facing
people of the African Diaspora. Through rotating exhibitions, from
contemporary art and photography to multimedia deep dives into history,
the museum attempts to rediscover cultural traditions lost during
colonization and the transatlantic slave trade. The museum also hosts
performance pieces, music nights, artist talks and discussions.
Don’t miss the on-site shop, with its range of one-of-a-kind art, jewelry,
apparel and home decor by contemporary designers.

BRIC HOUSE

ARTS CENTER

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-683-5600; www.bricartsmedia.org; 647 Fulton St, cnr Rockwell
Pl, Fort Greene; h gallery 11am-7pm Tue-Fri, to 5pm Sat & Sun; b B, Q/R to DeKalb Ave, 2/3, 4/5
to Nevins St)

This long-running Brooklyn arts organization (responsible for the free,
summer Celebrate Brooklyn! Festival (Prospect Park Bandshell, near Prospect Park W & 11th
St, Park Slope; h Jun–mid-Aug) in Prospect Park, among other things) is housed in
an impressive 40,000-sq-ft space. The multidisciplinary arts complex stages
art exhibitions, media events and a wide range of cultural fare – poetry
slams, plays, concerts, dance performances – inside its 400-seat theater.
There’s also a glassworking facility (which also has exhibitions) next door.
FORT GREENE PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.fortgreenepark.org; btwn Myrtle & DeKalb Aves & Washington
Park & St Edwards St, Fort Greene; h 6am-1am; c ; b B, Q/R to DeKalb Ave, C to Lafayette St, G to
Fulton St)

War history and a hilly aspect make 30-acre Fort Greene Park a rewarding
space to ramble. Forts from the Revolutionary War and War of 1812 were
retired by 1847 when this tract of land became Brooklyn’s first park (a
measure championed by Walt Whitman, then editor of the Brooklyn Daily
Eagle). By 1896, Calvert Vaux and Frederick Olmsted – designers of
Central Park and Prospect Park – were resculpting its rugged expanse. It’s
popular for its tennis courts, ball fields and playground.
At the center of the park stands the Prison Ship Martyrs’ Monument, at the time
of its construction the world’s tallest Doric column at 149ft. Designed by
Stanford White (of prominent architectural firm McKim, Mead & White), it
was built in 1905 to memorialize the 11,500 American prisoners of war who
died in wretched conditions in British prison ships during the American
Revolution. Some of their remains are interred in a crypt beneath its base.
Particularly in summer, it’s worth checking the website for kid-friendly
events, historical walking tours, yoga sessions and more. If you’re there on

a Saturday don’t miss the year-round Greenmarket featuring all kinds of
fresh regional produce, held at the southeastern corner of the park. In
autumn months (from September to mid-November) it’s joined by an artisan
market featuring locally made artwork and crafts from independent artists.
KINGS COUNTY DISTILLERY

DISTILLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 347-689-4211; www.kingscountydistillery.com; 299 Sands St, at
Navy St, Brooklyn Navy Yard; tours $16; h tours 3pm & 5pm Tue-Thu, 3pm, 5pm & 7pm Fri,
hourly 1-6pm Sat, 1pm, 3pm & 5pm Sun, tasting room noon-10pm Mon-Sat, to 8pm Sun; g B62,
B67 to Sands/Navy Sts, b F to York St)

Set in an 1899 brick building in the Brooklyn Navy Yard, this distillery uses
New York grain to create some mighty smooth craft spirits. Come on a 45minute guided tour (advance booking recommended) for a look at the
distilling process and a tasting, with a bit of a history thrown in – the 19thcentury Whiskey Wars, which erupted in nearby Vinegar Hill, devastated
Brooklyn. Whether or not you join the tour, the atmospheric bar-tasting room
pours flights and shakes cocktails.
BLDG 92

MUSEUM

(% 718-907-5932; www.bldg92.org; 63 Flushing Ave, at Carlton Ave, Brooklyn Navy Yard; h noon6pm Wed-Sun; g B57, B69 to Cumberland St/Flushing Ave, b G to Fulton St, F to York St) F

A museum and gallery built in to the Brooklyn Navy Yard, BLDG 92 tells
Brooklyn’s living history, from the navy yards to its present-day innovators
and designers. Three floors of exhibition rooms showcase the shipbuilding
history that made Brooklyn, with some gripping testimony from characters
of the time…women welders working 10-hour days while fighting for equal
pay with the men, we salute you.
Check ahead on the website for regular tours of the Brooklyn Navy Yard.

2 Neighborhood Walk

Brownstones & Bridges

START ST GEORGE HOTEL
END JANE’S CAROUSEL
LENGTH 2 MILES; TWO HOURS
Studded with historic structures, Brooklyn Heights also has sublime views of Manhattan. Start
at Clark and Henry Sts, at the base of the 30-story 1 St George Hotel. Built between 1885 and
1930, it was once the city’s largest hotel. Scenes from The Godfather were filmed here.

Two blocks north on Orange St is 2 Plymouth Church. In the mid-19th century, Henry
Ward Beecher gave abolitionist sermons here. Abraham Lincoln worshiped here during his
1860 presidential campaign.
Continue west on Orange, then south on Willow St. The yellow mansion at 70 Willow
served as 3 Truman Capote’s house while he was writing Breakfast at Tiffany’s. Continue
south, turning right on Pierrepont St. The street turns into 4 Montague Tce, lined with old
brownstones. Thomas Wolfe penned Of Time and the River at No 5.
From here, turn left along Remsen St and right along Hicks St. Turning right along
Joralemon St, lined with terraced houses in shades of brick, green and powder blue. Continue
beneath the expressway and emerge facing 5 Pier 5, part of Brooklyn Bridge Park. These
restored riverbank spaces have mixed-use walking and cycling paths that meander close to the
water. Turning right, walk north past Pier 5’s barbecue and picnic zones, and the small sandy
beach at 6 Pier 4. Detour slightly to enjoy the flush of lawns and trees at 7 Pier 3. Continue
past Piers 2 and 1 for increasingly spectacular views of the Manhattan skyline across the water.
At the southern edge of 8 Pier 1 is a salt marsh sheltered by salvaged granite.
Nearby is 9 Fulton Ferry Landing. George Washington made an important hasty retreat
here during the Battle of Long Island in 1776. From here, follow Water St under the
a Brooklyn Bridge (opened 1883), and past the Civil War–era brick warehouses of the
b Empire Stores; grab a snack on the 5th floor. The walk ends at Empire Fulton Ferry, home to
the gleaming 1922 c Jane’s Carousel.

Park Slope, Gowanus & Sunset Park

Known for tree-lined streets and graceful brownstone houses, Park Slope is
Brooklyn’s answer to Manhattan’s Upper West Side. This former workingclass area is today filled with couples with toddlers and designer dogs, who
stroll between brunch places, boutiques and 585-acre Prospect Park,
Brooklyn’s most beautiful green space. West lies quirky Gowanus, whose
pungent canal has spawned its own monster mythology. Stretching south
along Third Ave, adjoining the historical and picturesque Green-Wood
Cemetery, are Greenwood Heights and Sunset Park MAP GOOGLE MAP . Neither
has major sights, but bargain-hunters take note: each has great-value hotels.
PROSPECT PARK
( MAP

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.

PARK

SUNSET PARK

PARK

MAP (www.nycgovparks.org/parks/sunset-park; btwn 41st & 44th Sts & Fifth & Seventh Aves,
Sunset Park; c ; g B63 to 42nd or 44th St, b R to 45th St, D, N to 36th St)

Sunset Park is a lovely hangout spot: on summer evenings, families keep
cool in its Olympic-size outdoor swimming pool, and kids love its large,
modern playground. It’s small enough to walk around easily, large enough
to spread out for picnics and relaxation, and features incredible views of
New York Harbor and the Statue of Liberty from its highest point. You’ll
also find basketball, volleyball and handball courts, and some ever-elusive
public restrooms.

Prospect Heights, Crown Heights & Flatbush

Endowed with multifarious dining scenes and tree-lined streets, the
neighborhoods that are located east and south of Prospect Park are a
springboard to big-hitters like the Brooklyn Museum and botanic garden.
Prospect Heights is filled with families, young professionals and scattered
restaurants. Eastern Pkwy runs through Crown Heights, a largely Caribbean
and African American neighborhood with a significant Hasidic Jewish
community. East and south are sedate Prospect Lefferts Gardens and Ditmas Park,
home to beautiful 19th-century brownstones. Below is Flatbush, founded by
the Dutch in the mid-1600s, with Caribbean and Haitian flavors but fewer
attractions.
BROOKLYN MUSEUM
( MAP

MUSEUM

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
o BROOKLYN BOTANIC GARDEN

GARDENS

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-623-7200; www.bbg.org; 150 Eastern Pkwy, Prospect Park;
adult/student/child $15/8/free, 8am-noon Fri free, Tue-Fri Dec-Feb free; h 8am-6pm Tue-Fri, from

10am Sat & Sun Mar-Oct, shorter hours Nov-Feb; c ; b 2/3 to Eastern Pkwy-Brooklyn Museum, B,
Q to Prospect Park)

Opened in 1911 and now one of Brooklyn’s most picturesque sights, this
52-acre garden is home to thousands of plants and trees and a Japanese garden
where river turtles swim alongside a Shinto shrine. The best times to visit
are late April or early May, when the blooming cherry trees (a gift from
Japan) are celebrated in Sakura Matsuri – the Cherry-Blossom Festival (h late
Apr/early May), or fall, when the deciduous trees blaze their colours.
A network of trails runs throughout the gardens, connecting popular
sections devoted to native flora, bonsai trees, a wood covered in bluebells
and a rose garden. The Discovery Garden is a hands-on, immersive space for
kids, with regular family activities. There’s also a good cafe (with outdoor
seating, of course).
There are three entrances; the most convenient one is immediately west
of the Brooklyn Museum. The Washington Ave entrance around the corner
(at President St) leads to a striking eco-designed visitor center with a ‘living
roof’ covered in a thriving diversity of plants. It’s also possible to enter just
north of Prospect Park subway station (corner of Empire Blvd and Flatbush
Ave).
WEEKSVILLE HERITAGE CENTER

HISTORIC SITE

(% 718-756-5250; www.weeksvillesociety.org; 158 Buffalo Ave, btwn St Marks Ave & Bergen St,
Crown Heights; tours adult/student $8/6; h 9:30am-6pm Tue-Fri, tours 3pm Tue-Thu; b A/C to
Ralph Ave, 2/3 Utica Ave)

In 1838 a former enslaved man by the name of James Weeks purchased a
tract of land on the fringes of Brooklyn’s settled areas to build a free
African American community of entrepreneurs, doctors, laborers and
craftspeople. The village was absorbed into Brooklyn, but three historic
wooden houses (known as the Hunterfly Road Houses) have been
preserved.

Small exhibitions of photography and local history are free to visit during
opening hours, but tours of the houses are greatly more rewarding.
WORTH A DETOUR

GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY
If you want to enjoy a slice of scenic Brooklyn in total peace and quiet, make for GreenWood Cemetery ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-768-7300; www.green-wood.com; 500
25th St, at Fifth Ave, Greenwood Heights; h 8am-5pm Oct-Mar, 7am-7pm Apr-Sep; p ; b R to
25th St) F . This historic burial ground set on the borough’s highest point covers 478 hilly
acres with more than 7000 trees (many of which are over 150 years old); its myriad tombs,
mausoleums, lakes and patches of forest are connected by a looping network of roads and
footpaths, making this a perfect spot for some aimless rambling.
Founded in 1838 as a rural cemetery with Manhattan views, Green-Wood has over 560,000
‘permanent residents,’ including notable and historic personalities such as inventors Samuel
Morse and Elias Howe, abolitionist Henry Ward Beecher, designer Louis Comfort Tiffany,
artist Jean-Michel Basquiat and Susan Smith McKinney-Steward, the first African-American
woman in New York state to gain a medical degree.
Don’t miss Battle Hill, the cemetery’s highest point, where Washington’s Continental Army
lost to British and Hessian troops during the 1776 Battle of Long Island (aka the Battle of
Brooklyn). The event is commemorated by the 7ft statue of Minerva, the Roman goddess of
wisdom, whose upright arm waves to the Statue of Liberty, facing back from a few miles
across the harbor. The hill is located in the northeast sector of the cemetery, off Battle Ave.
Musical legend Leonard Bernstein and Brooklyn Dodgers owner Charles Ebbets are both
buried in the vicinity.
Admission is free, as are the maps available at the entrance. On Wednesdays at 1pm you can
take a two-hour trolley-bus tour ($20 per person; advance online booking recommended). Note
the squawking green-monk parakeets nesting within the nooks of the glorious Gothic entry
gate – some allegedly broke free from an airport crate in the 1960s and started a colony that’s
lived here ever since.
Tip: pack mosquito repellent in the summer.

BROOKLYN CHILDREN’S MUSEUM

MUSEUM

(% 718-735-4400; www.brooklynkids.org; 145 Brooklyn Ave, at St Marks Ave, Crown Heights; $11;

h 10am-5pm Tue, Wed & Fri, to 6pm Thu, to 7pm Sat & Sun; c ; b A/C to Kingston-Throop Aves,
2/3 to Kingston Ave)

A bright-yellow, L-shaped structure houses this hands-on kids’ favorite,
founded in 1899 as the first children’s museum in the US. The collection

contains almost 30,000 cultural objects (musical instruments, masks and
dolls) and natural-history specimens (rocks, minerals and a complete Asianelephant skeleton). But Brooklyn is very much in the house, with a recreated bodega, a pizza joint, and a Caribbean market that kids can play-act
in. The canopied rooftop area, with greenery and play areas, is a highlight.
WYCKOFF HOUSE MUSEUM

HISTORIC BUILDING

(% 718-629-5400; www.wyckoffmuseum.org; 5816 Clarendon Rd, at E 59th St, East Flatbush;
suggested donation adult/child $5/3; h tours 1-4pm Fri & Sat, by arrangement Tue-Thu; b 2, 5 to
Newkirk Ave then g B8 to Kings Hwy St)

Built in 1652, Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House is New York City’s oldest
building and one of the oldest in the US. A working farm until 1901, this
Dutch Colonial H-frame house has shingled walls and split doors; outside is
a community vegetable garden. Guided tours (usually half-hourly) explain
the family’s history and successive additions made to the house in the 18th
and 19th centuries. Located in East Flatbush, a solid hour by public
transportation from Downtown Brooklyn – for history fanatics only.

2 Local Life

Fort Greene to Prospect Park

Linking Brooklyn’s two most attractive green spaces, this 3.5-mile
walk starts at historic Fort Greene Park, tours cafes and cultural
landmarks in Clinton Hill and Bed-Stuy, and finishes at the fringe
of expansive Prospect Park.

1 Fort Greene Park A stroll across pleasant 30-acre Fort Greene

Park is a bracing way to kick off the day. Climb the hill to the
Prison Ship Martyrs’ Monument for military history and views of
Manhattan. On Saturday morning there’s a Greenmarket at the
southeast corner of the park, where you can peruse locally sourced
cheeses, baked goods and seasonal produce.
2 Brownstones & Local Flavors The pleasant neighborhood

surrounding the park is also called Fort Greene. Restaurant-lined
DeKalb Ave, on the park’s southern flank, is one of its main
commercial strips, while the side streets have some of Brooklyn’s

loveliest residential architecture. From the park’s southwestern
corner, dip one block beyond DeKalb to Lafayette Ave for tapas at
convivial Olea.
3 Clinton Hill Continuing east along Lafayette Ave, you’ll pass

intriguing buildings like the stately 1906-built Masonic Temple (on the
corner with Clermont Ave) as you cut through the neighborhood of
Clinton Hill.

4 Bed-Stuy Pitstop After less than 10 minutes’ walk, you’ll cross

into the neighborhood of Bed-Stuy, rich in African American
cultures and boasting numerous noteworthy places to eat. Make
sure you stop for a passion-fruit or dulce de leche doughnut at
Dough.
5 Biggie Mural Turning south along Bedford Ave, after a few

blocks you’ll come face to face with one of Bed-Stuy’s most
beloved sons. Christopher Wallace, better known as hip-hop
legend the Notorious B.I.G., stares regally from a mural on the
corner with Quincy St.
6 Museum of African Art Almost four blocks south is a repository

of traditional and contemporary African art. If you’re here on a
weekday step inside the museum (www.bedstuymuseum.org; 1157 Bedford Ave,
Ste 1, Bed-Stuy; by donation; h 10am-3pm, tours by appointment) to see ceremonial
masks, headdresses, fertility figures and more from diverse
African countries.
7 Franklin Avenue It’s a very pleasant 25-minute walk, past

bustling cafes and hang-worthy bars, to reach your next
destination. Break up the journey by stopping for cookies and
cocktails at sweet-toothed bar Butter & Scotch.
8 Prospect Park Just one block west is the enormous green escape

of Prospect Park. Consider touring the many-splendored Botanic
Garden, if you arrive early enough; otherwise take your time
through the park’s meandering paths (or call it a day at a bar or
restaurant on Classon and Washington Aves).

Williamsburg, Greenpoint & Bushwick

An international byword for beards, body art, bustling bars and fixed-wheel
bikes, Williamsburg is now well and truly gentrified. Artists and students piled

in to the postindustrial neighborhood, then since the late 1990s its
revitalized streets received a stampede of property developers sowing eyewatering rents. Street art, coffee joints and avant-garde nightspots remain,
making this an exciting neighborhood to explore. But the seamy up-andcomer is now Bushwick, to the east. North lies Greenpoint, Brooklyn’s nowgentrifying ‘Little Poland,’ with enough casual restaurants and bars to recall
its working-class immigrant roots.
CITY RELIQUARY

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-782-4842; www.cityreliquary.org; 370 Metropolitan Ave, near
Havemeyer St, Williamsburg; adult/child $7/free; h noon-6pm Thu-Sun; b G to Metropolitan Ave, L
to Lorimer St)

You knew Brooklyn was bizarro, but this repository for New York–related
ephemera is something else. Tenderly curated displays exhibit objects from
the recent past, like seltzer bottles, postcards of Lady Liberty and decaying
confetti. Push through the antique subway turnstile to learn about local
character ‘Little Egypt’ in a peep-show-style booth, admire mosaic shrines
out the back, and stick around for a drink maybe (check out the website for
occasional events).
BROOKLYN ART LIBRARY

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-388-7941; www.sketchbookproject.com; 28 Frost St, btwn Union
Ave & Lorimer St, Williamsburg; h 10am-6pm Wed-Sun; b L to Lorimer St) F

Enjoy an intimate glimpse into the creative minds of artists, both
professional and amateur, at Brooklyn Art Library, which has assembled the
world’s largest collection of artist sketchbooks. More than 41,000
sketchbooks line the walls, containing a wild mix of graphic design,
collage, fine art, poetry, irreverent comics and personal essays. Notebooks
in baskets on the tables are free for visitors to browse (don’t grab from the
shelves).
If you feel inspired after paging through a few books, join in on the
creative, cathartic fun. You can buy a sketch book ($30 for the 5”x7” book

that each artist must use) and fill it with whatever you like; let your
imagination run wild or use one of the suggested yearly themes. Once
received by the library (you can mail it back from home) it will be added to
the collection. Contributors from over 130 countries have added their
sketchbooks. For a snappier way to leave your mark, take a picture in the
photo booth to add to their collection.
MCCARREN PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-965-6580; www.nycgovparks.org/parks/mccarren-park; N 12th
St, at Bedford Ave, Williamsburg; h pool 11am-3pm & 4-7pm late May-early Sep; c ; b G to Nassau
Ave, L to Bedford Ave)

The grassy 35-acre McCarren Park makes a good picnic spot, and
barbecues and bikinis define the action on warm summer weekends. On
sweltering days you might want to head to the free swimming pool – a huge,
historic community spot that reopened in 2012 after being closed for almost
three decades. Go early to avoid the worst of the crowds. Free movies and
live-music nights are held on Wednesdays in July and August (see
www.summerscreen.org for details).
EAST RIVER STATE PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-782-2731; www.parks.ny.gov/parks/155; Kent Ave, btwn N 7th
& N 9th Sts, Williamsburg; h 9am-9pm May-Sep, to 7pm Oct-Apr; g B32 to Kent Ave/N 6th St, b L
to Bedford Ave)

This 7-acre waterfront park is a slice of greenery with sublime views of
Manhattan and cobbled vestiges of its cargo-handling past. It’s home to
plenty of events and activities in summer, with picnic tables, playgrounds
and the odd concert. There’s also summer-only ferry service to Governors
Island and year-round service on the NYC Ferry ( MAP ; www.ferry.nyc; N 6th St, N
5th St Pier & Park, off Kent Ave, Williamsburg; one-way trip $2.75; g B32 to N 6th St, b L to
Bedford Ave). No pets allowed. Saturdays in the warmer months see the park

given over to Smorgasburg, the country’s largest outdoor food market.

LOCAL KNOWLEDGE

BUSHWICK STREET ART
Further cementing Bushwick’s status as Brooklyn’s coolest neighborhood is Bushwick
Collective (www.instagram.com/thebushwickcollective; Bushwick; b L to Jefferson St) F , an
outdoor gallery of murals by some of the most talented street artists in NYC and beyond. The
works change regularly, and can be found mainly along Jefferson and Troutman Sts between
Cypress and Knickerbocker Aves, with others along Gardner Ave (north of Flushing Ave).
Other street art can be found around the Morgan Ave L stop, particularly on Seigel and Grattan
Sts.
The latter two streets are conveniently near Roberta’s and Pine Box Rock Shop – great
places to stop for a pizza or some drinks.
Though overall safe to visit, Bushwick still has occasional incidents of crime, so pay
attention to your surroundings in this area, especially late at night and on weekends.

BROOKLYN BREWERY

BREWERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-486-7422; www.brooklynbrewery.com; 79 N 11th St, btwn Berry
St & Wythe Ave, Williamsburg; tours Mon-Thu $18, Sat & Sun free; h tasting room 5-11pm MonThu, 5pm-midnight Fri, noon-midnight Sat, noon-8pm Sun, tours 1-6pm Sat & Sun, reserve ahead
Mon-Fri; b L to Bedford Ave)

Harking back to a time when this area of New York was a beer-brewing
center, the Brooklyn Brewery not only brews and serves tasty local suds but
also offers 45-minute tours of its facilities. Tours offered from Monday to
Thursday include tastings of four beers, plus history and insight into the
brewery; reserve a tour spot online. Note that sandals and high-heeled shoes
are not allowed on tours.
On weekends, tours are free (just show up) but don’t include tastings;
buy refreshing brews at the bar. Or you can skip the tour altogether and just
while away a weekend afternoon in the bare-bones tasting room.
Interesting fact: the brewery’s cursive logo was designed by none other
than Milton Glaser, of ‘I Heart New York’ fame, who did the job in
exchange for a share of the profits and free beer for life.

WILLIAMSBURG BRIDGE

BRIDGE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nyc.gov/html/dot/html/infrastructure/williamsburg-bridge.shtml;
S 5th St, Williamsburg; b J/M/Z to Marcy Ave)

Built in 1903 to link Williamsburg and the Lower East Side (at Delancey
St), this steel-frame suspension bridge helped transform the area into a
teeming industrial center. At the time it was the longest suspension bridge
on earth, a behemoth with its 1600ft span and all-steel towers. While the
Brooklyn Bridge is the more attractive bridge, the Williamsburg Bridge’s
foot and bike paths offer excellent views of Manhattan and the East River,
plus it connects two neighborhoods with numerous bars and restaurants.

TOP EXPERIENCE
CONEY ISLAND AMUSEMENT PARKS

Coney Island – a name synonymous in American culture with antique seaside fun and
frolicking – achieved worldwide fame as a working-class amusement park and beach-resort
area at the turn of the 20th century. After decades of decline, its kitschy charms have
experienced a 21st-century revival. Though it’s no longer the booming attraction it once was, it
still draws crowds of tourists and locals alike for legendary roller-coaster rides, hot dogs and
beer on the beachside boardwalk.
Luna Park ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-373-5862; www.lunaparknyc.com; 1000 Surf
Ave, at W 10th St; h Apr-Oct; b D/F, N/Q to Coney Island-Stillwell Ave) is one of Coney
Island’s most popular amusement parks and contains one of its most legendary rides: the
Cyclone ($10), a wooden roller-coaster that reaches speeds of 60mph and makes near-vertical
drops. In a neighboring park is the 150ft-tall pink-and-mint-green Deno’s Wonder Wheel (
MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-372-2592; www.denoswonderwheel.com; 1025 Riegelmann
Boardwalk, at W 12th St; rides $10; h from noon Jul & Aug, Sat & Sun Apr-Jun, Sep & Oct; c ;
b D/F, N/Q to Coney Island-Stillwell Ave), which has been delighting New Yorkers since 1920
as the best place to survey Coney Island from up high.

DON’T MISS
A Cyclone roller-coaster ride A Cold beer at Ruby’s A Nathan’s Famous hot dogs

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP

GOOGLE MAP , C2

A Surf Ave & Boardwalk, btwn W 15th & W 8th Sts A b D/F, N/Q to Coney Island-

Stillwell Ave

Coney Island & Brighton Beach

Located an hour by subway from midtown Manhattan, Coney Island was
once New York City’s most popular beachside amusement area. After
decades in the doldrums, revitalization has brought the summertime crowds
back for hot dogs, roller coasters, minor-league baseball games and strolls
down the boardwalk.
Situated directly to the east along the boardwalk is Brighton Beach,
dubbed ‘Little Odessa’ for its large population of Ukrainian and Russian
families. Running under the elevated subway tracks, its bustling main street,
Brighton Beach Ave, is lined with Slavic shops, restaurants and cafes.
CONEY ART WALLS

PUBLIC ART

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.coneyartwalls.com; 3050 Stillwell Ave, off Surf Ave, Coney
Island; h noon-8pm Jun-Sep; b D/F, N/Q to Coney Island-Stillwell Ave) F

This open-air public museum of street art features 35 freestanding walls
transformed each season into colorful murals by emerging and renowned
graffiti artists from around the world (including pioneers such as Daze and
Lee Quiñones). On summer weekends, food trucks and live music make it
one big Instagram-worthy street party.
