SoHo & Chinatown
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping

SoHo & Chinatown
SOHO, NOHO & NOLITA | CHINATOWN & LITTLE ITALY

Neighborhood Top Five

1 Shopping Maxing out the credit cards on SoHo’s big-name fashion

streets, followed by cool-hunting lesser-known labels in the cognoscenti
sidewalks of nearby Nolita and NoHo.
2 Chinatown Slurping soup dumplings and haggling for designer wares of

ambiguous authenticity amid the sizzling lights of Chinatown.
3 Little Italy Getting your fix of rich sugo or a delicate tiramisu, while

listening in on grandfathers sipping grappa and speaking in the mother
tongue.

4 Merchant’s House Museum Snooping around this time-jarred, possibly

haunted, museum, imagining NYC life in the wild and dusty 1800s.
5 Peking Duck House Sharing a tender, succulent Peking duck in the

quintessential spot to have it if you’re not in Beijing.

Explore SoHo & Chinatown
Like a colorful quilt of subneighborhoods sewn together in mismatched
patches, the areas around SoHo (SOuth of HOuston) feel like a string of
mini republics. Style mavens boutique-hop in Nolita (NOrth of LIttle
ITAly), Italian Americans channel Napoli in ever-shrinking Little Italy, and
Chinese families chat over xiao long bao (soup dumplings) in hyperactive
Chinatown.
Lower-rise buildings inject these streets with a cozy, village-like vibe
(main drags Broadway and Canal St excepted). Celebrities, cast-iron lofts
and A-list boutiques stud SoHo’s cobbled side streets, while humbler 19thcentury tenements and quirkier one-off boutiques flavor neighboring Nolita.
Chinatown has an ‘anything goes’ spirit, with bustling crowds and
hawkers haggling under faded billboards. The best way to weave your way
around here is on foot. And don’t bother planning a route – just let your
senses guide you. Whether you’re following your nose down an alleyway
for freshly baked pork buns, or your ears to a prayer gong in a heady
Buddhist temple, unexpected surprises await.

Local Life
A

Family style Hit Chinatown’s bustling dining dens with a handful of

friends and eat ‘family style’ (order a ton of dishes and sample spoonfuls of
each). You’ll think the waiter left a zero off the bill.

Side streets The stretch of Broadway cutting through SoHo is reserved for
the tourists – New Yorkers scour the one-of-a-kind boutiques on the side
streets for idiosyncratic buys.
A

Cultural breaks Explore the area’s artistic legacy at the Drawing Center
and the Leslie-Lohman Museum of Gay & Lesbian Art, or just marvel at
140 tons of dirt at the New York Earth Room.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway The subway lines dump off along various points of Canal St (J/Z,
N/Q/R/W and 6). Once you arrive, it’s best to explore on foot. The
neighborhood’s downtown location makes it easy to access from Midtown
and Brooklyn.
A

Bus & Taxi Avoid taking cabs or buses – especially in Chinatown, as the
traffic is full-on. For SoHo, have your taxi let you off along Broadway if
you aren’t fussed about your final destination. Don’t take cabs south of
Canal St if you’re simply planning to wander around Chinatown. The area
is so small that you’ll make much better time on foot than waiting for lights
to change.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
Serious shopaholics should consult the city’s in-the-know retail blogs here before hitting SoHo
and surrounds – there’s always some sort of ‘sample sale’ or offer going on, not to mention the
opening of yet another boutique stocking fresh, emerging design talent.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Wayan
A Uncle Boons
A Dutch
A Il Buco Alimentari & Vineria
A Prince Street Pizza
A Chefs Club

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Apothéke
A Spring Lounge
A Joe’s Pub

For reviews, see here
7 Best Places to Shop
A Glossier Flagship
A Opening Ceremony
A MiN New York
A Resurrection
A Galeria Melissa
A Saturdays

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE

CHINATOWN
America’s biggest Chinatown is a feast for the senses: the scent of fresh
fish melds with ripe persimmons, mah-jongg tiles clatter on makeshift
tables, and duck roasts dangle in restaurant windows. Plus it’s a delight
for shopping treasures – score everything from ‘faux-lex’ watches and
jade Buddha statues to tire irons and a pound of ground turmeric.

DON’T MISS
A Museum of Chinese in America A Chinatown back alleys, like Mott and Mulberry Sts
A Mahayana Temple A Nom Wah Tea Parlor A Apothéke

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , C3
A www.explorechinatown.com
A south of Broome St & east of Broadway A b N/Q/R/W, J/Z, 6 to Canal St; B/D to Grand St; F

to East Broadway

Museum of Chinese in America The Museum of Chinese in America
( MAP

GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-619-4785; www.mocanyc.org; 215 Centre St,

btwn Grand & Howard Sts; adult/child $12/8, 1st Thu of month free;
h 11am-6pm Tue, Wed & Fri-Sun, to 9pm Thu), designed by Maya Lin

(architect of Washington, DC’s Vietnam Memorial) is a
multifaceted space with exhibitions that illuminate Chinese
American life, both past and present. Wind your way through
multimedia exhibits and imbibe maps, timelines, photos, letters,
films and artifacts. The museum’s anchor exhibit, With a Single
Step: Stories in the Making of America, offers a look into topics
ranging from immigration to cultural identity and racial
stereotyping.
Food, Glorious Food The most rewarding experience for
Chinatown visitors is to access this wild and wonderful world
through their taste buds. More than any other area of Manhattan,
Chinatown’s menus sport wonderfully low prices, uninflated by
ambience, hype or reputation. But more than cheap eats, the
neighborhood is rife with family recipes passed across generations

and continents. Food displays and preparation remain unchanged
and untempered by American norms; it’s not unusual to walk by
storefronts sporting a tangled array of lacquered animals –
chickens, rabbit and duck, in particular – ready to be chopped up
and served at a family banquet. Steaming street stalls clang down
the sidewalk serving pork buns and other finger-friendly food.
Buddhist Temples
Chinatown is home to Buddhist temples large and small, public and
obscure. They are easily stumbled upon during a stroll of the neighborhood,
and at least two such temples are considered landmarks. The Eastern States
Buddhist Temple ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-966-6229; 64 Mott St, btwn Bayard & Canal
Sts; h 8:30am-6pm) is filled with hundreds of Buddhas, while the Mahayana Temple
( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-925-8787; http://en.mahayana.us; 133 Canal St, at Manhattan
Bridge Plaza; h 8:30am-6pm; b B/D to Grand St; J/Z to Bowery; 6 to Canal St) holds one

golden, 16ft-high Buddha, sitting on a lotus and edged with offerings of
fresh oranges, apples and flowers. Mahayana is the largest Buddhist temple
in Chinatown, and its entrance, which overlooks the frenzied vehicle
entrance to the Manhattan Bridge, is guarded by two proud and handsome
golden lions. Step inside and you’ll find a simple interior of wooden floor
and red paper lanterns, dramatically upstaged by the temple’s magnificent
Buddha, thought to be the largest in the city.

IMMIGRATION PATTERNS
When New York City’s Chinatown was founded in the mid-18th century, it was
immigrants from Guandong (Canton Province) that built it. Many of the traditional shops
hawking pork buns, and restaurants serving dim sum, are grounded in Cantonese culture.
After the Vietnam War came Chinese groups from Vietnam, then the late 20th century
brought a wave of Fujianese that caused tensions with the original community. Since
then, Chinatown has become a hot pot of different Asian cultures, from Burmese to
Filipino. Even Latin American flavor is creeping in down Canal St.
TAKE A BREAK
Dive into a dim sum feast at 1920s Nom Wah Tea Parlor, where the decor is American
diner but the flavors are finger-licking Cantonese.
If your visit extends into the evening, drink at Apothéke, where ‘chemists’ mix up perfect
potions to cure all ailments.

Canal, Mott & Mulberry Streets Traditionally Canal St has been
Chinatown’s spine, but the relentless force of gentrification is
coming and the first sure signs can be seen here. It’s still busy as
hell, where oncoming human and car traffic wait for nobody. You’ll

still see roasted ducks and pigs hanging by their skinny necks in
windows, but it’s also where you’ll find persistent street vendors
pushing knock-off Prada bags, and hipster design markets catering
to an altogether different crowd. To find the true heart of
Chinatown, find your way into the side streets: Mott and Mulberry
are particularly evocative hunting grounds for treasures from the
Far East. You’ll pass stinky seafood stalls hawking slippery fish;
mysterious herb shops peddling a witch’s cauldron of roots and
potions; storefront bakeries with steamy windows and 80¢ pork
buns; and produce markets piled high with fresh lychees, bok choy
and Asian pears.
History of Chinese Immigrants The history of Chinese immigrants
in New York City is a long and tumultuous one. The first Chinese
people to arrive in America came to work under difficult conditions
on the Central Pacific Railroad; others were lured to the West Coast
in search of gold. When prospects dried up, many moved east to
NYC to work in factory assembly lines and in the laundry houses
of New Jersey.

SIGHTS

SoHo is the NYC of incognito celebrities and prized cast-iron lofts. It’s
also home to a number of cultural assets, including an LGBTIQ+ art
museum, ambitious installations by Walter De Maria, and New York’s
most authentic Federal-era abode. Chinatown harbors Buddhist
temples and a museum dedicated to the Chinese-American experience.

SoHo, NoHo & Nolita

BROKEN KILOMETER

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-989-5566; www.diaart.org; 393 W Broadway, btwn Spring &
Broome Sts, SoHo; h noon-3pm & 3:30-6pm Wed-Sun, closed mid-Jun–mid-Sep; b N/R to Prince
St; C/E to Spring St) F

Occupying a cavernous ground-floor space in SoHo is this 1979 installation
by the late American artist Walter De Maria. The work consists of 500 solid
brass rods, positioned in five parallel rows, with the space between the rods
increasing by 5mm with each consecutive space, from front to back. The
result: a playful subversion of spacial perception. The rods appear to be
identically spaced, even though at the back they’re almost 2ft apart. No
photos allowed.
NEW YORK CITY FIRE MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-691-1303; www.nycfiremuseum.org; 278 Spring St, btwn Varick
& Hudson Sts, SoHo; adult/child $10/8; h 10am-5pm; b C/E to Spring St)

In a grand old firehouse dating from 1904, this ode to firefighters includes a
fantastic collection of historic equipment and artifacts. Eye up everything
from horse-drawn firefighting carriages and early stovepipe firefighter hats
to Chief, a four-legged firefighting hero from Brooklyn. Exhibits trace the

development of the NYC firefighting system, and the museum’s heavy
equipment and friendly staff make this a great spot for kids.
The New York Fire Department (FDNY) lost half of its members in the
collapse of the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001, and memorials
and exhibits have become a permanent part of the collection – as well as the
2019 planting of a seedling from the Word Trade Center survivor tree out
front. Fans can stock up on books about firefighting history and official
FDNY clothing and patches in the gift shop.
NEW YORK EARTH ROOM

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-989-5566; www.earthroom.org; 141 Wooster St, btwn Prince &
W Houston Sts, SoHo; h noon-3pm & 3:30-6pm Wed-Sun; b N/R to Prince St) F

Since 1980 the oddity of the New York Earth Room, the work of artist
Walter De Maria, has been wooing the curious with something not easily
found in the city: dirt (250 cu yd, or 280,000lb, of it, to be exact). Walking
into the small space is a heady experience, as the scent will make you feel
like you’ve entered a wet forest; the sight of such beautiful, pure earth in
the midst of this crazy city is surprisingly moving.
DONALD JUDD HOME STUDIO

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-219-2747; http://juddfoundation.org; 101 Spring St, at Mercer St,
SoHo; adult/student $24/11.50; h by prebooked guided tour Tue-Sat; b N/R to Prince St; 6 to Spring
St)

The former home and studio of the late American artist Donald Judd offers
a fascinating glimpse into the life and artistic practices of the minimalist
maverick. Guided tours of the space run for approximately 90 minutes and
must be booked online (tours often sell out a month in advance). The home
studio also hosts drawing classes and art talks; see the website for details.
DRAWING CENTER

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-219-2166; www.drawingcenter.org; 35 Wooster St, btwn Grand
& Broome Sts, SoHo; h noon-6pm Wed & Fri-Sun, to 8pm Thu; b A/C/E, 1, N/Q/R to Canal St) F

America’s only nonprofit institute focused solely on drawings, the Drawing
Center uses work by masters as well as unknowns to juxtapose the
medium’s various styles. Historical exhibitions have included work by
Michelangelo, James Ensor and Marcel Duchamp, while contemporary
shows have showcased heavyweights such as Richard Serra, Ellsworth
Kelly and Richard Tuttle. As to the themes themselves, expect anything
from the whimsical to the politically controversial.
CHILDREN’S MUSEUM OF THE ARTS

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-274-0986; www.cmany.org; 103 Charlton St, btwn Greenwich &
Hudson Sts, SoHo; $13, 4-6pm Thu by donation; h noon-5pm Mon & Fri, to 6pm Thu, 10am-5pm
Sat & Sun; c ; b 1 to Houston St; C/E to Spring St)

This small but worthy stop encourages kids aged 10 months to 15 years to
view, make and share art. Rotating exhibitions aside, the center offers a vast
program of daily activities for fledgling artists, from sculpture and
collaborative mural painting, to songwriting and children’s book design. It
also runs movie nights and other special treats. See the website for
upcoming offerings.

TOP EXPERIENCE
MERCHANT’S HOUSE MUSEUM
Built in 1832 and purchased by merchant magnate Seabury Tredwell three years later, this redbrick mansion is the most authentic Federal-style house in town (of about 300). An
antiquarian’s dream, the Merchant’s House is as much about the city’s mercantile past as it is a
showcase of high-end domestic furnishings from the 19th century. Everything in the house is
testament to what money could buy, from the mahogany pocket doors, bronze gasoliers and
marble mantelpieces, to the elegant parlor chairs, attributed to noted furniture designer Duncan
Phyfe. Even the elaborate system of multilevel call bells for the servants works to this day.
Many believe that the ghost of Gertrude Tredwell – Seabury’s youngest child and the
building’s last resident – haunts the place, making cameos late in the evening and at public
events. Several attendees once witnessed the shadow of a woman walk up to the performers
and take a seat in the parlor chairs at a Valentine’s Day concert. Apropos, the museum offers
ghost tours after dark (typically in late October), plus lectures, special events and historical
walking tours of NoHo. Check the website for details.

DON’T MISS
A Chairs attributed to Duncan Phyfe A Ghost tours

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP

GOOGLE MAP , G2

A www.merchantshouse.org
A 29 E 4th St, btwn Lafayette St & Bowery, NoHo A adult/child $15/free A h noon-5pm
Fri-Mon, to 8pm Thu, guided tours 2pm Thu-Mon & 6:30pm Thu A b 6 to Bleecker St;

B/D/F/M to Broadway-Lafayette St

Chinatown & Little Italy

CHINATOWN

AREA

( MAP

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
LESLIE-LOHMAN MUSEUM OF GAY & LESBIAN ART

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-431-2609; www.leslielohman.org; 26 Wooster St, btwn Grand &
Canal Sts, Little Italy; suggested donation $10; h noon-6pm Wed & Fri-Sun, to 8pm Thu; b A/C/E,
N/Q/R, 1 to Canal St) F

The world’s first museum dedicated to LGBTIQ+ themes stages six to eight
annual exhibitions of both homegrown and international art. Offerings have
included solo-artist retrospectives as well as themed shows exploring the
likes of ‘art and sex along the New York waterfront.’ Much of the work on
display is from the museum’s own collection, which consists of over 24,000
works. The space also hosts queer-centric lectures, readings, film screenings
and performances; check the website for updates.
MULBERRY STREET

STREET

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Little Italy; b N/Q/R, J/Z, 6 to Canal St; B/D to Grand St)

Named for the mulberry farms that once stood here, Mulberry St is now
better known as the meat in Little Italy’s sauce. It’s an animated strip,
packed with smooth-talking restaurant hawkers (especially between Hester
and Grand Sts), wisecracking baristas and a healthy dose of kitschy
souvenirs.
Despite the neighborhood’s many changes over the years, history looms
large. One block north stands fourth-generation Alleva ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ;
% 212-226-7990; 188 Grand St; h 9am-7pm; b J/Z, N/Q/R, 6 to Canal St; B/D to Grand St), one of
the city’s original cheese shops and famed for its mozzarella. Across the
street on Grand lies another veteran, Ferrara Cafe & Bakery, celebrated for
its classic Italian pastries and gelati. Back on Mulberry, old-time Mulberry
Street Bar ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-226-9345; www.facebook.com/MulberryStBar; 176
Mulberry St, at Broome St; h 11am-midnight Sun-Thu, to 2am Fri & Sat; b B/D to Grand St; J/Z to

Bowery) was a favorite haunt of the late Frank Sinatra; its own TV cameos

include Law & Order and The Sopranos.
Alcohol was openly traded on the corner of Mulberry and Kenmare Sts
during Prohibition, leading to its nickname, the ‘Curb Exchange.’ That
police headquarters at the time were only a block away at 240 Centre St is
testament to the power of good old-fashioned bribes. From this point north,
the old-school delis and restaurants of Little Italy give way to the newschool boutiques, galleries and restaurants of Nolita. Take a gander at what
was once the Ravenite Social Club ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 247 Mulberry St, Nolita; b 6
to Spring St; N/R to Prince St) to see how things have really changed around here.
Now a designer shoe store, it was once a mobster hangout (originally
known as the Alto Knights Social Club). Indeed, it was right here that big
hitters such as John Gotti (as well as the FBI, which kept a watchful eye
from the building across the street) logged time. Only the shop’s tile floor
remains from the day, the shop windows once an intimidating brick wall.

ARTISTS SPACE

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-226-3970; www.artistsspace.org; 80 White St, at Cortland Alley,
Chinatown; h noon-6pm Wed-Sun; b N/Q/R/W to Canal St) F

One of the first alternative spaces in New York, Artists Space made its
debut in 1972 with a mission to support contemporary artists working in the
visual arts – from video, electronic media and performance to architecture
and design. More than 40 years on, it remains a solid choice for those
seeking crisp, provocative and experimental creativity. In late 2019 the
venue moved to a new location with two floors of exhibition space.
COLUMBUS PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Mulberry & Bayard Sts, Chinatown; b J/Z, N/Q/R, 6 to Canal St)

Mah-jongg meisters, slow-motion tai-chi practitioners and old aunties
gossiping over homemade dumplings: it might feel like Shanghai, but this
leafy oasis is core to NYC history. In the 19th century, this was part of the
infamous Five Points neighborhood, the city’s first tenement slums and the
inspiration for Martin Scorsese’s Gangs of New York.

TOP EXPERIENCE

LITTLE ITALY
In the last 50 years, New York’s Little Italy has shrunk from a big, brash boot to an ultra-slim
sandal. A mid-century exodus to Brooklyn and beyond has seen this neighborhood turn into a
micro-pastiche of its former self. It’s now little more than Mulberry Street, a kitsch strip of
gingham tablecloths, mandolin muzak and nostalgia for the old country.
Come late September, Mulberry St turns into a raucous, 11-day block party for the San
Gennaro Festival (www.facebook.com/sangennaronyc), a celebration honoring the patron
saint of Naples. It’s a loud, convivial affair, with food and carnival stalls, free entertainment
and more big hair than Jersey Shore.
If you’re after an old-world-style Italian dinner, family-run Da Nico ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-343-1212; www.danicoristorante.com; 164 Mulberry St, btwn
Grande & Broome Sts; mains $18-38; h noon-10pm Sun-Thu, to 11pm Fri & Sat; b J/Z
N/Q/R/W, 6 to Canal St) checks all the boxes. To satisfy your sweet tooth, head to Ferrara
Cafe & Bakery ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ) for mouthwateringly good tiramisu, or tasty
coffee.

DON’T MISS
A Mulberry St A San Gennaro Festival in September A Great tiramisu

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP

GOOGLE MAP , B2

A b N/Q/R/W, J/Z, 6 to Canal St; B/D to Grand St
