NYC on Screen
New York City has a long and storied life on screen. It was on these
streets that a bumbling Woody Allen fell for Diane Keaton in Annie
Hall, that Meg Ryan faked her orgasm in When Harry Met Sally, and
that Sarah Jessica Parker philosophized about the finer points of
dating and Jimmy Choos in Sex & the City. To fans, traversing the city
can feel like one big déjà vu of memorable scenes, characters and oneliners.

Hollywood Roots & Rivals
Believe it or not, America’s film industry is an East Coast native. Fox,
Universal, Metro, Selznick and Goldwyn all originated here in the early
20th century, and long before Westerns were shot in California and
Colorado, they were filmed in the (now former) wilds of New Jersey. Even
after Hollywood’s year-round sunshine lured the bulk of the business west
by the 1920s, ‘Lights, Camera, Action’ remained a common call in Gotham.

The Kaufman Astoria Legacy
The heart of the local scene was Queens’ still-kicking Kaufman Astoria
Studios. Founded by Jesse Lasky and Adolph Zukor in 1916 as a one-stopshop for their Famous Players–Lasky Corporation, the complex would
produce a string of silent-era hits, among them The Sheik (1921) and
Monsieur Beaucaire (1924), both starring Italian-born heartthrob Rudolph
Valentino, as well as Manhandled (1924), starring early silver-screen diva
Gloria Swanson. Renamed Paramount Pictures in 1927, the studios became
known for turning Broadway stars into big-screen icons, among them the
Marx Brothers, Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers, the latter making her
feature-film debut as a flapper in Young Man of Manhattan (1930).
Despite Paramount moving all of its feature film shoots to Hollywood in
1932, the complex – renamed Eastern Services Studio – remained the home
of Paramount’s newsreel division. Throughout the 1930s, it was also known
for its ‘shorts,’ which launched the careers of homegrown talents including
George Burns, Bob Hope and Danny Kaye. After a stint making propaganda
and training films for the US Army between WWII and 1970, what had
become known as the US Signal Corps Photographic Center was renamed
the Kaufman Astoria Studios by George S Kaufman (the real-estate
magnate, not the playwright) in 1983. Modernized and expanded, the studio
has gone on to make a string of flicks, including All that Jazz (1979),
Brighton Beach Memoirs (1986) and The Stepford Wives (2004). It was here
that the Huxtables lived out their middle-class Brooklyn lives in the ’80s

TV sitcom The Cosby Show, where the heroine of Nurse Jackie juggled
addictions and work, and the inmates of Litchfield Penitentiary battled their
demons in Orange is the New Black. It’s still here that small-screen favorite
Sesame Street is taped.
Combined, the city’s TV and film industries spend more than $8.7 billion (and rising) on
production annually and support 130,000 jobs. More than a third of professional actors in the US
are based here.

Beyond Astoria
Slap-bang in the historic Brooklyn Navy Yard, the 760,000-sq-ft Steiner
Studios is the largest studio complex east of LA. Its film credits to date
include The Producers (2005), Revolutionary Road (2008), Sex & the City 1
and 2 (2008, 2010), and The Wolf of Wall Street (2013). The studios have
also been used for numerous TV shows, among them Martin Scorsese’s
critically acclaimed gangster drama Boardwalk Empire and fellow HBO
series Vinyl, a rock drama by Scorsese, Mick Jagger and Terence Winter.
Back in Queens you’ll find the city’s other big gun, Silvercup Studios. Its
list of features include NYC classics such as Francis Ford Coppola’s The
Godfather: Part III (1990) and Woody Allen’s Broadway Danny Rose
(1984) and The Purple Rose of Cairo (1985), plus TV gems such as mafia
drama The Sopranos and the equally lauded comedy 30 Rock, starring Tina
Fey as a TV sketch writer and Alec Baldwin as a network executive at the
Rockefeller Center. In reality, the Rockefeller Center is home to the NBC
TV network, its long-running variety show Saturday Night Live the real
inspiration behind Fey’s 30 Rock project.
Other media networks dotted across Manhattan include the Food and
Oxygen Networks, both housed in the Chelsea Market, as well as Robert De
Niro’s Tribeca Productions, based in the Tribeca Film Center.
Beyond the studios and headquarters are some of the top film schools:
New York University’s Tisch Film School, the New York Film Academy,
the School of Visual Arts, Columbia University and the New School. But

you don’t have to be a student to learn, with both the Museum of the
Moving Image in Astoria, Queens, and the Paley Center for Media in
Midtown Manhattan acting as major showcases for screenings and seminars
about productions both past and present.

Landmarks on Screen

Downtown Drama to Midtown Romance
It’s not surprising that NYC feels strangely familiar to many first-time
visitors – the city itself has racked up more screen time than most
Hollywood divas put together and many of its landmarks are as much a part
of American screen culture as its red-carpet celebrities. In Brooklyn, the
brownstone buildings of Fort Greene were the setting for Spike Lee’s
cosmopolitan comedy-drama She’s Gotta Have It (1986). Then there’s the
Staten Island Ferry, which takes bullied secretary Melanie Griffith from
suburbia to Wall St in Working Girl (1988); Battery Park, where Madonna
bewitches Aidan Quinn and Rosanna Arquette in Desperately Seeking
Susan (1985); or the New York County Courthouse, where villains get their
just desserts in Wall Street (1987) and Goodfellas (1990). Then there are
small-screen classics such as Cagney & Lacey, NYPD Blue and Law &
Order. The latter show, famous for showcasing New York and its
characters, is honored with its own road – Law & Order Way – that leads to
Pier 62 at Chelsea Piers. More recently, the Marvel series Jessica Jones and
Luke Cage capitalized on the moody atmospheres of their filming locations
(respectively, Brooklyn and Harlem).
Few landmarks can claim as much screen time as the Empire State
Building, famed for its spire-clinging ape in King Kong (1933, 2005), as
well as for the countless romantic encounters on its observation decks. One
of its most famous scenes is Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks’ after-hours
encounter in Sleepless in Seattle (1993). The sequence – which uses the real
lobby but a studio-replica deck – is a tribute of sorts to An Affair to
Remember (1957), which sees Cary Grant and Deborah Kerr make a pact to
meet and (hopefully) seal their love atop the skyscraper.
Sarah Jessica Parker is less lucky in Sex & the City (2008), when a
nervous Mr Big jilts her and her Vivienne Westwood wedding dress at the
New York Public Library. Perhaps he’d seen Ghostbusters (1984) a few too

many times, its opening scenes featuring the haunted library’s iconic marble
lions and Rose Main Reading Room. The library’s foyer sneakily stands in
for the Metropolitan Museum of Art in The Thomas Crown Affair (1999), in
which thieving playboy Pierce Brosnan meets his match in sultry detective
Rene Russo. It’s at the fountain in adjacent Bryant Park that DIY sleuth
Diane Keaton debriefs husband Woody Allen about their supposedly
bloodthirsty elderly neighbor in Manhattan Murder Mystery (1993). True to
form, Allen uses the film to showcase a slew of New York locales, among
them the National Arts Club in Gramercy Park and one of his own former
hangouts, Elaine’s at 1703 Second Ave. It’s at this since-closed Upper East
Side restaurant that Keaton explains her crime theory to Allen and dinner
companions Alan Alda and Ron Rifkin. The restaurant was a regular in
Allen’s films, also appearing in Manhattan (1979) and Celebrity (1998).
Across Central Park – whose own countless scenes include Barbra
Streisand and Robert Redford rowing on its lake in clutch-a-Kleenex The
Way We Were (1973) – stands the Dakota Building, used in the classic
thriller Rosemary’s Baby (1968) and once the home of Judy Garland. The
Upper West Side is also where you’ll find Tom’s Restaurant, the facade of
which was used regularly in Seinfeld. Another neighborhood star is the
elegant Lincoln Center, where Natalie Portman slowly loses her mind in the
psychological thriller Black Swan (2010), and where love-struck
Brooklynites Cher and Nicolas Cage meet for a date in Moonstruck (1987).
The Center sits on what had previously been a rundown district of
tenements, captured in Oscar-winning gangland musical West Side Story
(1961).

Tom’s Restaurant, which appeared as Monk’s Diner in Seinfeld | VALESTOCK/SHUTTERSTOCK
©

More than 70 TV shows are filmed in NYC, from hit series such as Law & Order: Special Victims
Unit and The Good Fight and quirky comedies like The Marvelous Mrs Maisel, to long-standing
classics including The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon and Saturday Night Live.

The Oscar-winner Birdman (2014) shines the spotlight on Midtown’s
glittering Theater District, in which a long-suffering Michael Keaton tries to
stage a Broadway adaptation at the St James Theatre on W44th St. Locked
out of the building, a mortified Keaton fronts Times Square in nothing but
his underwear. A few blocks further east, he spars over his play with
Lindsay Duncan at historic drinking den Rum House. Locations in
Manhattan, as well as Harlem and Brooklyn, form a much crueller backdrop
in Joker (2019), which makes effective use of the graffiti-scarred subway to
evoke the unforgiving city as it nudges the alienated protagonist towards
violence.

LOCATION TOURS
Movie- and TV-location guided tours such as On Location Tours are a good way to visit some
of the spots where your screen favorites were shot, including The Devil Wears Prada, SpiderMan, How I Met Your Mother, Jessica Jones, The Sopranos and more. Alternatively, you can
do it yourself after visiting the comprehensive On the Set of New York website
(www.onthesetofnewyork.com), which offers free downloadable location maps covering much
of Manhattan.

Dancing in the Street
Knives make way for leotards in the cult musical Fame (1980), in which
New York High School of Performing Arts students do little for the city’s
traffic woes by dancing on Midtown’s streets. The film’s graphic content
was too much for the city’s Board of Education, who banned shooting at the
real High School of Performing Arts, then located at 120 W 46th St.
Consequently, filmmakers used the doorway of a disused church on the
opposite side of the street for the school’s entrance, and Haaren Hall (Tenth
Ave and 59th St) for interior scenes.
Fame is not alone in turning Gotham into a pop-up dance floor. In On the
Town (1949), starstruck sailors Frank Sinatra, Gene Kelly and Jules
Munshin look straight off a Pride float as they skip, hop and sing their way
across this ‘wonderful town,’ from the base of Lady Liberty to Rockefeller
Plaza and the Brooklyn Bridge. Another wave of campness hits the bridge
when Diana Ross and Michael Jackson cross it in The Wiz (1978), a bizarre
take on The Wizard of Oz, complete with munchkins in Flushing Meadows
Corona Park and an Emerald City at the base of the WTC Twin Towers.
Topping them all, however, is the closing scene in Terry Gilliam’s The
Fisher King (1991), which sees Grand Central Terminal’s Main Concourse
turned into a ballroom of waltzing commuters.

Hook & Ladder Company 8’s firehouse, home to the Ghostbusters crew |

STARRING NYC
It would take volumes to cover all the films tied to Gotham, so fire up your imagination with
the following celluloid hits:
Taxi Driver (Martin Scorsese, 1976) Starring Robert De Niro, Cybill Shepherd and Jodie
Foster. De Niro is a mentally unstable Vietnam War vet whose violent urges are heightened by
the city’s tensions. It’s a funny, depressing, brilliant classic that’s a potent reminder of how
much grittier this place used to be.
Desperately Seeking Susan (Susan Seidelman, 1985) Starring Madonna, Rosanna Arquette
and Aidan Quinn. A case of mistaken identity leads a bored New Jersey housewife on a wild
adventure through Manhattan’s subcultural wonderland. Relive mid-80s East Village and longgone nightclub Danceteria.
Summer of Sam (Spike Lee, 1999) Starring John Leguizamo, Mira Sorvino and Jennifer
Esposito. Spike Lee puts NYC’s summer of 1977 in historical context by weaving together the
Son of Sam murders, the blackout, racial tensions and the misadventures of one disco-dancing
Brooklyn couple, including scenes at CBGB and Studio 54.
Angels in America (Mike Nichols, 2003) Starring Al Pacino, Meryl Streep and Jeffrey
Wright. This movie version of Tony Kushner’s Broadway play recalls 1985 Manhattan:
crumbling relationships, out-of-control AIDS and a closeted Roy Cohn – advisor to President
Ronald Reagan – doing nothing about it except falling ill himself. Follow characters from
Brooklyn to Lower Manhattan to Central Park.
Party Monster (Fenton Bailey, 2003) Starring Seth Green and Macaulay Culkin, who plays
the famed, murderous club kid Michael Alig, this is a disturbing look into the drug-fueled
downtown clubbing culture of the late ’80s. The former Limelight club is featured
prominently.
Precious (Lee Daniels, 2009) Starring Gabourey Sidibe and Mo’Nique. Based on the novel
Push by Sapphire, this unflinching tale of an illiterate teenager abused by her parents takes
place in Harlem, its gritty streets a the backdrop to stellar performances.
Birdman (Alejandro G Iñárritu, 2014) Oscar-winning black-comedy/drama starring Michael
Keaton and featuring Zach Galifianakis, Edward Norton, Andrea Riseborough, Amy Ryan,
Emma Stone and Naomi Watts. Birdman documents the struggles of a has-been Hollywood
actor trying to mount a Broadway show.
Ghostbusters (Paul Feig, 2016) The reboot of the original 1984 film stars four female ghost
hunters (comedy stars Melissa McCarthy, Kristen Wiig, Kate McKinnon and Leslie Jones)
who light up NYC during their encounters with ghoulish creatures. Though it received mixed
reviews, the film broke new ground with its all-female leads.
The Greatest Showman (Michael Gracey, 2017) Musical starring Hugh Jackman, Michelle
Williams and Zac Efron. Inspired by the story of PT Barnum, who established the first circus
and freak show in 19th-century Manhattan. This film tackles New York society tensions and

class divide as low-born Barnum (Hugh Jackman) strives to establish himself and his tribe of
New York misfits as respectable performers.
