Midtown
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping
Sports & Activities

Midtown
MIDTOWN EAST | FIFTH AVENUE | MIDTOWN WEST & TIMES SQUARE | MIDTOWN
EAST & FIFTH AVENUE

Neighborhood Top Five

1 Rockefeller Center Playing Spot the Landmark at the jaw-dropping Top

of the Rock observation deck, or taking a tour of NBC’s historic TV
studios.
2 Museum of Modern Art Hanging out with Picasso, Warhol and Rothko, or

grabbing a spectacular bite to eat or a fine cocktail at this blockbuster
museum.
3 Bryant Park Lunching alfresco, watching a movie under the stars or even

just relaxing in this activity-filled Midtown oasis.

4 Jazz at Lincoln Center Gazing at the spectacular view while listening to

world-class musicians hit their groove.
5 Broadway Adding a little sparkle to life with a toe-tapping, soul-lifting

Broadway show.

Explore Midtown
Midtown is big, brazen and best seen on foot, so slice it up and enjoy it bit
by bit. The top end of Fifth Ave (around the 50s) makes for a fabled
introduction, home to Tiffany & Co, the Plaza hotel, the Museum of
Modern Art (MoMA) and the Rockefeller Center’s Top of the Rock
observation decks. A day in Midtown East could easily incorporate rare
manuscripts at the Morgan Library & Museum, beaux-arts architecture at
Grand Central Terminal, the art deco lobby of the Chrysler Building and a
tour of the United Nations. If it’s a rainy day, explore the gilded New York
Public Library.
In Midtown West, design and fashion buffs head to the Museum of Arts
& Design and the Museum at FIT. Between the two is blinding Times
Square, most spectacular at night. Its residents include top-tier retail chains
and a TKTS Booth selling cut-price Broadway tickets. Further west is
Hell’s Kitchen, packed with great eateries and gay venues.

Local Life
Dive bars Stiff drinks, loosened ties and the whiff of nostalgia await at nobull dive bars like Jimmy’s Corner and Rudy’s Bar & Grill.
A

Theater Look beyond the glitz of Broadway for innovative drama at
Playwrights Horizons and Second Stage Theater.
A

Food Join all walks of life at time-warped Cuban diner Margon or go for
some classic Jewish deli food at Ess-a-Bagel.
A

Movies Bring a blanket and picnic dinner for alfresco cinema at the Bryant
Park Summer Film Festival.
A

Drag shows Sashay away to Hardware or Industry to see NYC’s top
queens strut their stuff.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway Times Sq-42nd St, Grand Central-42nd St and 34th St-Herald Sq
are Midtown’s main interchange stations. A/C/E and 1/2/3 lines run north–
south through Midtown West; 4/5/6 through Midtown East. The central
B/D/F/M lines follow Sixth Ave, while N/Q/R/W follow Broadway. The 7,
E and M lines offer some crosstown service.
A

Bus For Midtown’s western and eastern extremes. Routes include M11
(north on Tenth Ave; south on Ninth), M101, M102 and M103 (north on
Third Ave; south on Lexington) and M15 (north on First Ave; south on
Second). Crosstown buses take 34th and 42nd Sts.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
Savoring Midtown’s A-list restaurants without mortgaging the house is possible if you go for
the prix-fixe lunch menu where available. Participants include Michelin-starred Le Bernardin,
which offers dishes featured in its evening menus. How far ahead you should book depends on
the restaurant. It can sometimes be a one-month wait at Le Bernardin, which offers online
reservations.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Le Bernardin
A O-ya
A Modern
A Totto Ramen
A Agern
A Hangawi

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Robert
A Bar SixtyFive
A Rum House
A Flaming Saddles
A Middle Branch
A The Campbell

For reviews, see here
1 Best Skyline Views
A Top of the Rock
A Bar SixtyFive
A Empire State Building
A Top of the Strand
A Franklin D Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park

TOP EXPERIENCE

TIMES SQUARE
Love it or hate it, the intersection of Broadway and Seventh Ave –
better known as Times Square – is New York City’s heart. It’s a
restless, hypnotic torrent of glittering lights, giant billboards and raw
urban energy that doesn’t seem to have an off switch: it’s nearly as
busy in the wee hours as it is in the afternoon.

DON’T MISS
A Taking in Times Square from the TKTS Booth steps A Seeing a Broadway show A Sipping a

drink at R Lounge
A Staring in awe at the sheer dazzle of it all

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , E5
A www.timessquarenyc.org
A Broadway, at Seventh Ave A b N/Q/R/W, S, 1/2/3, 7 to Times Sq-42nd St

Hyperactive Heart This is the New York of collective fantasies –
the place where Al Jolson ‘makes it’ in the 1927 film The Jazz
Singer, where photojournalist Alfred Eisenstaedt famously captured
a lip-locked sailor and nurse on V-J Day in 1945, and where Alicia
Keys and Jay-Z waxed lyrically about the concrete jungle.
But for several decades, the dream here was a sordid one. The economic
crash of the early 1970s led to a mass exodus of corporations from Times
Square. Billboard niches went dark, stores shut and once-grand hotels were
converted into SRO (single-room occupancy) dives. While the adjoining
Theater District survived, its respectable playhouses shared the streets with
porn cinemas and strip clubs. That all changed with tough-talking former
mayor Rudolph Giuliani who, in the 1990s, boosted police numbers and
lured in a wave of ‘respectable’ retail chains, restaurants and attractions. By
the new millennium, Times Square had gone from X-rated to G-rated,
drawing almost 50 million visitors annually.

How the New York Times Made New Year’s Eve At the turn of the
20th century, Times Square was an unremarkable intersection
known as Longacre Sq. This would change with a deal made

between subway pioneer August Belmont and New York Times
publisher Adolph Ochs. Heading construction of the city’s first
subway line (from Lower Manhattan to Harlem), Belmont astutely
realized that a Midtown business hub would encourage use of the
line (and maximize profit). Belmont approached Ochs, arguing that
moving to Broadway and 42nd St would be a win-win for the
broadsheet: an in-house subway station would mean faster
distribution of the newspaper, but also more sales to the influx of
commuters – and convinced mayor George B McClellan Jr to
rename the square in honor of the broadsheet. In the winter of
1904–05, both the subway station and the Times’ new headquarters
at One Times Square made their debut.
In honor of the move, the Times hosted a New Year’s Eve party in 1904,
setting off fireworks from its skyscraper rooftop. By 1907, the square had
become so built-up that fireworks were deemed a safety hazard, forcing the
newspaper to come up with an alternative crowd-puller. It came in the form
of a 700lb, wood-and-iron ball, lowered from the roof of One Times Square
to herald the arrival of 1908.
Around one million people still gather in Times Square every New Year’s
Eve to watch a Waterford crystal ball descend from the building at
midnight. Looking up, it’s easy to forget that behind the current armor of
billboards, the One Times Square building still exists. To see what it looked
like in the days of Adolph Ochs, pay a visit to the beautiful DeWitt Wallace
Periodical Room at the New York Public Library, whose paintings by
muralist Richard Haas include Times Square in the time of streetcars.

TOP TIP
In 2017, designated outdoor street-food areas launched in Times Square’s pedestrian
plazas (at the Broadway intersections with W 43rd and W 47th Sts), meaning it’s now
possible to bask in the warm glow of the neon lights sitting with a beer and taco in hand.
There’s also a tourist information booth ( MAP ; % 212-484-1222;
www.timessquarenyc.org; Broadway Plaza, at W 45th St; h 8am-5pm; b N/Q/R/W, S,
1/2/3, 7, A/C/E to Times Sq-42nd St).
TAKE A BREAK
For a panoramic overview, order a drink at the Renaissance Hotel’s R Lounge, which
offers floor-to-ceiling glass windows over the neon-lit spectacle.

Times Square is so touristy and chaotic that if you want a proper meal, you’re better off
eating elsewhere. Fournos Theophilos, a two-block walk east, is a quiet retreat for a
delicious Greek lunch with baklava milkshakes.

How Theater Came to Times Square The neighborhood’s first
playhouse was the long-gone Empire, opened in 1893 and located
on Broadway between 40th and 41st Sts. Two years later, cigar
manufacturer and part-time comedy scribe Oscar Hammerstein
opened the Olympia, also on Broadway, before opening the
Republic – now children’s theater New Victory ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ;
% 646-223-3010; www.newvictory.org; 209 W 42nd St, btwn Seventh &

Eighth Aves; c ; b N/Q/R/W, S, 1/2/3, 7 to Times Sq-42nd St; A/C/E to 42nd
St-Port Authority Bus Terminal) – in 1900. This led to a string of new
venues, among them the still-beating New Amsterdam Theatre ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; Aladdin; % 866-870-2717; www.newamsterdamtheatre.com;
214 W 42nd St, btwn Seventh & Eighth Aves; h box office 9am-8pm MonFri, from 10am Sat, 10am-6:30pm Sun; c ; b N/Q/R/W, S, 1/2/3, 7 to Times
Sq-42nd St; A/C/E to 42nd St-Port Authority Bus Terminal) and Lyceum

Theatre ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.shubert.nyc/theatres/lyceum; 149 W
45th St, btwn Sixth & Seventh Aves; b N/R/W to 49th St).
The Broadway of the 1920s was well-known for its lighthearted
musicals, commonly fusing vaudeville and music-hall traditions, and
producing classic tunes like Cole Porter’s ‘Let’s Misbehave.’ But at the
same time, Midtown’s theater district was evolving as a platform for new
American dramatists. One of the greatest was Eugene O’Neill (1888–1953).
Born in Times Square at the long-gone Barrett Hotel (1500 Broadway), the
playwright debuted many of his works here, including Pulitzer Prize
winners Beyond the Horizon and Anna Christie. O’Neill’s success on
Broadway paved the way for other 20th-century American greats like
Tennessee Williams, Arthur Miller and Edward Albee, who would come to
be recognized for their serious talent by the establishment of the annual
Tony Awards in 1947.

Brilliant Broadway The dozens of Broadway and off-Broadway
theaters near Times Square run everything from blockbuster
musicals to new and classic drama. Unless there’s a specific show
you’re after, the best – and cheapest – way to score tickets in the
area is at the TKTS Booth ( MAP ; www.tdf.org/tkts; Broadway, at W
47th St, Midtown; h 3-8pm Mon & Fri, 2-8pm Tue, 10am-2pm & 3-8pm
Wed, Thu & Sat, 11am-7pm Sun; b N/Q/R/W, S, 1/2/3, 7 to Times Sq-42nd
St), where you can line up and get same-day discounted tickets for

top Broadway and off-Broadway shows. Smartphone users can
download the free TKTS app, which offers rundowns of both
Broadway and off-Broadway shows, as well as real-time updates of
what’s available on that day. Always have a backup choice in case
your first preference sells out, and never buy from scalpers on the
street. Queues are usually shortest after 5:30pm – though the clever
buy their tickets at the less-crowded South Street Seaport branch.

The TKTS Booth is an attraction in its own right, with its illuminated
roof of 27 ruby-red steps rising a panoramic 16ft 1in above Father Duffy
Sq, named for a WWI army chaplain.

Today’s Times Square The iconic hourglass-shaped plaza is an
unmissable homage to the hustle and bustle of big-city life. Almost
as bright at 2am as it is at noon, and always jammed with people,
Times Square proves that New York truly is the city that never
sleeps. For some, it’s hell on earth. Even so, if you can stroll along
this short section of Broadway without feeling at least the tiniest
twinge of awe, check your pulse. The massive billboards stretch
half a skyscraper tall, and LED signs are lit for shows and
performances. A mishmash of costumed characters on the square
(from the cute, like Elmo, to the noble, like the Statue of Liberty, to
the popular, like Marvel action heroes, to the just plain bizarre, like
Naked Cowboy) mix with the jumble of humanity from every
corner of the globe. Walk around and in minutes you’ll hear more
languages being spoken than you even knew existed. It’s also an
urban playground for public art and seasonal events, not forgetting
the world’s most famous spot to celebrate New Year’s Eve.
Brill Building At the northwest corner of Broadway and 49th, the
humble-looking Brill Building ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 1619 Broadway, at
W 49th St; b N/R/W to 49th St; 1, C/E to 50th St) – its ground floor
being redeveloped for retail – is widely considered the most
important generator of popular songs in the Western world. In
1962, over 160 music businesses were based here, from
songwriters and managers to record companies and promoters. It
was a one-stop shop for artists, who could craft a song, hire
musicians, cut a demo and convince a producer, all on-site. Among

the legends who recorded here were Carole King, Bob Dylan, Joni
Mitchell and Paul Simon.

TOP EXPERIENCE

EMPIRE STATE BUILDING
The Chrysler Building may be prettier, and One World Trade Center
taller, but the queen bee of the New York skyline remains the Empire
State Building. NYC’s former tallest star has enjoyed close-ups in
around a hundred films, from King Kong to Independence Day. Heading
up to the top is as quintessentially New York as pastrami, rye and
pickles.

DON’T MISS
A Observation decks at sunset
A Live jazz Thursday to Saturday nights
A Art deco lobby with aluminum-relief mural

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , B7
A www.empirestatebuilding.com
A 20 W 34th St, btwn Fifth & Sixth Aves
A 86th-fl observation deck adult/child $38/32, incl 102nd-fl observation deck $58/52
A h 8am-2am, last elevators up 1:15am
A b 6 to 33rd St, B/D/F/M, N/Q/R/W to 34th St-Herald Sq

By the Numbers
The statistics are astounding: 10 million bricks, 60,000 tons of steel, 6400
windows and 328,000 sq ft of marble. Built on the original site of the
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, construction took a record-setting 410 days, using
seven million hours of labor and costing $41 million. It might sound like a
lot, but it fell well below its $50 million budget. Coming in at 102 stories
and 1454ft from top to bottom, the limestone tower opened for business on
May 1, 1931. Generations later, Deborah Kerr’s words to Cary Grant in An
Affair to Remember still ring true: ‘It’s the nearest thing to heaven we have
in New York.’

Observation Decks
Unless you’re Ann Darrow (the unfortunate woman caught in King Kong’s
grip), heading to the top of the Empire State Building should leave you
beaming. There are two observation decks. The open-air 86th-floor deck

offers an alfresco experience, with telescopes (previously coin operated;
now free) for close-up glimpses of the metropolis in action. Further up, at
the top of the spire, the enclosed 102nd floor is New York’s second-highest
observation deck, trumped only by the observation deck at One World
Trade Center. Needless to say, the views through the floor-to-ceiling
windows over the city’s five boroughs (and four neighboring states, weather
permitting) are quite simply exquisite. The views from both decks are
especially spectacular at sunset, when the city dons its nighttime cloak in
dusk’s afterglow.

An Ambitious Antenna
A locked, unmarked door on the 102nd-floor observation deck leads to one
of New York’s most outrageous pie-in-the-sky projects to date: a narrow
terrace intended to dock zeppelins. Spearheading the dream was former
New York governor Alfred E Smith, who went from failed presidential
candidate in 1928 to head honcho of the Empire State Building project.
When architect William Van Alen revealed the secret spire of his competing
Chrysler Building, Smith went one better, declaring that the top of the
Empire State Building would sport an even taller mooring mast for
transatlantic airships. While the plan looked good on paper, there were two
(major) oversights: dirigibles require anchoring at both ends (not just at the
nose, as planned) and passengers (who travel in the zeppelin’s gondola)
cannot exit the craft through the giant helium-filled balloon. Regardless, it
didn’t stop them from trying. In September 1931, the New York Evening
Journal threw sanity to the wind, managing to moor a zeppelin and deliver
a pile of newspapers fresh out of Lower Manhattan. Though the ambitious
plan for docking airships never got off the ground, years later an aircraft
met up with the building with tragic consequences: a B-25 bomber crashed
into the 79th floor on a foggy day in 1945, killing 14 people.

TOP TIPS
Getting here very early (like 8am) or very late will help you avoid delays – as will
buying tickets in advance online for an extra $2 convenience fee.

On the 86th floor between 10pm and 1am from Thursday to Saturday, the twinkling sea
of lights below is accompanied by a live saxophone soundtrack (requests are welcome).

Download the Empire State Building tour app (free with your ticket) or stream the audio
version live using the on-site free wi-fi.
TAKE A BREAK
You’re just a short walk from Koreatown, with abundant eating options along 32nd St,
including peaceful Hangawi.

Or, stroll northward and lunch at the Bryant Park Grill.

Language of Light
Since 1976, the building’s top 30 floors have been floodlit in a spectrum of
colors each night, reflecting seasonal and holiday hues, or even local sports
teams, schools or charities. Famous combos include orange, white and
green for St Patrick’s Day; blue and white for Chanukah; white, red and
green for Christmas; and the rainbow colors for Gay Pride weekend in June.
For a full rundown of color schemes, check the website.

Sibling Comparisons
The Empire State Building was designed by the prolific architectural firm
Shreve, Lamb and Harmon. According to legend, the skyscraper’s
conception began with a meeting between William Lamb and building cofinancier John Jakob Raskob, during which Raskob propped up a No 2
pencil and asked, ‘Bill, how high can you make it so that it won’t fall
down?’ Shreve, Lamb and Harmon’s other projects include the skyscraper

at 500 Fifth Ave. To compare the soaring siblings, head to the northeast
corner of Fifth Ave and 40th St.

TOP EXPERIENCE

MUSEUM OF MODERN ART
MoMA boasts more A-listers than an Oscars after-party: Van Gogh,
Matisse, Picasso, Warhol, Cassatt, Gaugin, Mondrian, Pollock and
Bourgeois. Since its 1929 founding, the museum has amassed around
200,000 artworks, documenting the creativity of the late-19th century
through to today. For art buffs, it’s Valhalla. For the uninitiated, it’s a
crash course in all that is enthralling about art.

UPI / ALAMY STOCK PHOTO ©

DON’T MISS
A Van Gogh’s Starry Night
A The Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden
A Dining at The Modern
A MoMA Book & Design Store

PRACTICALITIES
A MoMA
A MAP , G2
A % 212-708-9400
A www.moma.org
A 11 W 53rd St, btwn Fifth & Sixth Aves
A adult/child $25/free, 5:30-9pm Fri free
A h 10am-5:30pm Sat-Thu, to 9pm Fri & 1st Thu
Ac
A b E, M to 5th Ave-53rd St; F to 57th St

Collection Highlights
Works are rotated through the galleries every six months, so it’s hard to say
exactly what you’ll find on display, but Van Gogh’s phenomenally popular
The Starry Night should be a sure bet – it’s usually mobbed by a circle of
star-struck fans wielding cameras. Other highlights of the collection include
Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon and Henri Rousseau’s The Sleeping
Gypsy, not to mention iconic American works like Warhol’s Campbell’s
Soup Cans and Gold Marilyn Monroe, Matisse’s Dance (I) and Hopper’s
poignant New York Movie.

MoMA underwent a months-long redesign in 2019 by Diller Scofidio +
Renfro, which added more than 40,000 sq ft of gallery space. The
permanent collection has been curated as an overarching history of modern
art, showcasing painting, sculpture, photography, film, architecture,
industrial design and other disciplines, all set together in chronological
segments on floors 5 (1880s–1940s), 4 (1940s–1970s) and 2 (1970s–
present). Floor 3 features galleries for temporary exhibits, while the new
4th-floor Kravis Studio will be a dedicated showcase for performance and
other experimental art.
Generally speaking, Mondays and Tuesdays are the best (ie leastcrowded) days to visit, except on public holidays. Friday evenings and
weekends can be incredibly crowded and frustrating.

Abstract Expressionism
One of the greatest strengths of MoMA’s collections is abstract
expressionism, a radical movement that emerged in New York in the 1940s
and boomed a decade later. Defined by its penchant for irreverent
individualism and monumentally scaled works, this so-called New York
School helped turn the metropolis into the epicenter of Western
contemporary art. Among the stars on view are Mark Rothko’s No. 10
(1950), Jackson Pollock’s One: Number 31, 1950 and Lee Krasner’s
Untitled (1949).

GALLERY CONVERSATIONS
To delve a little deeper into MoMA’s collection, join one of the museum’s talks and
readings, which offer thought-provoking insight into specific works and exhibitions on
view. The talks take place daily at 11:30am and 1:30pm. To check upcoming topics, visit
the MoMA website and search for ‘Gallery Sessions.’
TOP TIP
To maximize your time and create a plan of attack, download the museum’s free
smartphone app from the website beforehand. It’s available in several different
languages.
TAKE A BREAK
For communal tables and a casual vibe, nosh on Italian-inspired fare at Cafe 2 ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-333-1299; www.momacafes.com; dishes $12-14; h 11am5:30pm Sat-Thu, to 7:30pm Fri; W ; b E, M to 5th Ave-53rd St, F to 57th St).

For table service, opt for Terrace Café, which features an outdoor terrace overlooking
53rd St.

Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden
With architect Yoshio Taniguchi’s reconstruction of the museum in 2004
came the restoration of the Sculpture Garden to the original, larger vision of
Philip Johnson’s 1953 design. Johnson described the space as a ‘sort of
outdoor room,’ and on warm, sunny days, it’s hard not to think of it as a
soothing alfresco lounge. One resident that can’t seem to get enough of it is
Aristide Maillol’s The River, a larger-than-life female sculpture that featured
in Johnson’s original garden. She’s in fine company too, with fellow works
from greats including Matisse, Giacometti, Calder and Picasso. Sitting
sneakily above the garden’s eastern end is Water Tower, a translucent resin
installation by British artist Rachel Whiteread. The Sculpture Garden is
open free of charge from 9:30am to 10:15am daily, except in inclement
weather and during maintenance.

Film Screenings
Not only a palace of visual art, MoMA screens an incredibly well-rounded
selection of celluloid gems from its collection of over 22,000 films,
including the works of the Maysles Brothers and every Pixar animation film
ever produced. Expect anything from Academy Award–nominated
documentary shorts and Hollywood classics to experimental works and
international retrospectives. Best of all, your museum ticket will get you in
for free (though you’ll still need to get a ticket for the film you want to see).

TOP EXPERIENCE
GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL
Threatened by the opening of the original Penn Station, transport
magnate Cornelius Vanderbilt transformed his 19th-century Grand
Central Depot into a 20th-century showpiece. Grand Central Terminal
is New York’s most breathtaking beaux-arts building. Its chandeliers,
marble and historic bars and restaurants are a porthole into an era
when train travel and romance went hand in hand.

DON’T MISS
A Main beaux-arts facade
A Paul César Helleu’s celestial mural
A Oysters under Rafael Guastavino’s vaulted ceiling
A Cocktails at The Campbell
A Claus Meyer’s Nordic-inspired gourmet bites

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , C5
A www.grandcentralterminal.com
A 89 E 42nd St, at Park Ave
A h 5:30am-2am
A b S, 4/5/6, 7 to Grand Central-42nd St, d Metro North to Grand Central

42nd St Facade
Clad in Connecticut Stony Creek granite at its base and Indiana limestone
on top, Grand Central’s showpiece facade is crowned by America’s greatest
monumental sculpture, The Glory of Commerce (also known as
Transportation). Designed by the French sculptor Jules-Félix Coutan and
rising 48ft, the piece was executed in Long Island City by local carvers
Donnelly and Ricci. Once completed, it was hoisted up, piece by piece, in
1914. Its protagonist is a wing-capped Mercury, the Roman god of travel
and commerce. To the left is Hercules in an unusually placid stance, while
looking down on the mayhem of 42nd St is Minerva, the ancient guardian
of cities. The clock beneath Mercury’s foot contains the largest example of
Tiffany glass in the world.

Main Concourse
Grand Central’s centerpiece is more akin to a glorious ballroom than a
thoroughfare. The marble floors are Tennessee pink, while the vintage ticket
counters are Italian Bottocino marble. The vaulted ceiling is (quite literally)
heavenly, its turquoise and gold-leaf mural depicting eight constellations…
backwards. A mistake? Apparently not. Its French designer, painter Paul
César Helleu, wished to depict the stars from God’s point of view – from
the out, looking in. The original, frescoed execution of Helleu’s design was
by New York–based artists J Monroe Hewlett and Charles Basing. Moisture
damage saw it faithfully repainted (alas, not in fresco form) by Charles
Gulbrandsen in 1944. By the 1990s, however, the mural was in ruins again.
Enter renovation architects Beyer Blinder Belle, who restored the work, but
left a small rectangular patch of soot (in the northwest corner, beneath the
crab) as testament to just what a fine job they did.

GUIDED TOURS
The Municipal Art Society ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-464-8255; www.mas.org;
tours adult/child from $30/20) runs 75-minute walking tours through Grand Central daily
at 12:30pm. Tours start in front of Track 29 in the Main Concourse.

The Grand Central Partnership ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ;
www.grandcentralpartnership.nyc) F also leads free, 90-minute tours of the terminal and
the surrounding neighborhood on Fridays at 12:30pm, which commence on the
southwest corner of E 42nd St and Park Ave.
THE PRESIDENT’S SECRET
Hidden away under the Waldorf-Astoria hotel is Grand Central’s little-known Platform
61. One person who did know it well was President Franklin D Roosevelt. Determined to
hide his wheelchair use from public view, Roosevelt made good use of the platform’s
freight elevator. Upon arrival at the station, the president would be driven straight out of
his train carriage, along the platform and into the elevator…his public none the wiser.

Whispering Gallery, Oyster Bar & Restaurant, & Campbell Bar

The vaulted landing directly below the bridge linking the Main Concourse
and Vanderbilt Hall is home to one of Grand Central’s quirkier features, the
so-called Whispering Gallery. If you’re in company, stand facing the arched
corners diagonally opposite each other and whisper something. If your
partner proposes (it happens a lot), chilled champagne is just through the
door at the Grand Central Oyster Bar & Restaurant. It’s hugely atmospheric
(with a vaulted tiled ceiling by Catalan-born engineer Rafael Guastavino):
the best spot is at the bar counter in front of the oyster shuckers. An elevator
beside the restaurant leads up to another historic gem, the deliciously
snooty bar The Campbell.

Grand Central Goes Gourmet
Thronging Grand Central Market has long been a commuter foodie delight
with its 240ft of fresh produce and artisan treats, but recently the terminal
has taken things up a gear. A partnership with Claus Meyer, the Nordic chef
who cofounded Noma in Denmark, has led to the launch of the Great
Northern Food Hall in the airy, chandelier-lit Vanderbilt Hall. A major step
up from the basement Dining Concourse, Meyer’s handiwork offers Nordicinspired gourmet bites using New York produce: flatbreads, hot sandwiches
and smørrebrød (Danish open sandwiches) with fillings such as curried
herring and egg yolk, alongside wine and artisan coffee. Next door, Meyer’s
stylish one-Michelin-starred restaurant, Agern, serves fresh, zingy New
Nordic cuisine and has an excellent lunch deal: two/three courses for
$42/50.

TOP EXPERIENCE

CHRYSLER BUILDING
The 77-floor Chrysler Building makes most other skyscrapers look like
uptight geeks. Designed by William Van Alen in 1930, it’s the pinup for
New York’s most flamboyant art deco architecture. Constructed as the
headquarters for Walter P Chrysler and his automobile empire, the
ambitious $15 million building remains one of New York’s most
poignant symbols.

DON’T MISS
A Transport and Human Endeavor lobby-ceiling mural
A William Van Alen’s spire
A Building facade ornamentation
A Views from Third Ave and 44th St and the Empire State Building
A Chambellan and Delamarre’s reliefs, Chanin Building

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , C5
A 405 Lexington Ave, at E 42nd St
A h lobby 7am-6:30pm Mon-Fri
A b S, 4/5/6, 7 to Grand Central-42nd St

The Lobby
Although the Chrysler Building has no restaurant or observation deck, its
lobby is a lavish consolation prize. Bathed in an amber glow, its Jazz Age
vintage is echoed in its architecture – dark, exotic African wood and
marble, contrasted against the brash steel of industrial America. The
elaborately veneered elevators are especially beautiful, their Egyptian lotus
motifs made of inlaid Japanese ash, Oriental walnut and Cuban plumpudding wood. When the doors open, you almost expect Bette Davis to strut
on out. Above you is painter Edward Trumbull’s ceiling mural Transport
and Human Endeavor. Purportedly the world’s largest mural at 97ft by
100ft, its depiction of buildings, airplanes and industrious workers on
Chrysler assembly lines shows the golden promise of industry and
modernity.

The Spire

Composed of seven radiating steel arches reminiscent of the rising sun, the
Chrysler Building’s 185ft spire was as much a feat of vengeance as it was
of modern engineering. Secretly constructed in the stairwell, the 200ft
creation (dubbed ‘the vertex’) was raised through a false roof and anchored
into place in an impressive 1½ hours. The novel reveal shocked and
outraged architect H Craig Severance, who had hoped that his Manhattan
Company skyscraper on Wall St would become the world’s tallest building.
The fait accompli was especially humiliating given that Severance had
personally fallen out with architect William Van Alen, a former colleague.
Karmic retribution may have been served with the 1931 debut of the eventaller Empire State Building, but Van Alen’s crowning glory endures as a
showstopping symbol of 20th-century daring.

The Gargoyles
If the spire is the building’s diva, the gargoyles are its supporting cast. Pairs
of gleaming steel American eagles look ready to leap from the corners of
the 61st floor – they’d look Gothic, were it not for their distinctly art deco
angular lines. Further down on the 31st floor, giant winged hubcaps echo
the Chrysler radiator caps of the late 1920s. For a dramatic view of the
gargoyles from street level, head to the corner of Lexington Ave and 43rd St
and look up.

CREMASTER 3
The Chrysler Building’s lobby and crown feature in Cremaster 3 (2002), an avant-garde
film by award-winning visual artist and filmmaker Matthew Barney. The third
installment of an epic five-part film project, it delivers a surreal take on the skyscraper’s
construction, fusing Irish mythology with genre elements from both zombie and gangster
films. To read more about the project, check out www.cremaster.net.
TAKE A BREAK
If you just want a quickie snack, 99 Cent Pizza (% 212-661-6221; 473 Lexington Ave, at
46th St; pizza slice $1; h 10am-midnight; b S, 4/5/6, 7 to Grand Central-42nd St) is a few
blocks away.

For something more relaxing, turn the corner and sit down to a fancier meal at Sparks
(% 212-687-4855; www.sparkssteakhouse.com; 210 E 46th St, btwn Second & Third
Aves, Midtown East; dinner mains $38-59; h noon-11pm Mon-Thu, to 11:30pm Fri, 511:30pm Sat; W ; b S, 4/5/6, 7 to Grand Central-42nd St) – a steakhouse with gangster
history.

A Neighboring Gem
Across the street from the Chrysler Building, on the southwest corner of
Lexington Ave and 42nd St, stands another art deco gem: the Chanin Building (
MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 122 E 42nd St, at Lexington Ave, Midtown East; b S, 4/5/6, 7 to Grand
Central-42nd St). Completed in 1929, the 56-story brick-and-terra-cotta tower is

the work of unlicensed architect Irwin S Chanin, who teamed up with the
legally recognized firm Sloan & Robertson to achieve his dream. Yet the
star attraction here is the work of René Chambellan and Jacques Delamarre,
creators of the exquisite bands of relief at the building’s base. While birds
and fish create a sense of whimsy in the lower band, the upper band of
terra-cotta steals the show with its rich botanical carvings.

The Cloud Club
Balanced at the top of the Chrysler Building between 1930 and 1979 was
the famed Cloud Club. Its regulars included tycoon John D Rockefeller,

publishing magnate Condé Montrose and boxing legend Gene Tunney. The
art deco–meets–Hunting Lodge hangout from floors 66 to 68 featured a
lounge and dining rooms (including a private room for Walter Chrysler), as
well as kitchens, a barber shop and a locker room with sneak cabinets for
hiding booze during Prohibition. Chrysler merrily boasted about having the
highest toilet in town.

TOP EXPERIENCE

ROCKEFELLER CENTER
This 22-acre ‘city within a city’ debuted at the height of the Great
Depression. Taking nine years to build, it was America’s first multiuse
retail, entertainment and office space – a modernist sprawl of buildings
(14 of which are the original art deco structures), outdoor plazas and
big-name tenants.
DON’T MISS
A Sky-high views from Top of the Rock
A Sunset cocktails at Bar SixtyFive
A José Maria Sert’s American Progress
A Saturday Night Live set (NBC Studio Tour)
A Skating at the Rockefeller Rink

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , B3
A www.rockefellercenter.com
A Fifth to Sixth Aves, btwn W 48th & 51st Sts
A b B/D/F/M to 47th-50th Sts-Rockefeller Center

Top of the Rock
There are views, and then there’s the view from the Top of the Rock.
Crowning the central Comcast Building (aka 30 Rockefeller Plaza, formerly
called the GE Building), 70 stories above Midtown, its blockbuster vista
includes one icon that you won’t see from atop the Empire State Building –

the Empire State Building. If possible, head up just before sunset to see the
city transform from day to night (if you’re already in the area and the
queues aren’t long, purchase your tickets in advance to avoid the lateafternoon rush).

Public Artworks
Rockefeller Center features the work of 30 great artists, commissioned
around the theme ‘Man at the Crossroads Looks Uncertainly but Hopefully
at the Future.’ Paul Manship contributed the 18ft Prometheus, overlooking
the sunken plaza, while Lee Lawrie made the 24ft-tall bronze Atlas, in front
of the International Building (630 Fifth Ave). Isamu Noguchi’s News sits
above the entrance to the Associated Press Building (50 Rockefeller Plaza),
and José Maria Sert’s oil American Progress awaits in the lobby of the
Comcast Building. The latter work replaced Mexican artist Diego Rivera’s
original painting, rejected by the Rockefellers for containing ‘communist
imagery’ and destroyed (though a copy was made and is on display in
Mexico City’s Palacio de Bellas Artes).

NBC Studio Tour
TV comedy 30 Rock gets its name from 30 Rockefeller Plaza, the real-life
home of NBC TV. One-hour NBC Studio Tours ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-6643700; www.thetouratnbcstudios.com; 30 Rockefeller Plaza, entrance at 1250 Sixth Ave; 1hr tours
adult/child $33/29, children under 6yr not admitted; h 8:20am-2:20pm Mon-Thu, to 5pm Fri, to 6pm
Sat & Sun, longer hours in summer; b B/D/F/M to 47th-50th Sts-Rockefeller Center) – enter

from 1250 Sixth Ave – usually include a visit to Studio 8H, home of the
iconic Saturday Night Live set. Tours have a strict ‘no bathrooms policy’
(empty your bladder beforehand!) and advance online reservations are
strongly recommended. Across 49th St, opposite the plaza, is the glassenclosed NBC Today show studio, broadcasting live from 7am to 11am on
weekdays. If you fancy some screen time, head in by 6am to be at the front
of the crowd.

Rockefeller Plaza
Come the festive season, Rockefeller Plaza is where you’ll find New York’s
most famous Christmas tree. Ceremoniously lit just after Thanksgiving, it’s a
tradition that dates back to the 1930s, when construction workers set up a
small tree on the site. In its shadow, Rink at Rockefeller Center is the city’s
most famous ice-skating rink. Although magical, it’s also undeniably small
and crowded. Opt for the first skating period (8:30am) to avoid a long wait.
Come summer, the rink becomes a cafe.

TOP EXPERIENCE

ROOSEVELT ISLAND
Roosevelt Island, a 2-mile sliver of land in the East River between
Manhattan and Queens, was long ignored by visitors and locals alike –
except for quick trips on its aerial tram for the views. But since the
long-awaited, stunning Franklin D Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park at
the island’s southern tip was completed in 2012, there’s now an
excellent reason to go.
DON’T MISS
A Franklin D Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park A Viewing platform A Aerial tram ride A Renwick

Smallpox Hospital ruins

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , G2
A www.rihs.us
A b F to Roosevelt Island, j from Roosevelt Island Tramway Station, 2nd Ave at E 60th St

Early Days
The Canarsee Native Americans called this tiny spit of land
‘Minnahanonck’ (Nice Island), which they sold as part of a larger parcel to
the Dutch in 1633; from then it was used for livestock farming, and called
‘Varckens Eylandt’ (Hog Island). When the British took control of the area,
the island was granted to the sheriff of New York, John Manning. After his
death ownership transferred to his stepdaughter, Mrs Blackwell, and the
island was called Blackwell’s Island from the 1680s onward. In 1828 it was
purchased by the city government, which used it to house various

‘undesirables’ by building a prison and medical facilities, including a
mental-health hospital – the Octagon tower at its north end still stands as part
of a residential complex – and the Renwick Smallpox Hospital, whose ruined,
eerie-looking facade haunts the island’s southern half. By the mid-20th
century most of the institutions on ‘Welfare Island’ had been closed down
or abandoned. In the 1970s, the city began redeveloping the island by
renaming it in honor of President Franklin D Roosevelt and building a
series of cookie-cutter brutalist apartment buildings along the island’s main
road. For years, the only thing Roosevelt Island really had to offer visitors
were the views of Manhattan and the picturesque ruins of the old smallpox
hospital.

Remembering a President
The island finally hit the architectural map in 2012, when a 4-acre memorial
park to President Franklin D Roosevelt opened on its southern tip. Designed
by architect Louis Kahn in 1972, its construction stalled later in the decade
when Kahn died and New York City almost went into bankruptcy. William
vanden Heuvel, former US ambassador and chairperson of the Four
Freedoms Park Conservancy, kept the dream alive, and spent years raising
funds and lobbying for the park’s completion.

A High-Tech Future
In 2017, a fresh future for the island began with the opening of the first
phase of a new advanced engineering school called Cornell Tech, a joint
venture between Ivy League school Cornell University and the Technion –
Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa. The $2-billion, high-tech campus,
which is being built with some of the most energy-efficient technology in
the world, is planned for completion via two further stages by 2037. It will
eventually span 12 acres and is promised to create 28,000 new jobs and
billions of dollars in economic benefits for the city.

SIGHTS

Midtown dazzles with several big-name sights, among them the
megascreens and razzle of Times Square, modern-art temple MoMA,
the observation decks of the Empire State Building and Rockefeller
Center, and tours of the diplomatic United Nations. In their shadow
lurk a number of lesser-known cultural options, from the marvelous
manuscripts and interiors of the Morgan Library & Museum, to nofee, fashion-focused Museum at FIT and neo-Gothic stunner St
Patrick’s Cathedral.

Midtown East

GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL
( MAP

HISTORIC BUILDING

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
CHRYSLER BUILDING
( MAP

HISTORIC BUILDING

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND
( MAP

AREA

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
MORGAN LIBRARY & MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-685-0008; www.themorgan.org; 225 Madison, at E 36th St,
Midtown East; adult/child $22/free, 7-9pm Fri free; h 10:30am-5pm Tue-Thu, to 9pm Fri, 10am-6pm
Sat, 11am-6pm Sun; b 6 to 33rd St)

Incorporating the mansion once owned by steel magnate JP Morgan, this
sumptuous cultural center houses a phenomenal array of manuscripts,
tapestries and books (with no fewer than three Gutenberg Bibles). Adorned
with Italian and Dutch Renaissance artworks, Morgan’s personal study is
only trumped by his personal library (East Room), an extraordinary, vaulted
space with three stories of walnut bookcases, a 16th-century Dutch tapestry
and zodiac-themed ceiling. The center’s rotating exhibitions are often
superb, as are its regular cultural events. Audioguides are free.
UNITED NATIONS

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-963-4475; http://visit.un.org; visitors gate First Ave at 46th St,
Midtown East; guided tour adult/child $22/12, grounds access Sat & Sun Mar-Dec free; h 1hr tours
9am-4:45pm Mon-Fri, visitor center also open 10am-4:45pm Sat & Sun; b S, 4/5/6, 7 to Grand
Central-42nd St)

New York is the home of the UN, a worldwide organization overseeing
international law, security and human rights. The Le Corbusier–designed
Secretariat building is off-limits, but guided tours cover the restored
General Assembly Hall, Security Council Chamber, Trusteeship Council
Chamber and Economic & Social Council (ECOSOC) Chamber, as well as
exhibits about the UN’s work and artworks donated by member states.
Weekday tours must be booked online; kids under five not admitted. Photo
ID is required.
Free walk-in access to the visitor center only is permitted on weekends
(enter at 43rd Street). To the north of the UN complex, which technically
stands on international territory, is a serene park featuring Henry Moore’s
Reclining Figure, as well as several other peace-themed sculptures.
FRANKLIN D ROOSEVELT FOUR FREEDOMS PARK

MEMORIAL

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-204-8831; www.fdrfourfreedomspark.org; Roosevelt Island;

h 9am-7pm Wed-Mon Apr-Sep, to 5pm Wed-Mon Oct-Mar; b F to Roosevelt Island, j Roosevelt
Island) F

Dramatic design, presidential inspiration and a refreshing perspective on the
NYC skyline make for an arresting trio at the Franklin D Roosevelt Four
Freedoms Park. At the southern tip of Roosevelt Island on the East River,
this remarkable monument honors America’s 32nd president and his 1941
State of the Union speech. It’s breathtakingly cinematic in its scale and
effect: a luminous granite vision designed by renowned architect Louis
Kahn in 1973, but only completed in 2012 – 38 years after Kahn’s death.
A sweep of grand, stark steps lead up to a sloping triangular lawn.
Fringed by linden trees, the lawn gently spills down to a bronze bust of
Roosevelt by American sculptor Jo Davidson. Framing the sculpture is a
granite wall, hand engraved with Roosevelt’s rousing speech, in which he
spoke of the four essential human freedoms he desired for the world:
freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want and freedom
from fear. The wall also serves to separate the bust from ‘The Room,’ a
contemplative granite terrace clinging to the very tip of the island. The
combination of lapping waves and hovering skyline are utterly
mesmerizing. In front of the steps near the entrance to the park, the Gothic
ruins of a 19th-century smallpox hospital only serves to accentuate the
contemporary architecture beyond.
Although the F subway line will get you to Roosevelt Island, it’s much
more fun catching the aerial tramway car (% 212-832-4583;
www.rioc.ny.gov/tramtransportation.htm; 60th St, at Second Ave; one-way $2.75; h every 7-15 min
6am-2am Sun-Thu, to 3:30am Fri & Sat; b N/Q/R, 4/5/6 to Lexington Ave-59th St), which

glides above the East River, offering eagle-eye views of the Manhattan
skyline. The monument is a 15-minute walk south of both the Roosevelt
Island tramway car and subway stations.
JAPAN SOCIETY

ARTS CENTER

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.japansociety.org; 333 E 47th St, btwn First & Second Aves,
Midtown East; adult/child $12/10, 6-9pm Fri free; h noon-7pm Tue-Thu, to 9pm Fri, 11am-5pm Sat
& Sun; b S, 4/5/6, 7 to Grand Central-42nd St)

Elegant exhibitions of both traditional and contemporary Japanese art,
textiles and design are the main draw at this calming cultural center,
complete with indoor gardens and water features. Its theater hosts a range of
films and dance and theatrical performances, while those wanting to dig
deeper can browse through 14,000 volumes in the research library or attend
one of its myriad lectures or workshops.

Fifth Avenue

EMPIRE STATE BUILDING
( MAP

OBSERVATORY, HISTORIC BUILDING

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
ROCKEFELLER CENTER
( MAP

HISTORIC BUILDING

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Stephen A Schwarzman Building; % 917-275-6975; www.nypl.org; 476
Fifth Ave, at W 42nd St; h 8am-8pm Mon & Thu, to 9pm Tue & Wed, to 6pm Fri, 10am-6pm Sat,
10am-5pm Sun, guided tours 11am & 2pm Mon-Sat, 2pm Sun; b B/D/F/M to 42nd St-Bryant Park, 7
to 5th Ave) F

Loyally guarded by ‘Patience’ and ‘Fortitude’ (the marble lions overlooking
Fifth Ave), this beaux-arts show-off is one of NYC’s best free attractions.
When dedicated in 1911, New York’s flagship library ranked as the largest
marble structure ever built in the US, and to this day its recently restored
Rose Main Reading Room steals the breath away with its lavish coffered ceiling.
And it’s not just for show: anybody who’s working can use it, making it
surely the most glamorous coworking space in the world.

That reading room only one of several glories inside, among them the
DeWitt Wallace Periodical Room (1st floor). This extraordinary building is home
to precious manuscripts by just about every author of note in the English
language, as well as an original copy of the Declaration of Independence
and a Gutenberg Bible. The Map Division is equally astounding, with a
collection that holds some 431,000 maps, 16,000 atlases and books on
cartography, dating from the 16th century to the present. To properly
explore this mini-universe of books, art and architectural flourishes, join a
free guided tour (departing from Astor Hall) or grab a free audioguide from the
information desk (also in Astor Hall).
Across its branches, the NYPL keeps brains in gear with its string of
lectures, seminars and workshops, with topics ranging from contemporary
art to the writings of Jane Austen. You’ll find some of the best at the main
branch on 42nd St. You can search all happenings at the library’s website.
BRYANT PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-768-4242; www.bryantpark.org; 42nd St, btwn Fifth & Sixth
Aves, Midtown West; h 7am-midnight Mon-Fri, to 11pm Sat & Sun Jun-Sep, shorter hours Oct-May;

b B/D/F/M to 42nd St-Bryant Park, 7 to 5th Ave)

European coffee kiosks, alfresco chess games, summer film screenings and
winter ice skating: it’s hard to believe that this leafy oasis was a crimeridden hellscape known as ‘Needle Park’ in the ’70s. Nestled behind the
beaux-arts New York Public Library building, it’s a whimsical spot for a
little time-out from the Midtown madness. Fancy taking a beginner Italian
language, yoga or juggling class, joining a painting workshop or signing up
for a birding tour? There’s a daily smorgasbord of quirky activities.
Among the park’s attractions is the French-inspired, Brooklyn-made Le
Carrousel ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.bryantpark.org/amenities/le-carrousel; W 40th St, at
Sixth Ave; ride $3; h 11am-8pm Jun-Oct, to 7pm Jan & Mar-May, reduced hours rest of year),

offering rides. Frequent special events include the Bryant Park Summer Film
Festival (h mid-Jun–Aug) F , popular with post-work crowds lugging cheese-and-

wine picnics. Come Christmastime, the place becomes a winter
wonderland, with holiday gift vendors lining the park’s edge and a popular
ice-skating rink sprouting in its middle. Lovely Bryant Park Grill ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-840-6500; www.arkrestaurants.com/bryant_park; mains $20-49, weekend
brunch $28.50; h 11:30am-3:30pm & 5-11pm Apr-Dec, shorter hours Jan-Mar; v ) is the site of

many a New York wedding come springtime, and when it’s not closed for a
private event, the patio bar is a perfect spot for a twilight cocktail. Next
door you’ll find its more casual alfresco sibling Bryant Park Cafe ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-840-6500; www.arkrestaurants.com/bryant_park; h 11:30am-10:30pm
mid-Apr–Nov), a much-loved spot for after-five catch-ups that’s open mid-

April to November.

TOP OF THE ROCK

VIEWPOINT

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-698-2000, toll free 877-692-7625; www.topoftherocknyc.com;
30 Rockefeller Plaza, entrance on W 50th St, btwn Fifth & Sixth Aves; adult/child $38/32,
sunrise/sunset combo $56/45; h 8am-midnight, last elevator at 11pm; b B/D/F/M to 47th-50th StsRockefeller Center)

Designed in homage to ocean liners and opened in 1933, this 70th-floor
open-air observation deck sits atop 30 Rockefeller Plaza, the tallest
skyscraper at the Rockefeller Center. Top of the Rock beats the Empire
State Building on several levels: it’s less crowded, has wider observation
decks (both outdoor and indoor) and offers a view of the Empire State
Building itself. Before ascending, a fascinating 2nd-floor exhibition gives
an insight into the legendary philanthropist behind the art deco complex.
If you don’t have under-21s in tow, note that similar views can be had
from the Rockefeller’s 65th-floor Bar SixtyFive…and you don’t need a
ticket to Top of the Rock to get in.

ST PATRICK’S CATHEDRAL

CATHEDRAL

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-753-2261; www.saintpatrickscathedral.org; Fifth Ave, btwn E
50th & 51st Sts; h 6:30am-8:45pm; b B/D/F/M to 47th-50th Sts-Rockefeller Center, E/M to 5th Ave53rd St)

America’s largest Catholic cathedral graces Fifth Ave with Gothic Revival
splendor. Built at a cost of nearly $2 million during the Civil War (and
spiffed up with a $200 million restoration in 2015), the building did not

originally include the two front spires; those were added in 1888. Step
inside to appreciate the Louis Tiffany–designed altar, gleaming below a
7000-pipe church organ, and Charles Connick’s stunning Rose Window
above the Fifth Ave entrance. Occasional walk-in guided tours are
available; check the website for details.
PALEY CENTER FOR MEDIA

ARTS CENTER

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-621-6800; www.paleycenter.org; 25 W 52nd St, btwn Fifth &
Sixth Aves; suggested donation adult/child $10/5; h noon-6pm Wed & Fri-Sun, to 8pm Thu; b E, M
to 5th Ave-53rd St) F

This pop-culture repository offers more than 160,000 TV and radio
programs from around the world on its computer catalog. Reliving your
favorite TV shows on one of the center’s consoles is a fun option on a rainy
day, as are the excellent regular screenings, festivals, speakers and
performers.

SKYSCRAPERS IN MIDTOWN
Midtown’s skyline is more than just the Empire State and Chrysler Buildings, with enough
modernist and postmodernist beauties to satisfy the wildest of high-rise dreams. Here are six
of Midtown’s most notable.
Seagram Building (1956–58; 514ft) A textbook regular, the 38-floor Seagram Building (
MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 100 E 53rd St, at Park Ave, Midtown East; b 6 to 51st St; E, M to
Fifth Ave-53rd St) is one of the world’s finest examples of the international style. Its lead
architect, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, was recommended for the project by Arthur Drexler,
then-curator of architecture at MoMA. With its low podium, colonnade-like pillars and bronze
cladding, Mies cleverly references classical Greek influences.
Lever House (1950–52; 306ft) Upon its debut in 1952, 21-story Lever House ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; 390 Park Ave, btwn E 53rd & E 54th Sts, Midtown East; b E, M to 5th
Ave-53rd St) was at the height of the cutting-edge. The UN Secretariat Building was the only
other skyscraper to feature a glass skin, an innovation that would redefine urban architecture.
The building’s form was equally bold: two counter-posed rectangular shapes consisting of a
slender tower atop a low-rise base. The open courtyard features marble benches envisioned by
Japanese American sculptor Isamu Noguchi, while the lobby exhibits contemporary art
especially commissioned for the space.
Citigroup Center (1974–77; 915ft) With its striking triangular-cut roof and candy-like striped
facade, Hugh Stubbins’ 59-story Citigroup Center ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 601
Lexington Ave, at E 53rd St, Midtown East; b 6 to 51st St; E, M to Lexington Ave-53rd St)
signaled a shift from the flat-roof sobriety of the international style. Even more dramatic is the
building’s base, which is cut away at the four corners, leaving the tower to perch dramatically
on nine-story stilts. This unusual configuration allowed for the construction of St Peter’s
Lutheran Church on the site’s northwest corner, which replaced the original neo-Gothic church
demolished during the skyscraper’s construction. The podcast 99% Invisible has a fascinating
episode about the building’s dangerous structural flaws – found (and repaired) after its
construction.
Hearst Tower (2003–06; 597ft) This 46-floor tower ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 949 Eighth
Ave, btwn 56th & 57th Sts, Midtown West; b A/C, B/D, 1 to 59th St-Columbus Circle) is one
of NYC’s most creative works of contemporary architecture, not to mention one of its
greenest; around 90% of its structural steel is from recycled sources. Designed by Foster &
Partners, its diagonal grid of trusses evokes a jagged glass-and-steel honeycomb. The tower
rises above the hollowed-out core of John Urban’s 1928 cast-stone Hearst Magazine Building
and the lobby is home to Richard Long’s Riverlines, a 70ft mural made using mud from New
York’s Hudson River and England’s River Avon.
Bank of America Tower (2004–09; 1200ft) Designed by Cook & Fox Architects, the 58-floor
Bank of America Tower ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; One Bryant Park; www.durst.org; Sixth
Ave, at W 42nd St; b B/D/F/M to 42nd St-Bryant Park) is famed for its striking crystal shape,

piercing 255ft spire and enviable green credentials. The stats are impressive: a clean-burning,
on-site cogeneration plant providing around 65% of the tower’s annual electricity
requirements; CO₂-detecting air filters that channel oxygenated air where needed; and
elevators designed to avoid empty-car trips. On the ground floor is the glass-walled public
Urban Garden Room (8am to 8pm), used by locals in bad weather.
432 Park Avenue MAP GOOGLE MAP (2011–15; 1396ft) It’s a case of ‘thin is in’ with
the arrival of this 1396ft-tall, $1.3-billion residential tower ( MAP ;
www.432parkavenue.com; b N/Q/R to Lexington Ave-59th St) by Uruguayan architect Rafael
Viñoly. The tower’s clean, white, cubic facade, inspired by a 1905 trash can by Austrian
designer Josef Hoffman, rises above the Midtown skyline like an impossibly slim square tube.
It’s currently the city’s second-tallest building, upstaged only by One World Trade Center.
(Measured to actual roof height, however, it’s actually 28ft taller than its spire-crowned
downtown rival.)

Midtown West & Times Square
AREA

TIMES SQUARE
( MAP

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
MUSEUM

MUSEUM OF MODERN ART
( MAP

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
o RADIO CITY MUSIC HALL

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.radiocity.com; 1260 Sixth Ave, at W 50th St; tours adult/child
$31/27; h tours 9:30am-5pm; c ; b B/D/F/M to 47th-50th Sts-Rockefeller Center)

This spectacular moderne movie palace was the brainchild of vaudeville
producer Samuel Lionel ‘Roxy’ Rothafel. Never one for understatement,
Roxy launched his venue on December 23, 1932, with an over-the-top
extravaganza that included camp dance troupe the Roxyettes (mercifully
renamed the Rockettes). Guided tours (75 minutes) of the sumptuous
interiors include the glorious auditorium, Witold Gordon’s classically

inspired mural History of Cosmetics in the Women’s Downstairs Lounge,
and the VIP Roxy Suite, where luminaries such as Elton John and Alfred
Hitchcock have been entertained.
As far as catching a show here goes, be warned: the vibe doesn’t quite
match the theater’s glamour these days. That said, there are often some
fabulous talents in the lineup, with past performers including Lauryn Hill,
Rufus Wainwright, Aretha Franklin and Dolly Parton. And while the word
‘Rockettes’ provokes eye rolling from most self-consciously cynical New
Yorkers, fans of glitz and kitsch might just get a thrill from the troupe’s
annual Christmas Spectacular.
Same-day tickets are available at the box office inside the Sixth Ave
entrance. Whether you book here or in advance online, expect horrendous
queues to get into the show; it’s hugely popular. Tour tickets are usually
easy enough to book on the day, and tours depart from the entrance around
the corner on W 50th St.
INTREPID SEA, AIR & SPACE MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 877-957-7447; www.intrepidmuseum.org; Pier 86, Twelfth Ave at W
46th St; adult/child $33/24; h 10am-5pm Mon-Fri, to 6pm Sat & Sun Apr-Oct, 10am-5pm Mon-Sun
Nov-Mar; c ; g westbound M42, M50 to 12th Ave, b A/C/E to 42nd St-Port Authority Bus Terminal)

In WWII, the USS Intrepid survived both a bomb and kamikaze attacks.
Thankfully, this hulking aircraft carrier is now a lot less stressed, playing
host to a multimillion-dollar interactive military museum that tells its tale
through videos, historical artifacts and frozen-in-time living quarters. The
flight deck features fighter planes and military helicopters, which might
inspire you to try the museum’s high-tech flight simulators. Topical rotating
exhibits add to the fun. Even if you’re not into the subject matter, it’s
irresistibly absorbing and impressive.

MUSEUM AT FIT

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-217-4558; www.fitnyc.edu/museum; 227 W 27th St, at Seventh
Ave, Midtown West; h noon-8pm Tue-Fri, 10am-5pm Sat; b 1 to 28th St) F

Fashionistas won’t want to miss a visit to the fabulous sartorial exhibits at
the Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT), which holds one of the world’s
richest collections of garments, textiles and accessories – more than 50,000
items spanning the 18th century to the present day. The school’s museum

features innovative, rotating exhibitions showcasing both permanentcollection items and on-loan curiosities. Exhibitions aside, the museum also
hosts film screenings and talks, including with prolific fashion designers
and critics.
MUSEUM OF ARTS & DESIGN

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; MAD; % 212-299-7777; www.madmuseum.org; 2 Columbus Circle,
btwn Eighth Ave & Broadway; adult/child $16/free, by donation 6-9pm Thu; h 10am-6pm Tue, Wed,
Fri-Sun, to 9pm Thu; c ; b A/C, B/D, 1 to 59th St-Columbus Circle)

MAD offers four floors of superlative design and handicrafts, from blown
glass and carved wood to elaborate metal jewelry. Temporary exhibitions
are innovative: one past show rendered fake news into art. The 6th floor
houses resident artists’ studios where you can interact with designers.
During ‘Studio Sundays,’ professional artists lead family-friendly
explorations of the galleries, followed by hands-on workshops inspired by
the exhibitions. The gift shop sells fantastic contemporary jewelry, while
9th-floor restaurant/bar Robert is perfect for cocktails with a view.
VESSEL (TKA)

ARCHITECTURE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 646-954-3100; www.hudsonyardsnewyork.com; Hudson Yards, W
31st St off Tenth Ave, Midtown; h 10am-9pm; b 7 to 34th St-Hudson Yards) F

Sprouting 150ft high from the central plaza of Hudson Yards is the
controversial construction called ‘The Vessel.’ Looking something like a
giant, copper-colored, latticed beehive – it was allegedly inspired by stepwells in India – it features 154 flights of interlacing stairs across eight
levels, offering novel views of the Hudson River (as well as a hell of a
workout). Admission is free but timed tickets must be booked online or via
smartphone using the digital kiosks at its base.

HUDSON YARDS
After six years and $25 billion, the first phase of Manhattan’s new megadevelopment
‘neighborhood’ Hudson Yards ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 646-954-3100;
www.hudsonyardsnewyork.com; W 30th to W 34th Sts, btwn Tenth & Twelfth Aves, Midtown
West; b 7 to 34th St-Hudson Yards) has finally opened. Five sheer glass skyscrapers of office
space and luxury condos surround a manicured plaza, alongside a seven-story mall ( MAP ;
% 646-954-3150; Tenth Ave at W 31st St, Midtown; h shops 10am-9pm Mon-Sat, 11am-7pm

Sun, restaurant hours vary; W ) for upscale shopping and dining; promising interdisciplinary
arts center The Shed; and the Vessel, an Instagram-ready copper-clad basket of infinite
staircases with river views. It might make you think more of gleaming Dubai than gritty New
York, but then again, that’s the point.
It’s been decried by its critics as a soulless corporate playground for the wealthy and hyped
by its boosters as a live-work-play ‘city within a city’ revitalizing the formerly industrialized
far west of Midtown. As it’s connected to the northern end of the High Line, crowds of visitors
inevitably end up here, wandering through the Vessel and the shopping mall wondering what
to do next. The Shed is worth a visit if there’s a show on, as is bustling Spanish food hall
Mercado Little Spain. Beyond that Hudson Yards is more about style than substance – though
you can also indulge in the thrill of its rarefied heights at The Edge (www.edgenyc.com), a
large, prow-shaped balcony jutting out from the 101st floor that’s New York’s highest open-air
observatory (adult/child from $36/31).
The second phase of the project, containing more office and residential high-rises, open
plaza space and an elementary school on the site’s western half, is due to be completed in
2024.
