Queens
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping
Sports & Activities

Queens
LONG ISLAND CITY | ASTORIA | JACKSON HEIGHTS | FLUSHING & CORONA |
WOODSIDE | ELMHURST | FLUSHING

Neighborhood Top Five

1 MoMA PS1 Feeling inspired at the Museum of Modern Art’s cross-river

cultural hub, with paintings, sculpture and site-specific installations.
2 Museum of the Moving Image Reliving your favorite film and TV

moments at Astoria’s contemporary tribute to the small and silver screens.
3 Rockaways Heading out to the seaside by subway (or better yet ferry) for

surfing, rock-loving waterfront eateries and miles of shimmering beaches.

4 Roosevelt Avenue Taking a snack crawl through Latin America, via food

trucks along this melting-pot avenue.
5 Flushing Immersing yourself in bustling Asian street life and feasting on

chewy Chinese noodles, plump dumplings and plenty more.

Explore Queens
Queens is NYC’s biggest and most-populated borough – anywhere else, it
would be a major city in its own right. So where to begin?
Start with a day in Long Island City, home to contemporary art hubs
MoMA PS1 and SculptureCenter. Watch the sun set from Gantry Plaza
State Park, and sip-and-sup on neighborly Vernon Blvd. Spend a day or two
exploring Astoria, taste-testing a variety of eateries, sipping local brews,
and checking out the Museum of the Moving Image. If it’s summer, catch
an alfresco film at Socrates Sculpture Park.
With its jumble of street foods, Asian groceries and kitschy malls,
Flushing (home to NYC’s biggest Chinatown) also merits a full-day
adventure. Or you can spend the morning on Main St and Roosevelt Ave,
then hit neighboring Corona for the Queens Museum, Louis Armstrong
House or New York Hall of Science for the kids. If it’s hot, tackle the surf at
Rockaway Beach, home to NYC’s coolest beach scene.

Local Life
A

Hangouts Brew fans head to Astoria Bier & Cheese for local suds, while

hipsters sans attitude quaff unfancy beers with mesmerizing views at
Anable Basin Sailing Bar & Grill.
A

Culture Take an aerial tour of NYC without ever leaving the ground at the

retro-cool Queens Museum.

Flushing Snack on lamb dumplings in the Golden Shopping Mall
basement, then ignite the palate at Szechuan House.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway Twelve lines serve Queens. From Manhattan, catch the N/Q/R
and M to Astoria, the 7 to Long Island City, Woodside, Corona and
Flushing, and the A to Rockaway Beach. The E, J and Z lines reach
Jamaica, while the G directly connects Long Island City to Brooklyn.
A

Train Commuter service Long Island Rail Road (LIRR; % 718-217-5477;
www.mta.info/lirr) has a handy connection from Manhattan’s Penn Station to
Flushing.
A

Ferry The NYC Ferry runs from East 34th St across to Long Island City,
up to Roosevelt Island and on to Astoria.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
Beat Manhattan hotel prices while sleeping with a view of that famous skyline in a sleek
designer bedroom. Queens’ growing list of swanky hotels, many cleverly repurposing
industrial real estate, makes it the ideal place to rest your head at reasonable rates, yet remain
close to the action.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Casa Enrique
A Bahari Estiatorio
A Mombar
A Addã
A Taverna Kyclades

For reviews, see here
5 Best Asian Cuisine
A HinoMaru
A Pye Boat Noodle
A New World Food Court
A Golden Shopping Mall
A Szechuan House

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Dutch Kills
A Astoria Bier & Cheese
A Singlecut Brewsmiths
A Anable Basin Sailing Bar & Grill
A Mikkeller NYC
A Alewife

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE
MOMA PS1
The smaller, hipper sibling of Manhattan’s Museum of Modern Art,
MoMA PS1 hunts down razor-sharp art and serves it in an ex-school
locale. Here you’ll be peering at videos through floorboards and
debating the meaning of nonstatic structures while staring through a
hole in the wall. Nothing is predictable. Best of all, admission is free
with your MoMA ticket within 14 days of your visit.

DON’T MISS
A Temporary and long-term exhibitions
A Summer ‘Warm Up’ parties
A Sunday Sessions

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , B5
A % 718-784-2084
A www.momaps1.org
A 22-25 Jackson Ave, Long Island City
A suggested donation adult/child $10/free, NYC residents or with MoMA ticket free, Warm Up

party online/at venue $18/22
A h noon-6pm Thu-Mon, Warm Up parties noon-9pm Sat Jul-early Sep
A b G, 7 to Court Sq, E/M to Court Sq-23rd St

Roots, Radicals & PS1 Classics
PS1 first hit the scene in the 1970s. This was the age of Dia, Artists’ Space
and the New Museum – new-gen projects showcasing the city’s thriving
experimental, multimedia art scene. In 1976, Alanna Heiss – a supporter of
art in alternative spaces – took possession of an abandoned school building
in Queens and invited artists like Richard Serra, James Turrell and Keith
Sonnier to create site-specific works. The end result was PS1’s inaugural
exhibition, Rooms. Surviving remnants include Richard Artschwager’s
oval-shaped wall ‘blps’ and Alan Saret’s light-channeling The Hole at P.S.1,
Fifth Solar Chthonic Wall Temple, on the north wing’s 3rd floor. These
works are part of the museum’s long-term installations, which also include
Pipilotti Rist’s video Selbstlos im Lavabad (Selfless in the Bath of Lava) –

viewable through the lobby floorboards – and Turrell’s awe-inspiring
Meeting, where the sky is the masterpiece.

Summer ‘Warm Up’ Parties
On Saturday afternoons from July 4 through Labor Day, rock on at one of
New York’s coolest weekly music/culture events, Warm Up. It’s a hit with
everyone from verified hipsters to plugged-in music geeks, who spill into
the MoMA PS1 courtyard to eat, drink and catch a stellar lineup of top
bands, experimental music and DJs. Featured artists have included acidhouse deity DJ Pierre and techno pioneer Juan Atkins. It’s like one big
block party, albeit with better music and art than your usual neighborhood
slap-up. Linked to it is the annual YAP (Young Architects Program)
competition, in which one design team is selected to transform the museum
courtyard with a large-scale structure that provides shade and creative party
space.

BOOKSTORE
Seek further enlightenment at Artbook ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-433-1088;
www.artbook.com/artbookps1.html; 22-25 Jackson Ave, Long Island City; h noon-6pm
Thu-Mon; b E/M to Court Sq-23rd St, G, 7 to Court Sq), the MoMA PS1 bookstore.
Stock up on MoMA exhibition catalogs, coffee-table tomes, art-theory titles and out-ofprint fodder. You’ll also find contemporary culture, film and performance titles; art,
architecture and design journals; magazines; and new media. Scan the Artbook website
for occasional readings and exhibition-based events.
TAKE A BREAK
Greek chef Mina Stone offers Greek comfort food in the museum’s restaurant,
appropriately named Mina’s.

A few blocks from the museum, the LIC Market serves creative American dishes.

Sunday Sessions

Another cultural treat is the Sunday Sessions, on Sundays November to
April (for the 2019–20 season but timeframes vary yearly). Spanning
lectures, film screenings, live music and performance art and beyond, the
lineup has included experimental comedy, postindustrial noise jams and
Latin art-house dance. One week you might catch a symphony debut, the
next an architectural performance from Madrid. Upcoming events are listed
on the MoMA PS1 website.

Architecture
Built in the Renaissance Revival style and dating back to the early 1890s,
the MoMA PS1 building housed the first school in Long Island City. Low
attendance forced its closure in 1963. A three-year, award-winning
restoration by LA-based architect Frederick Fisher in the mid-1990s saw
the addition of the building’s outdoor galleries and main entrance.

SIGHTS

The Queens Tourism Council (www.itsinqueens.com) website offers
information on attractions and events, while the Queens Council on the
Arts (www.queenscouncilarts.org) promotes art in the borough. For a
more personalized introduction, Hunter College urban-geography
professor Jack Eichenbaum leads many unusual Walking Tours of Queens’
ethnic neighborhoods, including a full-day walk/subway ride along the
7 train line.

Long Island City

Despite being only a 10-minute ride on the 7 train to Midtown, Long Island
City remained undeveloped and undiscovered for decades. Now many years
into its miniboom, it remains on the edge of cool. Several cutting-edge art
museums and repurposed industrial buildings lend it the prototypical vibe
of a hip New York City neighborhood just past pioneering stage. There are
great views to be had, particularly from Gantry Plaza State Park along the
river.
To get there, take the G to 21st St or the NYC Ferry.
MOMA PS1
( MAP

GALLERY

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
o NOGUCHI MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-204-7088; www.noguchi.org; 9-01 33rd Rd, at Vernon Blvd,
Long Island City; adult/child $10/free, 1st Fri of month free; h 10am-5pm Wed-Fri, 11am-6pm Sat &
Sun; g Q103, Q104 to Vernon Blvd-33 Rd, b N/W to Broadway)

Both the art and the context in which it’s displayed here are the work of
LA-born sculptor, designer and landscape architect Isamu Noguchi, famous
for iconic lamps and coffee tables, as well as elegant, abstract stone
sculptures. Artifacts are displayed in serene indoor galleries and a
minimalist sculpture garden, forming a complete aesthetic vision and an
oasis of calm. The 1st floor holds the permanent collection, while the
upstairs gallery shows temporary exhibitions.
GANTRY PLAZA STATE PARK

STATE PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nysparks.com/parks/149; 4-09 47th Rd, Long Island City; h 8am10pm; b 7 to Vernon Blvd-Jackson Ave)

This 12-acre riverside park directly across the water from the United
Nations has gorgeous uninterrupted views of the Manhattan skyline. It’s
nicely designed, with public lounges for panoramic chilling, and attracts a
good mix of Queens families. The restored gantries – in service until 1967 –
are testament to the area’s past as a loading dock for rail-car floats and
barges.
Dating back to 1936, the giant Pepsi-Cola sign at the park’s northern end
is an icon of Long Island City. It once topped a nearby Pepsi bottling plant,
which has been since demolished. This is also a handy spot for catching
ferries across to E 34th St, or up to Roosevelt Island and Astoria.
SOCRATES SCULPTURE PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.socratessculpturepark.org; 32-01 Vernon Blvd, Astoria; h 9amdusk; b N/W to Broadway) F

First carved out of an abandoned dump by sculptor Mark di Suvero,
Socrates is now a city park on the river’s edge with beautiful views and a
rotating series of installations. Try to time a visit with free events – such as
yoga on weekends from mid-May to late September, and Wednesday-night
movies in July and August.
KAUFMAN ARTS DISTRICT

ARTS CENTER

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.kaufmanartsdistrict.com; 34-12 36th St, Astoria; b M/R to
Steinway St, N/Q to 36th Ave)

Anchored by the legendary Kaufman Astoria Studios at 34-12 36th St, this upand-coming district comprises more than 24 blocks of Queens’ cultural
heart – you can say you knew it before it became the new Chelsea. In
addition to key institutions like the Museum of the Moving Image, the KAD
puts on events, workshops and public art pieces around the area (see the
website for a calendar), and there are plenty of restaurants and bars to pop
into between gallery visits.
SCULPTURECENTER

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-361-1750; www.sculpture-center.org; 44-19 Purves St, Long
Island City; suggested donation $10; h 11am-6pm Thu-Mon; b 7 to 45th Rd-Court House Sq, E, M
to 23rd St-Ely Ave, G to Long Island City-Court Sq)

Down a dead-end street, in a former trolley repair shop, SculptureCenter
pages Berlin with its edgy art and industrial backdrop. Its hangar-like main
gallery and cavernous underground space show both emerging and
established artists. It’s always a worthwhile add-on to a visit to nearby
MoMA PS1.
WORTH A DETOUR

FARM LIFE
Frolic with cows, sheep and goats at Queens County Farm Museum (% 718-347-3276;
www.queensfarm.org; 73-50 Little Neck Pkwy, Floral Park; h 10am-5pm; c ; g Q46 to Little
Neck Pkwy) F , the last patch of farmland within the city limits. It’s a long way from
Manhattan, but for anyone with an interest in urban agriculture – or kids who need a break
from city energy – this is a tranquil destination. It hosts an annual powwow for tribes from all
over America, plus many seasonal events (including a haunted house in late October).

Astoria

Home to the largest Greek community in the world outside Greece, this is
obviously the place to find amazing Greek bakeries, restaurants and
gourmet shops, mainly along Broadway. An influx of Eastern European,
Middle Eastern and Latino immigrants, not to mention young artsy types
(especially aspiring actors), have created a rich and diverse mix. A reminder
that movie-making started in Astoria in the 1920s; the Museum of the
Moving Image exposes some of the mysteries of the craft with amazing
exhibits and screenings in its ornate and renovated theater.
o MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.movingimage.us; 36-01 35th Ave, btwn 36th & 37th Sts, Astoria;
adult/child $15/9, 4-8pm Fri free; h 10:30am-5pm Wed & Thu, to 8pm Fri, to 6pm Sat & Sun; c ;

b M/R to Steinway St)

This supercool complex is one of the world’s top film, TV and video
museums. Galleries show the best of a collection of 130,000-plus artifacts,
including Elizabeth Taylor’s wig from Cleopatra, an epic bounty of vintage
TVs and cameras, 19th-century optical toys and a room of vintage arcade
games. Interactive displays – such as a DIY flip-book station – show the
science behind the art. The museum also has fantastic temporary exhibitions
and regular film screenings; check the website for details.

Jackson Heights

Spread out in a 50-block area from 70th to 90th Sts between Roosevelt and
34th is one of the nicest NYC neighborhoods that few New Yorkers know
about. Roosevelt Ave is not to be missed. It’s a veritable United Nations,
best appreciated by chowing down at a restaurant or several. South Asians
and Latinos from every community south of the border to the tip of
Patagonia have significant presences. To get here, take the 7 to 74th StBroadway or E/F/M/R to Jackson Heights-Roosevelt Ave.

Flushing & Corona

The intersection of Main St and Roosevelt Ave, downtown Flushing, can
feel like the Times Square of a city a world away from NYC. Immigrants
from all over Asia, primarily China and Korea, populate this exuberant
neighborhood, and its markets and restaurants burst with the delicious and
exotic.
To the southeast is Corona, most notable for Flushing Meadows Corona
Park, Queens’ massive green heart. Besides several worthwhile museums,
the park (created to host the 1939 World’s Fair) also contains the USTA
Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, where the US Open is held every
August.
o LOUIS ARMSTRONG HOUSE

NOTABLE BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-478-8274; www.louisarmstronghouse.org; 34-56 107th St,
Corona; adult/child $12/8; h 10am-5pm Wed-Fri, from noon Sat & Sun, last tour 4pm; b 7 to 103rd
St Corona Plaza)

At the peak of his career and with worldwide fame at hand, legendary
trumpeter Armstrong settled in this modest Queens home, and lived there
until his death in 1971. The place has been immaculately preserved in
groovy style, down to the dazzling retro-turquoise kitchen. Guided tours (40
minutes) tell Armstrong’s story through audio clips and insightful
commentary on some of the objects connected to the great jazz man.
FLUSHING MEADOWS CORONA PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nycgovparks.org/parks/fmcp; Grand Central Pkwy, Corona;

h 24hr; b 7 to Mets Willets Point) F

Central Queens’ biggest attraction is this 1225-acre park, built for the 1939
World’s Fair and dominated by Queens’ most famous landmark, the
stainless-steel Unisphere ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; h 24hr; b 7 to 111th St or Mets Willets
Point) – it’s the world’s biggest globe: 120ft high and weighing 380 tons.

Facing it is the former New York City Building, now home to the fantastic
Queens Museum.
Just south are three weather-worn, Cold War–era New York State
Pavilion Towers, part of the New York State Pavilion for the 1964 World’s
Fair. (You may recognize them as alien spaceships from the film Men in
Black.) If entering the park from the north, via the 7 train, look for the 1964
World’s Fair mosaics by Salvador Dalí and Andy Warhol. Also nearby is
Citi Field, and the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-760-6200; https://ustanew2.gotennissource.com; b 7 to Mets Willets
Point). Head west over the Grand Central Pkwy to find a few more

attractions, including the New York Hall of Science. The park has sports
grounds, too, on its eastern and southern edges. The top-notch Astroturf
soccer fields are popular for soccer, and there’s a pitch-and-putt golf course
that’s lit up for golfers at night.

WORTH A DETOUR

ROCKAWAY BEACH
Immortalized by the Ramones’ 1977 song ‘Rockaway Beach,’ America’s largest urban beach
(h beach 6am-9pm, boardwalk to 10pm; g Q52-SBS to Rockaway Beach Blvd-Beach 92 St,
f NYC Ferry from Wall St-Pier 11, b A to Beach-90 St) – and one of the city’s best – is just a
$2.75 trip on the A train from Manhattan (or the same price on the ferry). Less crowded than
Coney Island and with a wilder feel, Rockaway Beach is a long stretch with two social hubs.
On the west end, Jacob Riis Park (% 718-318-4300; www.nyharborparks.org/visit/jari.html;
Gateway National Recreation Area, Rockaway Beach Blvd, Queens; h 9am-5pm Memorial
Day-Labor Day; p c ; g Q35 & Q22 to Jacob Riis Park, f Sat, Sun & holidays from Pier 11,
Wall St, to Riis Landing, Rockaway), part of the 26,000-acre Gateway National Recreation
Area, mostly draws families. This area is also home to the cool green ruins of Fort Tilden, a
decommissioned coastal artillery installation from WWI.
On the east end, starting around Beach 108th St, is a burgeoning scene of hipsters, artists
and locavore food options, fronting the city’s only designated surfing beaches (at Beach 92nd
St and going east). On the boardwalk here, concrete concession booths peddle treats such as
lobster rolls, ceviche and hipster pizza.
Extending from near JFK International Airport, the salty, marshy Jamaica Bay Wildlife
Refuge covers the water north of the Rockaways’ barrier island. As one of the most important
migratory bird and wetland habitats along the eastern seaboard, it attracts more than 325 bird
species in spring and fall, as they snap up all sorts of briny sea creatures like clams, turtles,
shrimp and oysters. Each season brings different visitors. Spring features warblers and
songbirds, and American woodcocks in late March. In mid-August shorebirds start to move
south, landing here from Canada and fueling up for the trip to Mexico. Fall is when migrating
hawks and raptors get mobile, along with ducks, geese, monarch butterflies and thousands and
thousands of dragonflies. Birders and naturalists get the most action around the east pond,
though casual visitors will enjoy the more scenic and better maintained west pond trail, which
has a loop path of 2 miles. Just make sure to wear mud-resistant shoes, insect repellent and
sunscreen, carry some water and watch out for poison ivy.
To get to the visitor center (% 718-318-4340; www.nyharborparks.org; Cross Bay Blvd,
Broad Channel; h trails sunrise-sunset, visitor center 9am-5pm; g Q53 to Cross Bay
Blvd/Wildlife Refuge, b A/S to Broad Channel) F , exit at Broad Channel station, walk west
along Noel Rd to Cross Bay Blvd, turn right (north) and walk for 0.7 miles, and the center will
be visible on the left side of the road.

QUEENS MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; QMA; % 718-592-9700; www.queensmuseum.org; suggested donation
adult/child $8/free; h 11am-5pm Wed-Sun; b 7 to 111th St or Mets Willets Point)

The Queens Museum is one of the city’s most unexpected pleasures. Its
most famous installation is the Panorama of New York City, a gob-smacking
9335-sq-ft miniature NYC, with all buildings accounted for and a 15minute dusk-to-dawn light simulation. The museum also hosts top
exhibitions of global contemporary art, reflecting the diversity of Queens. A
fascinating exhibit explores some of the most interesting and avant-garde
NYC designs that never came to fruition, realized through drawings and 3D models.
The museum is housed in a historic building constructed for the 1939
World’s Fair (and once home to the UN), and you’ll find a retro-fabulous
collection of memorabilia from both the ’39 and ’64 fairs on display (with
reproductions in the gift shop).
NEW YORK HALL OF SCIENCE

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 718-699-0005; www.nysci.org; 47-01 111th St; adult/child $16/13,
admission free 2-5pm Fri & 10-11am Sun; h 9:30am-5pm Mon-Fri, 10am-6pm Sat & Sun; b 7 to
111th St)

Occupying a weird 1965 building, rippling with stained glass, this science
museum is unapologetically nerdy. An outdoor mini-golf course and North
America’s largest science playground don’t require as much brain power,
but inside highlights include operating a Mars Rover, a Charles and Ray
Eames (of Eames chairs fame)–designed Mathematica exhibit and
Connected Worlds, an animated, interactive showcase allowing kids to
manage water and plant growth in six environments (jungle, desert,
wetlands, mountain valley, reservoir and plains).

WHY ARE QUEENS ADDRESSES HYPHENATED?
If you’ve spent more than a day or two in Manhattan, you’ll know that getting the hang of
navigation is pretty simple: Generally speaking, avenues run north–south, streets run east–west
increasing in number from north to south. Queens? Not so much. But there is a bit of rhyme
and reason to the borough’s funky hyphenated addresses and overuse of avenues, lanes, drives,
roads, streets and terraces (one amazing example in Forest Hills sees a consecutive five-block
run of 68th St, 68th Rd, 68th Dr, 69th Ave and 69th Rd!).
Before Queens was incorporated into New York City in 1898, it was a series of unrelated
towns and villages each with their own street nomenclature (there were 40 Washington Streets
alone!). Something had to be done but it didn’t happen until 1911 – 100 years after
Manhattan’s grid system began.
Today, the Queens grid system has 167 avenues that go east–west (Long Island City to
Queens Village) and 271 streets that go north–south (Whitestone to Rockaway) – Manhattan’s
total opposite. But here’s the most confusing bit: Addresses have two sets of double-digit
numbers separated by a dash. The two pre-dash numbers indicate the closest cross
street/avenue while the two post-dash numbers designate the building or house number (the
lowest number starts nearest to that cross street). Exceptions, of course, are rampant.
So the Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria is at 36-01 35th Ave, so that means it’s on
35th Ave between 36th St and 37th St and is the first building from 36th St. Got it?
Ah, fuhgeddaboudit!
