Upper West Side & Central Park
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping
Sports & Activities

Upper West Side & Central Park
Neighborhood Top Five

1 Central Park Escaping the urban madness with a day of picnicking on

Sheep Meadow, row-boating on the lake and strolling the grand Literary
Walk.

2 Lincoln Center Plunging into the sheer depth of artistic choices with

some of the world’s best opera, ballet, classical music, film and theater.
3 American Museum of Natural History Walking among some of the

world’s largest dinosaurs and running your hand along the pitted surface of
the biggest meteorite in the US.
4 Nicholas Roerich Museum Taking a pilgrimage to Tibet through the mind

of a remarkable man, all inside a beautiful 19th-century town house.
5 Riverside Park Jogging, cycling or even just strolling along the Hudson

waterfront as the sun goes down over the river’s far shore.

Explore the Upper West Side & Central Park
The central western section of Manhattan offers a lot of ground to cover, so
the best plan of attack will depend on what you want to see. Traveling with
tykes? Dazzle their budding brains with a visit to the American Museum of
Natural History, followed by a journey through the sprawling wonderland
that is Central Park. (The street running parallel to the park, Central Park
West, is lined with stately apartment buildings that are lovely to admire if
you can deal with the real-estate envy.) If the arts are high on your list, head
to Lincoln Center, where the Metropolitan Opera, the New York
Philharmonic and the New York City Ballet offer vibrant doses of culture.
But if your idea of a good time is just ambling around a neighborhood, then
take in the sights on and around Broadway in the 70s, an area packed with
bustling shops and fine architecture. To experience a quieter green space,
head to Riverside Park, along the far western edge of Manhattan, for a nice
long stroll with views of the Hudson River – particularly lovely at sunset.

Local Life

Go fishing Wood-smoked lox. Briny pickled herring. Meaty sturgeon. It
doesn’t get more Upper West Side than examining the seafood treats at
Zabar’s and Barney Greengrass.
A

Central chill Tourists in Central Park rush between sights. Make like a
local by picking out a patch of green with good views and letting the world
pass by.
A

Catch a flick Manhattan’s die-hard film buffs get their quality cinema
courtesy of the Film at Lincoln Center.
A

Late-night munchies Nothing is more New York than soaking up the
evening’s liquor damage with a 2am hot dog from Gray’s Papaya.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway The 1, 2 and 3 lines are good for destinations between Broadway
and the river; take the B or C train for museums and Central Park (which
can be accessed from every side). The A/C, B/D and 1 stop at 59th StColumbus Circle, at Central Park’s southwestern corner, and go north from
there; the N/R/W line goes to the southeast. The 2 or 3 stops at the northern
gate in Harlem.
A

Bus The M104 runs along Broadway; the M10 along the park’s scenic
western edge. Crosstown routes at 66th, 72nd, 79th, 86th and 96th Sts go
through the park to the Upper East Side, stopping at Central Park West and
Fifth Ave – not inside the park.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
The best way to cover all 840 acres of Central Park is by bicycle; Central Park Bike Tours and
Toga Bike Shop offer rentals. A full ride of the Central Park loop is 6.2 miles long, and takes
in hilly and flat terrain (the northern half being hillier than the south). Get more information
and a park map at the Central Park Conservancy website (www.centralparknyc.org).
5 Best Places to Eat
A Absolute Bagels
A Cafe Luxembourg
A Awadh
A Jin Ramen
A Jacob’s Pickles

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Dead Poet
A Empire Rooftop
A Prohibition
A Irving Farm Roasters

For reviews, see here
3 Best Live Music Spots
A Metropolitan Opera House
A SummerStage
A Smoke
A Beacon Theatre

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE

CENTRAL PARK
With more than 800 acres of picturesque meadows, ponds and woods,
Central Park might seem to be Manhattan in its raw state. But the
park, designed by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, is the
result of serious engineering: thousands of workers shifted 10 million
cartloads of soil to transform swamp and rocky outcroppings into the
‘people’s park’ of today.

DON’T MISS
A The Mall A Jackie O Reservoir A Bethesda Fountain A Conservatory Garden

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , D5
A www.centralparknyc.org
A 59th to 110th Sts, btwn Central Park West & Fifth Ave A h 6am-1am A b A/C, B/D to any stop

btwn 59th St-Columbus Circle & Cathedral Pkwy (110th St)

Birth of a Park In the 1850s, this area of Manhattan was occupied
by pig farms, a garbage dump, a bone-boiling operation and an
African American village. It took 20,000 laborers two decades to
transform this terrain into a park. Today, Central Park has more

than 24,000 trees, 136 acres of woodland, 21 playgrounds and
seven bodies of water – and more than 38 million visitors a year.
Bethesda Terrace & the Mall The arched walkways of Bethesda
Terrace ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 66th to 72nd St; b B, C to 72nd St),
crowned by the Bethesda Fountain ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; b B, C to 72nd
St), at 72nd St, have long been a gathering area for New Yorkers.
To the south is the Mall ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Literary Walk; btwn 67th
& 72nd Sts; h 6am-1am; b N/R/W to 5th Ave-59th St), featured in
countless movies, a promenade shrouded in mature North
American elms. The southern stretch, known as Literary Walk, is
flanked by statues of famous authors.
Central Park Zoo This small zoo ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-439-6500;
www.centralparkzoo.com; 64th St, at Fifth Ave; adult/child $20/15, without
4D Theater $14/9; h 10am-5pm Mon-Fri, to 5:30 Sat & Sun Apr-Oct, 10am4:30pm Nov-Mar; c ; b N/R to 5th Ave-59th St), which gained fame for

its part in the DreamWorks animated movie Madagascar, is home
to penguins, snow leopards and lemurs. Feeding times in the sea
lion and penguin tanks make for a rowdy spectacle. The attached
petting zoo, Tisch Children’s Zoo, has alpacas and mini-Nubian
goats and is perfect for small children.

CONSERVATORY GARDEN IF YOU WANT A LITTLE PEACE AND QUIET (AS
IN, NO RUNNERS, CYCLISTS OR BUSKERS), THE 6-ACRE CONSERVATORY
GARDEN ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; FIFTH AVE AT E 105TH ST; B 6 TO 103RD
ST) SERVES AS ONE OF THE PARK’S OFFICIAL QUIET ZONES. AND IT’S
BEAUTIFUL, TO BOOT: BURSTING WITH CRABAPPLE TREES,
MEANDERING BOXWOOD AND, IN THE SPRING, LOTS OF FLOWERS.
OTHERWISE, YOU CAN CATCH MAXIMUM CALM (AND MAX BIRDLIFE)
IN ALL AREAS OF THE PARK JUST AFTER DAWN.
TAKE A BREAK CONSIDER PACKING A PICNIC FROM THE ASSORTMENT
OF GOURMET GOODIES AT ZABAR’S OR ELI’S ESSENTIALS (% 646-7553999; WWW.ELIZABAR.COM/ELIS-ESSENTIALS-.ASPX; 1270 MADISON AVE,
AT E 91ST ST; BUFFET PER LB $16.95, SANDWICHES FROM $7.50; H 7AM-11PM;
W V ; B 6 TO 96TH ST), BOTH A SHORT HOP FROM THE PARK.

Inside the park you can dine alfresco at casual Le Pain Quotidien
(www.lepainquotidien.com; Mineral Springs Pavilion, Central Park, off West Dr; mains
$7.50-17; h 7am-7pm, closes earlier winter; W v c ; b B, C to 72nd St), or class things up a
bit with a meal in the elegant Loeb Boathouse.

Conservatory Water & Alice in Wonderland North of the zoo (at
74th St) is Conservatory Water, where model sailboats drift and
kids scramble about on a toadstool-studded Alice in Wonderland
statue. There are Saturday story hours (www.hcastorycenter.org) at
11am from June to September at the Hans Christian Andersen
statue, to the west of the water.
Great Lawn & the Ramble The Great Lawn ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ;
btwn 79th & 85th Sts; h Apr–mid-Nov; b B, C to 86th St) is a massive
emerald carpet at the center of the park, surrounded by ball fields
and London plane trees. (It’s where Simon & Garfunkel played
their famous 1981 concert.) Immediately to the southeast is
Delacorte Theater, home to an annual Shakespeare in the Park
festival, as well as Belvedere Castle, a bird-watching lookout.

Further south is the leafy Ramble ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; btwn 73rd &
78th Sts; b B,C to 81st St-Museum of Natural History), a popular birding
destination. On the southeastern end is the Loeb Boathouse, home
to a waterside restaurant that offers rowboat rentals and gondola
rides.
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir The reservoir (at 90th St)
takes up almost the entire width of the park and serves as a
gorgeous reflecting pool for the city skyline. It is surrounded by a
1.58-mile track that draws legions of joggers in the warmer
months. Nearby, at Fifth Ave and 90th St, is a statue of New York
City Marathon founder Fred Lebow, peering at his watch.
Strawberry Fields This tear-shaped garden ( MAP ; at W 72nd St; b C,
B to 72nd St) serves as a memorial to former Beatle John Lennon,
who lived directly across the street in the Dakota Building ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; 1 W 72nd St, at Central Park West; b B, C to 72nd St) and
was fatally shot there. The garden, which was partially funded by
his widow Yoko Ono, is composed of a grove of stately elms and a
tiled mosaic that reads, simply, ‘Imagine.’ Visitors can listen to an
audioguide to Strawberry Fields, narrated by Yoko, at
www.centralparknyc.org/imagine.

TOP EXPERIENCE

LINCOLN CENTER
This stark arrangement of gleaming modernist temples contains some
of Manhattan’s most important performance spaces, home to the finest
opera, ballet and symphony orchestra in New York City. Various other
venues are tucked in and around the 16-acre campus, including two
theaters, two film-screening centers and the world-renowned Juilliard
School for performing arts.

DON’T MISS
A Revson Fountain A Marc Chagall murals A Attending a performance

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , B7
A % 212-875-5456, tours 212-875-5350
A www.lincolncenter.org
A Columbus Ave, btwn W 62nd & 66th Sts A tours adult/student $25/20
A h tours 11:30am & 1:30pm Mon-Sat, 3pm Sun A c
A b 1, 2, 3 to 66th St-Lincoln Center, A/C or B/D to 59th St-Columbus Circle

A History of Building & Rebuilding Built in the 1960s, this
imposing arts campus replaced a neighborhood of tenements called
San Juan Hill (gleefully bulldozed by urban planner Robert
Moses), a predominantly African American neighborhood where
the exterior shots for the movie West Side Story were filmed. In
addition to being a controversial urban-planning move, Lincoln
Center wasn’t exactly well received at an architectural level – it
was relentlessly criticized for its conservative design, fortresslike
aspect and poor acoustics. For the center’s 50th anniversary (2009–
10), Diller Scofidio + Renfro and other architects gave the complex
a much-needed and critically acclaimed freshening up.
Highlights A survey of the three classic buildings surrounding the
central Revson Fountain is a must. These include the Metropolitan
Opera (its lobby walls are dressed with brightly saturated murals by
painter Marc Chagall), David Geffen Hall and the David H Koch
Theater, the latter designed by Philip Johnson. (These are all

located on the main plaza at Columbus Ave, between 62nd and 65th
Sts.) The Revson Fountain is spectacular in the evenings when it
puts on Las Vegas–like water shows.
Of the refurbished structures, there are a number that are worth
examining, including Alice Tully Hall, now displaying a very contemporary
translucent, angled facade, and the David Rubenstein Atrium ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-721-6500; http://atrium.lincolncenter.org; 61 W 62nd St, at Broadway;

h atrium 8am-10pm Mon-Fri, from 9am Sat & Sun, box office noon-7pm Mon-Sat, to 5pm Sun; b 1
to 66th St-Lincoln Center), a public space behind the Empire Hotel offering a

lounge area (with free wi-fi), a cafe and an information desk. Free events
are held here on Thursday evenings, and this is also where Lincoln Center
tours depart.

Performances & Screenings On any given night, there are
numerous performances happening throughout Lincoln Center –
and even more in summer, when Lincoln Center Out of Doors (a
series of dance and music concerts) and Midsummer Night Swing
(ballroom dancing under the stars) lure those who love their culture
alfresco. For details on seasons, tickets and programming – which
runs the gamut from opera to dance to theater to ballet – check the
Lincoln Center website.

SIGHTS

The stretch of Manhattan west of Central Park was once a lively mix of
African American, Latino and German Jewish immigrant
communities. (This is where you’ll find some of the best smoked fish in
town.) In more recent decades, it has become a base for well-to-do artsy
types, young professionals and the stroller set. While long stretches of
Broadway are lined with charmless chain stores, the rest of the
neighborhood is an architectural bonanza featuring beaux arts,
baroque, neo-Gothic and postwar styles. Some of the poshest pads line
Central Park West, among them the Dakota, where John Lennon once
lived.
PARK

CENTRAL PARK
( MAP

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
LINCOLN CENTER
( MAP

ARTS CENTER

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
o NICHOLAS ROERICH MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-864-7752; www.roerich.org; 319 W 107th St, btwn Riverside Dr
& Broadway; h noon-5pm Tue-Fri, from 2pm Sat & Sun; b 1 to Cathedral Pkwy 110th St) F

This compelling little museum, housed in a three-story town house from
1898, is one of Manhattan’s best-kept secrets. It displays 150 paintings by
the prolific Nicholas Konstantinovich Roerich (1874–1947), a Russian-born
poet, philosopher and painter. His most remarkable works are his stunning
depictions of the Himalayas, where he and his family settled in 1928.
Indeed, his mountainscapes are truly a wonder to behold: icy Tibetan peaks

in shades of blue, white, green and purple, channeling a Georgia
O’Keeffe/Rockwell Kent vibe.
NEW-YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-873-3400; www.nyhistory.org; 170 Central Park West, at W 77th
St; adult/child $22/6, by donation 6-8pm Fri, library free; h 10am-6pm Tue-Thu & Sat, to 8pm Fri,
11am-5pm Sun; c ; b B, C to 81st St-Museum of Natural History)

As the antiquated hyphenated name implies, the Historical Society is the
city’s oldest museum, founded in 1804 to preserve historical and cultural
artifacts. Its collection of more than 60,000 objects is quirky and fascinating
and includes everything from George Washington’s inauguration chair to a
19th-century Tiffany ice-cream dish (gilded, of course). However, it’s far
from stodgy, having moved into the 21st century with renewed vigor and
purpose.
Redesigned with a sleek and modern aesthetic and an emphasis on
interactive technology, the building houses several museums in one. The 4th
floor is now occupied by the immersive Center for Women’s History, the
only one of its kind in a major American museum, part of the revamped
Henry Luce III Center. Plus, there’s a children’s museum, lectures and other
educational activities. An Oval Office replica is also on the cards, along
with a new permanent exhibition dedicated to American presidents.
A few other notable treasures of the permanent collection include a leg
brace worn by President Franklin D Roosevelt and photographer Jack
Stewart’s graffiti-covered door from the 1970s (featuring tags by known
graffiti writers such as Tracy 168). In the lobby, be sure to look up: the
ceiling mural from Keith Haring’s 1986 ‘Pop Shop’ hangs above the
admissions desk.
RIVERSIDE PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.riversideparknyc.org; Riverside Dr, btwn W 59th & 155th Sts;

h 6am-1am; c ; b 1/2/3 to any stop btwn 72nd & 125th Sts)

A classic beauty designed by Central Park creators Frederick Law Olmsted
and Calvert Vaux, this waterside spot, running north on the Upper West
Side and banked by the Hudson River from W 59th to 155th Sts, is
lusciously leafy. Plenty of bike paths, playgrounds and dog runs make it a
family favorite. Views from the park make the Jersey side of the Hudson
look quite pretty.
From late March through October (weather permitting), lively waterside
restaurant West 79th Street Boat Basin Café ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-496-5542;
www.boatbasincafe.com; W 79th St, at Henry Hudson Parkway; mains $8-22; h noon-11pm AprOct, weather permitting; b 1 to 79th St) serves a light menu at the level of 79th St.
Pier i Café ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-362-4450; www.piericafe.com; at W 70th St &
Riverside Blvd; mains $13-24; h 8am-midnight May-Oct; b 1/2/3 to 72nd St), an outdoor cafe

nine blocks south on the waterfront, is another option.
AMERICAN FOLK ART MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-595-9533; www.folkartmuseum.org; 2 Lincoln Sq, Columbus
Ave, btwn W 65th & 66th Sts; h 11:30am-7pm Tue-Thu & Sat, noon-7:30pm Fri, noon-6pm Sun; b 1
to 66th St-Lincoln Center) F

This small institution offers rotating exhibitions in three small galleries.
Past exhibits have included quilts made by 19th-century soldiers and
sculptures by a celebrated Ghanaian coffin-maker of forts through which
slaves were trafficked. The gift shop is a trove of unique, artsy items:
books, jewelry, accessories, scarves, home decor etc. There’s free music on
Wednesdays (2pm) and Fridays (5:30pm).

STRAUS PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nycgovparks.org; Broadway, btwn W 106th & 107th Sts; b 1 to
103rd or 110th Sts)

This leafy little triangle is dedicated to the memory of Ida and Isidor Straus,
a wealthy couple (Isidor owned Macy’s) who died together in 1912 on the
Titanic, when Ida insisted on staying with her husband instead of boarding a
lifeboat. A curving granite exedra bears a fitting biblical quote: ‘Lovely and
pleasant were they in their lives and in their death they were not divided.’
CHILDREN’S MUSEUM OF MANHATTAN

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-721-1223; www.cmom.org; 212 W 83rd St, btwn Amsterdam
Ave & Broadway; $15; h 10am-5pm Tue-Fri & Sun, to 7pm Sat; c ; b B, C to 81st St-Museum of
Natural History, 1 to 86th St)

This small museum features interactive exhibits scaled down for the 0 to
10-year-old set, including toddler discovery programs and exhibits that
stimulate play, such as perennial favorites like the Talking Dragon, Dora the
Explorer–themed rooms and an 8ft mural wall for fingerpainting. The

outdoor seasonal Dynamic H₂O water exhibits shed light on NYC’s
aqueduct and watershed system.

TOP EXPERIENCE

AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL
HISTORY

Founded in 1869, this classic museum contains a veritable wonderland of some 34 million
artifacts, plus a cutting-edge planetarium. From October through May, it’s home to the
Butterfly Conservatory, featuring 500-plus butterflies from around the globe. Perhaps best
known are its Fossil Halls containing nearly 600 specimens, including the skeletons of a
massive mammoth and a fearsome Tyrannosaurus rex.
There are plentiful animal exhibits, galleries devoted to gems and an IMAX theater. The
Hall of Ocean Life contains dioramas devoted to ecology and conservation, as well as a
beloved 94ft replica of a blue whale suspended from the ceiling. At one entrance you’re
greeted by a 63ft, 19th-century canoe, carved by the Haida people of British Columbia.
For the space set, the Rose Center for Earth & Space is the star of the show. Its mesmerizing
glass-box facade – home to space-show theaters and the planetarium – is an otherworldly
setting. Dark Universe, narrated by Neil deGrasse Tyson and screening frequently, explores
the mysteries and wonders of the cosmos.
The museum gets swamped on weekends. Aim to go early on a weekday.

DON’T MISS
A Tyrannosaurus rex (4th floor)
A Hall of Ocean Life (1st floor)
A Hayden Big Bang Theater (2nd floor)

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP

GOOGLE MAP , C5

A % 212-769-5100
A www.amnh.org
A Central Park West, at W 79th St
A suggested admission adult/child $23/13
A h 10am-5:45pm
A b C to 81st St-Museum of Natural History; 1 to 79th St
