Upper East Side
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping

Upper East Side
Neighborhood Top Five

1 Metropolitan Museum of Art Spending a few hours (or weeks) wandering

amid the priceless cultural treasures.

2 Guggenheim Museum Walking the spiral ramp of Frank Lloyd Wright’s

iconic architectural design on the trail of its latest installations of modern
art.
3 Neue Galerie Gazing at the lush, gilded paintings of Gustav Klimt,

followed up by a leisurely lunch of Viennese specialties at the museum’s
elegant cafe.
4 Frick Collection Concerts Listening to classical music on a Sunday

evening, in a beaux-arts mansion surrounded by priceless paintings and
sculptures.
5 Bemelmans Bar Sipping an early evening cocktail at this elegant, mural-

lined bar that hearkens back to the city’s glorious Jazz Age.

Explore the Upper East Side
There are infinite ways to tackle this large, well-heeled neighborhood.
Begin with a walk south down Fifth Ave from 96th St, down historic
Museum Mile, which is studded with vintage mansions and prestigious
cultural institutions. Start early if you can – visiting the Metropolitan
Museum of Art alone can easily take up an entire morning (or more). Enter
Central Park just south of the 79th St Tranverse and join the hordes
picnicking or lying about Cedar Hill; in wintertime you’ll see local children
sledding. Stroll south to the sculpture of Alice in Wonderland – a great
photo op for kids to clamber over – and then take a break and watch the
model boats on Conservatory Water pond.
At 72nd St, scoot east to Madison Ave and head south, where you can
then enjoy extravagant flagship boutiques like Cartier, Prada and Oscar de
la Renta. The path is strewn with old-world cafes and opulent restaurants.
Welcome to the rarefied air of the Upper East Side.

Local Life
Lunch with the upper crust The Upper East Side is famed for wellcoiffed ‘ladies who lunch,’ dispensing air kisses while armed with designer
handbags the size of steamer trunks. Spot them at Sant Ambroeus and Café
Boulud on weekdays.
A

(Window) shop ’til you drop Champagne taste on a beer budget? Skip
the ritzy boutiques and hit high-end consignment shops like Michael’s for
bargains on barely worn frocks from high-society types.
A

Get jittery with it An upscale neighborhood drinks upscale coffee.
Indulge in a freshly drawn macchiato and a pastry at cafes like Sant
Ambroeus and Irving Farm Roasters.
A

Picnic in the park Assemble your own charcuterie at old-time deli
Schaller & Weber. Continue east to Carl Schurz Park for an alfresco meal
with stunning East River views.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway The 4/5/6 trains travel north–south on Lexington Ave, while the
Q stops at Lexington Ave and 63rd St before stopping along Second Ave at
72nd, 86th and 96th Sts. The F also stops at 63rd and Lex, then heads to
Roosevelt Island and Queens.
A

Bus M1, M2, M3 and M4 buses go down Fifth Ave (and up Madison Ave).
The M15, which runs up First Ave and down Second, is handy for the area’s
most easterly parts. Crosstown buses at 66th, 72nd, 79th, 86th and 96th Sts
take you to the Upper West Side.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
The Upper East Side is the epitome of old-school opulence, especially the area that covers the
blocks from 60th to 86th Sts between Park and Fifth Aves. If you’re looking for eating and
drinking spots that are easier on the wallet, head east of Lexington Ave. First, Second and
Third Aves are lined with less pricey neighborhood venues.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Tanoshi
A Café Boulud
A Levain Bakery
A Papaya King
A Café Sabarsky
A Sfoglia

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Bemelmans Bar
A UES NYC
A Pony Bar
A Jeffrey
A Caledonia
A Auction House

For reviews, see here
7 Best Places to Shop
A Blue Tree
A Tiny Doll House
A Michael’s
A Mary Arnold Toys
A Albertine

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE

GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM
A sculpture in its own right, this building by architect Frank Lloyd
Wright almost overshadows the collection of 20th-century art inside.
Even before it opened, the inverted ziggurat structure was derided by
some critics but hailed by others, who welcomed it as a beloved
architectural icon. Since its opening, this unusual structure has
appeared in countless postcards, TV programs and films.
DON’T MISS
A Temporary Rotunda exhibitions (with unusual viewpoints)
A Brunch at the Wright restaurant
A Museum shop

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , A3
A % 212-423-3500
A www.guggenheim.org
A 1071 Fifth Ave, at E 89th St
A adult/child $25/free, cash-only pay-what-you-wish 5-8pm Sat
A h 10am-5:30pm Wed-Fri, Sun & Mon, to 8pm Sat, to 9pm Tue
Ac
A b 4/5/6, Q to 86th St

Abstract Roots

The Guggenheim came out of the collection of Solomon R Guggenheim, a
New York mining magnate who began acquiring abstract art in his 60s at
the behest of his art adviser, an eccentric German baroness named Hilla
Rebay. In 1939, with Rebay serving as director, Guggenheim opened a
temporary museum on 54th St titled the Museum of Non-Objective
Painting. (Incredibly, it had grey velour walls, piped-in classical music and
burning incense.) Four years later, the pair commissioned Wright to
construct a permanent home for the collection.
Like most developments in New York City, the project took forever to
come to fruition. Construction was delayed for almost 13 years due to
budget constraints, the outbreak of WWII and outraged neighbors who
weren’t all that excited to see a giant concrete spaceship land in their midst.
Construction was finally completed in 1959 – after both Wright and
Guggenheim had passed away.

Bring on the Critics
When the Guggenheim opened its doors in October 1959, the ticket price
was 50¢ and the works on view included pieces by Wassily Kandinsky,
Alexander Calder and abstract expressionists Franz Kline and Willem de
Kooning.
The structure was savaged by the New York Times, but others quickly
celebrated it as one of the country’s most beautiful buildings. Whether
Wright intended to or not, he had given the city one of its most recognizable
landmarks.

To the Present
A renovation in the early 1990s added an eight-story tower to the east,
which seamlessly provided an extra 50,000 sq ft of exhibition space. These
galleries feature rotating exhibitions from the permanent collection, while
the ramps of the Rotunda are occupied by temporary exhibits.
The museum’s holdings include works by Kandinsky, Picasso and
Jackson Pollock. Over time, other key additions have included paintings by

Monet, Van Gogh and Degas, sculpture by Constantin Brancusi,
photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe, and key surrealist works donated by
Guggenheim’s niece Peggy.

Visiting the Museum
The museum’s ascending ramp displays rotating exhibitions of modern and
contemporary art. Though Wright intended visitors to go to the top and
wind their way down, the cramped single elevator makes this difficult.
Exhibitions, therefore, are installed from bottom to top.

TOP EXPERIENCE

METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART
This sprawling, encyclopedic museum, founded in 1870, houses one of
the world’s largest and most important art collections, with more than
two million individual objects, from Egyptian temples to American
paintings. ‘The Met’ attracts over six million visitors a year to its 17
acres of galleries, making it the largest single-site attraction in NYC. In
other words: plan on spending some time here.

DON’T MISS
A Temple of Dendur
A Paintings by Caravaggio, El Greco, Vermeer and other old masters
A Damascus Room in the Islamic Art galleries

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , A5
A % 212-535-7710
A www.metmuseum.org
A 1000 Fifth Ave, at E 82nd St
A 3-day pass adult/senior/child $25/$17/free, pay-what-you-wish for NY State residents
A h 10am-5:30pm Sun-Thu, to 9pm Fri & Sat
Ac
A b 4/5/6, Q to 86th St, 6 to 77th St

Egyptian Art
The museum has an unrivaled collection of ancient Egyptian art, some of
which dates back to the Paleolithic era. Located to the north of the Great
Hall, the 39 Egyptian galleries open dramatically with one of the Met’s
prized pieces: the Tomb of Perneb (c 2300 BCE), an Old Kingdom burial
chamber crafted from limestone. From here, a web of rooms is cluttered
with funerary stelae, carved reliefs and fragments of pyramids. Don’t miss
the intriguing models from the Tomb of Meketre, clay figurines meant to help
in the afterlife, in Gallery 105. These eventually lead to the Temple of Dendur
(Gallery 131), a sandstone temple to the goddess Isis given to the US by
Egypt in 1965. It resides in a sunny atrium gallery with a reflecting pool – a
must-see for the first-time visitor.

European Paintings
Want Renaissance? The Met’s got it. On the museum’s 2nd floor, the
European Paintings galleries display a stunning collection of masterworks.
This includes more than 1700 canvases from the roughly 500-year period
starting in the 13th century, with works by every important painter from
Duccio to Rembrandt. In fact, everything here is, literally, a masterpiece. At
the time of writing, the skylights in these galleries were being replaced to
improve the quality of light within. Once completed, hours spent viewing
these many powerful works will be even more enjoyable.

Art of the Arab Lands
In the southeastern corner of the 2nd floor you’ll find the Islamic galleries,
with 15 incredible rooms showcasing the museum’s extensive collection of
art from the Middle East, and Central and South Asia. In addition to
garments, secular decorative objects and manuscripts, you’ll find a
magnificent 14th-century mihrab (prayer niche) from Iran, lined with
elaborately patterned blue, white and yellow tile work (Gallery 455).
There’s also a superb array of Ottoman textiles (Gallery 459), a medievalstyle Moroccan court (Gallery 456) and the 18th-century Damascus Room
(Gallery 461).

FOR KIDS
The most popular galleries with children are generally the Egyptian, African and Oceania
galleries (check out the Asmat body masks), and the collection of medieval arms and
armor. The Met hosts plenty of youth-centric events (see the website) and distributes a
museum brochure and map made specially for kids.
THE MET’S MASCOT
In Gallery 111 you’ll find a small, blue-glazed faience hippopotamus that was sealed into
an Egyptian tomb 3900 years ago to guard its owner in the afterlife. Nicknamed
‘William,’ he’s the Met’s unofficial mascot. If you’d like your own guardian hippo, head
to the museum shop on the 1st floor, where you can buy bright-blue William figurines,
plush toys, ties, T-shirts, magnets and children’s books.
TAKE A BREAK
The museum’s casual Petrie Court Café (11am to 4:30pm) sells tasty salads, soups,
pastas and hot sandwiches, plus wine and a good selection of tea – all served in an airy
setting with floor-to-ceiling views of Central Park.

For more views with a cocktail in hand, head to the Met’s Cantor Roof Garden Bar.

American Wing
In the northwestern corner, the two-floor American Wing showcases a wide
variety of decorative and fine art from throughout US history. These include
everything from colonial portraiture to Hudson River School art – not to
mention Emanuel Leutze’s massive canvas of Washington Crossing the
Delaware (Gallery 760). What the permanent collection lacks, though, is a
serious body of Native American art. In 2018–19 a landmark exhibition
showcased 116 works of sculpture, painting, textiles and regalia from more
than 50 indigenous North American cultures. The works were gifts,
donations and loans from the Diker Collection, considered to be the most
significant private collection of Native American art in the US.

Greek & Roman Art

The 27 galleries devoted to classical antiquity are another Met doozy. From
the Great Hall, a passageway takes you through a barrel-vaulted room
flanked by the chiseled torsos of Greek figures. This spills right into one of
the Met’s loveliest spaces: the airy Greek and Roman sculpture court (Gallery
162), full of marble carvings of gods and historical figures. The statue of a
bearded Hercules from CE 68–98, with a lion’s skin draped about him, is
particularly awe-inspiring.

SIGHTS

The Upper East Side is mainly a residential area, and with a few
exceptions its sights are clustered along Fifth Ave from 70th to 93rd Sts
– the famed Museum Mile. Central Park runs along the western side of
Fifth Ave, bordered by a low stone wall. If the weather’s fine, you can
spend a very pleasant day alternating museum stops with a stroll
through some greenery.
METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART
( MAP

MUSEUM

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM
( MAP

MUSEUM

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
o FRICK COLLECTION

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.frick.org; 1 E 70th St, at Fifth Ave; adult/student $22/12, paywhat-you-wish 2-6pm Wed, free 6-9pm 1st Fri of month excl Jan & Sep; h 10am-6pm Tue-Sat,
11am-5pm Sun; b 6 to 68th St-Hunter College)

This spectacular art collection sits in a mansion built by steel magnate
Henry Clay Frick, one of the many such residences lining the section of
Fifth Ave that was once called ‘Millionaires’ Row.’ The museum has over a
dozen splendid rooms displaying masterpieces by Titian, Vermeer, Gilbert
Stuart, El Greco, Joshua Reynolds, Van Dyck and Rembrandt. Sculpture,
ceramics, antique furniture and clocks are also on display. Fans of classical
music will enjoy the piano and violin concerts on some Sunday evenings.
The Frick is a treat for several reasons. First, it’s housed in a lovely,
rambling beaux-arts structure built from 1913 to 1914 by Carrère and

Hastings; it’s also generally not crowded (except perhaps during popular
shows). It feels refreshingly intimate, with a trickling indoor courtyard
fountain and gardens (though closed to the public). A demure Portico Gallery
displays decorative works and sculpture. (Note that children under 10 years
are not admitted to the museum.) And, finally, free lectures from curators or
experts in the field are usually offered in conjunction with special
exhibitions.
A worthwhile audio tour (available in several languages) is included in
the admission price. Beginning in 2020, the museum is undertaking a
restoration and expansion project, eventually opening up new galleries on
the 2nd floor of the house and adding private state-of-the-art conservation
laboratories, a cafe, a new state-of-the-art auditorium, an Education Center
and ADA access throughout: expect disruptions to your visit (check the
progress at www.frickfuture.org).
MET BREUER

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-731-1675; www.metmuseum.org/visit/met-breuer; 945 Madison
Ave, at E 75th St; 3-day pass adult/senior/child $25/$17/free, pay-what-you-wish for NY State
residents; h 10am-5:30pm Tue-Thu & Sun, to 9pm Fri & Sat; b 6 to 77th St, Q to 72nd St)

The newest branch of the Metropolitan Museum of Art opened in the
landmark former Whitney Museum building (designed by Marcel Breuer;
there’s an architecture tour you can listen to on the Met’s website) in 2016.
Exhibits are dedicated to 20th- and 21st-century art, with sculpture,
photographs, video, design and paintings from the likes of American and
international figures such as Edvard Munch, Claes Oldenburg and Robert
Smithson. Your three-day admission includes the main museum, and
medieval exhibits at the Cloisters.
COOPER-HEWITT SMITHSONIAN DESIGN MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.cooperhewitt.org; 2 E 91st St, at Fifth Ave; adult/child $18/free,
pay-what-you-wish 6-9pm Sat; h 10am-6pm Sun-Fri, to 9pm Sat; b 4/5/6 to 86th St)

Part of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington DC, this is the only US
museum dedicated to both historic and contemporary design. Housed in the
64-room mansion built by billionaire Andrew Carnegie in 1901, the
210,000-piece collection offers artful displays spanning 3000 years over
three floors of the building. The beautiful garden is open to the public and
accessible from 90th St or from inside the museum.
MUSEUM

NEUE GALERIE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.neuegalerie.org; 1048 Fifth Ave, at E 86th St; adult/student
$22/12, free 5-8pm 1st Fri of month; h 11am-6pm Thu-Mon; b 4/5/6, Q to 86th St)

This restored Carrère and Hastings mansion from 1914 is a resplendent
showcase for Austrian and German art, featuring works by Paul Klee and
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, and incredible collections of Gustav Klimt and
Egon Schiele. In pride of place on the 2nd floor is Klimt’s golden 1907
Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I – acquired for the museum by cosmetics
magnate Ronald Lauder for a whopping $135 million. The fascinating story
of the painting’s history is told in the 2015 film Woman in Gold.
This is a small but beautiful place, with winding staircases and wroughtiron banisters. It also has a lovely, street-level eatery, Café Sabarsky;
downstairs, Café Fledermaus serves the same menu and absorbs the overflow.
Avoid weekends (and the free-admission first Friday of the month) if you
don’t want to deal with gallery-clogging crowds. Note that children aged
under 12 are not admitted to the museum, though Family Mornings are
offered on select Sundays.
GRACIE MANSION

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nyc.gov/gracie; East End Ave, at E 88th St; h tours 10am, 11am
& 5pm Mon; b Q to 86th St) F

This Federal-style home served as the country residence of merchant
Archibald Gracie in 1799. Since 1942, it’s been the residence of New
York’s mayors and their families (with the exception of Michael
Bloomberg, who preferred his own plush Upper East Side apartment). The

house has been added to and renovated over the years. To visit, you’ll have
to reserve a spot online for one of the hour-long house tours held one day a
week (less frequently during the holiday season).
The estate’s 11 acres of grounds were turned into the pleasant, riverside
Carl Schurz Park. It’s popular with local joggers and dog owners, and its
lovely promenade – which offers panoramic views of the East River,
several islands and the Triborough Bridge – is one of the Upper East Side’s
hidden gems.
ASIA SOCIETY & MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-288-6400; www.asiasociety.org; 725 Park Ave, cnr E 70th St;
adult/child $12/free, free 6-9pm Fri Sep-Jun; h 11am-6pm Tue-Sun, to 9pm Fri Sep-Jun; b 6 to 68th
St-Hunter College; Q to 72nd St)

Founded in 1956 by John D Rockefeller III (an avid collector of Asian art),
this cultural center hosts fascinating exhibits (Buddhist art of Myanmar,
retrospectives of leading Chinese artists, contemporary Southeast Asian
art), as well as Jain sculptures and Nepalese Buddhist paintings. Daily tours
(free with admission) are offered at 2pm Tuesday through Sunday yearround and at 6:30pm Friday (excluding summer months). Note the museum
is generally closed for three weeks or so in August and June for turning
over exhibitors.
JEWISH MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-423-3200; www.thejewishmuseum.org; 1109 Fifth Ave, btwn E
92nd & 93rd Sts; adult/child $18/free, Sat free, pay-what-you-wish 5-8pm Thu; h 11am-5:45pm
Mon-Tue & Fri, 11am-8pm Thu, 10am-5:45pm Sat & Sun; c ; b Q, 6 to 96th St)

This gem occupies a French-Gothic mansion from 1908, housing 30,000
items of Judaica including torah shields and hanukah lamps, as well as
sculpture, painting and decorative arts. It does not, however, include any
historical exhibitions relating to the Jewish community in New York.
Temporary exhibits are often excellent, featuring retrospectives on

influential figures such as Art Spiegelman or Leonard Cohen, as well as
world-class shows on luminaries like Marc Chagall and Modigliani.
TEMPLE EMANU-EL

SYNAGOGUE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.emanuelnyc.org; 1 E 65th St, at Fifth Ave; h 10am-4pm Sun-Thu,
to 2pm Fri; b 6 to 68th St-Hunter College) F

Founded in 1845 as the first Reform synagogue in New York, this temple,
completed in 1929, is now one of the largest Jewish houses of worship in
the world. An imposing Romanesque structure, it is more than 175ft long
and 100ft tall, with a brilliant, hand-painted ceiling featuring gold details. It
is best to call ahead before visiting because the synagogue regularly closes
for funerals and other events. Services (6pm Fridays and 10:30am
Saturdays) are open to all.
MUSEUM OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.mcny.org; 1220 Fifth Ave, btwn E 103rd & 104th Sts; suggested
admission adult/child $20/free; h 10am-6pm; b 6 to 103rd St)

Situated in a Georgian Colonial Revival–style building at the top end of
Museum Mile, this local museum focuses solely on New York City’s past,
present and future. Don’t miss the 28-minute film Timescapes (on the
ground floor), which charts NYC’s growth from a tiny trading post for
Native Americans to burgeoning metropolis.
