The NYC Table
Unlike California or the South, New York doesn’t have one defining
cuisine. Ask for some ‘New York food’ and you’ll wind up with
anything from brick-oven pizza in Brooklyn to vegan soul food in
Harlem. Cuisine in the multicultural city is global by definition, a
testament to the immigrants who have unpacked their bags and recipes
on its streets. And just like the city itself, it’s a scene that’s constantly
evolving, driven by insatiable ambition.

Urban Farm to Table
Whether it’s upstate triple-cream Kunik at Bedford Cheese Shop or
seasonal mushrooms at fine-dining Craft, New York City’s passion for all
things local and artisanal continues unabated. The city itself has become an
unlikely food bowl, with an ever-growing number of rooftops, backyards
and community gardens finding new purpose as urban farms.
The urban harvest makes smart use of space, with organic tomatoes
grown at Upper East Side delis and beehives on East Village tenement
rooftops. There are more expansive spaces, too, like Brooklyn Grange
(www.brooklyngrangefarm.com), an organic farm covering three rooftops
in Long Island City and the Brooklyn Navy Yards. At almost 5.5 acres, it
produces over 80,000lb of organically cultivated goodness annually, from
eggs to carrots, chard and heirloom tomatoes. Another Brooklyn producer is
Whole Foods ( MAP ; % 718-907-3622; www.wholefoodsmarket.com; 214 3rd
St, btwn Third Ave & Gowanus Canal, Gowanus; h 8am-11pm; W v ; b R to
Union St, F, G to 4th Ave-9th St), whose commercial-scale greenhouse farm
covers some 20,000 sq ft, making use of a high-efficiency irrigation system
to further reduce the produce’s carbon footprint.
Bargain-savvy gastronomes love the biannual NYC Restaurant Week. Taking place in January to
February and July to August, it sees many of the city’s restaurants, including some of its very best,
serve up two-course lunches for $26, or three-course dinners for $42. Check
www.nycgo.com/restaurantweek for details and reservations.

Food Specialties

Bagels
Bagels may have been invented in Europe, but they were perfected around
the turn of the 19th century in NYC – and once you’ve had one here, you’ll
have a hard time enjoying one anywhere else. It’s a straightforward
masterpiece: a ring of plain-yeast dough that’s first boiled and then baked,
either left plain or topped with various finishing touches, from sesame seeds
to chocolate chips. ‘Bagels’ made in other parts of the country are often just
baked and not boiled, which makes them nothing more than a roll with a
hole. And even if they do get boiled elsewhere, bagel-makers here claim
that it’s the New York water that adds an elusive sweetness never to be
found anywhere else. Which baker creates the ‘best’ bagel in New York is a
matter of (hotly contested) opinion, but most agree that Manhattan’s Ess-aBagel and Queens’ Brooklyn Bagel & Coffee Company rank pretty high.
The most traditionally New York way to order one is by asking for a ‘bagel
and a schmear,’ which will yield you said bagel with a small but thick swipe
of cream cheese. Or splurge and add some lox – thinly sliced smoked
salmon – as was originally sold from pushcarts on the Lower East Side by
Jewish immigrants back in the early 1900s.

Pizza
Pizza is certainly not indigenous to Gotham. But New York–style pizza is a
very particular item, and the first pizzeria in America was Lombardi’s in
Manhattan’s Little Italy, which opened in 1905.
While Chicago–style pizza is ‘deep dish’ and Californian tends to be light
and doughy, New York prides itself on pizza with a thin crust, an even
thinner layer of sauce and triangular slices (unless they’re Sicilian-style, in
which case they’re rectangular). Pizza made its way over to New York in
the 1900s through Italian immigrants and its regional style soon developed,

the thin crust allowing for faster cooking time in a city where everyone is
always in a hurry.
Today there are pizza parlors about every 10 blocks, especially in
Manhattan and most of Brooklyn, where you’ll find standard slices for $3.
The style at each place varies slightly – some places touting cracker-thin
crust, others offering slightly thicker and chewier versions, and plenty of
nouveau styles throwing everything from shrimp to cherries on top. The
city’s booming locavore movement has also made its mark, with hip
pizzerias like Roberta’s in Brooklyn peddling wood-fired pies topped with
sustainable, local produce.
City Harvest (www.cityharvest.org) is a nonprofit organization that distributes unused food to
around 1.2 million struggling New Yorkers each year. A whopping 64 million pounds of food is
rescued from city restaurants, bakeries and catering companies over the course of a year.
Individuals wanting to make a monetary donation can do so via the City Harvest website.

Hot Dogs
The hot dog made its way to New York via various European butchers in
the 1800s. One, Charles Feltman of Germany, was apparently the first to
sell them from pushcarts along the Coney Island seashore. Nathan
Handwerker, originally an employee of Feltman’s, opened his own shop
across the street, offering hot dogs at half the price of those at Feltman’s,
which put his former employer out of business. Today, the original and
legendary Nathan’s still stands in Coney Island, while its empire has
expanded on an international scale. There is barely a New York
neighborhood that does not have at least a few hot-dog vendors on its street
corners, although some locals would never touch one of those ‘dirty-water
dogs,’ preferring the new wave of chichi hot-dog shops that can be found all
over town. Enjoy yours, wherever it’s from, with ‘the works’: smothered
with spicy brown mustard, relish, sauerkraut and onions.

Egg Creams

Now don’t go expecting eggs or cream in this frothy, old-school beverage –
just milk, seltzer water and plenty of chocolate syrup (preferably the classic
Fox’s U-Bet brand, made in Brooklyn). When Louis Auster of Brooklyn,
who owned soda fountains on the Lower East Side, invented the treat back
in 1890, the syrup he used was indeed made from eggs, with added cream
to thicken the concoction. The name stuck, even though the ingredients
were modified, and soon they were a staple of every soda fountain in New
York. While Mr Auster sold them for 3¢ apiece, today they’ll cost you
anywhere from $2.50 to $5, depending on where you find one – which
could be from old-school institutions such as Katz’s Delicatessen in the
Lower East Side or Tom’s Restaurant in Brooklyn.

New York–Style Cheesecake
In one form or another, cheesecake has been around for quite a while. Look
back 2400 years and you’ll notice that Greek historian Thucydides and his
posse were already kneading honey into fresh feta and baking it over hot
coals for a sweet treat. Centuries later, the Romans adopted it, tweaking the
concept by incorporating spelt flour for a more ‘cake-like’ form. This would
be followed by countless more tweaks across the continent and centuries.
It would, however, take the error of a 19th-century New York farmer to
create the key ingredient in New York–style cheesecake: cream cheese. A
botched attempt at making French Neufchâtel cheese resulted in a curious
product with the texture of polyethylene plastic. Enter James Kraft, founder
of Kraft Foods, who picked it up in 1912, reformulated it, wrapped it in foil
and introduced the country to the wonder of cream cheese.
Classic New York cheesecake would be immortalized by Lindy’s
restaurant in Midtown. Opened by Leo Lindemann in 1921, the particular
type of confection served there – made of cream cheese, heavy cream, a
dash of vanilla and a cookie crust – became wildly popular in the ‘40s.
Today, this calorific local masterpiece is a staple on countless dessert
menus, whether you’re at a Greek diner or haute-cuisine hot spot. The most
famous (and arguably best) cheesecake in town is that from Brooklyn

stalwart Junior’s ( MAP ; % 718-852-5257; www.juniorscheesecake.com; 386
Flatbush Ave, at DeKalb Ave, Downtown Brooklyn; mains from $11;
h 6:30am-midnight Sun-Thu, to 1am Fri & Sat; b B, Q/R to DeKalb Ave, 2/3
to Hoyt St, A/C, G to Hoyt-Schermerhorn), whose well-known fans include
Barack Obama.
There’s a plethora of books about NYC’s culinary history. Top reads include William Grimes’
Appetite City: A Culinary History of New York, Arthur Schwartz’s New York City Food: An
Opinionated History and More Than 100 Legendary Recipes, and Gastropolis: Food & New York
City, edited by Annie Hauck-Lawson and Jonathan Deutsch.

Drink Specialties

Cocktails
New York City is a master of mixed libations. After all, this is the home of
Manhattans, legendary speakeasies and cosmo-clutching columnists with a
passion for fashion. Legend has it that the city’s namesake drink, the
Manhattan – a blend of whiskey, sweet vermouth and bitters – began life on
the southeastern corner of 26th St and Madison Ave, at the long-gone
Manhattan Club. The occasion was a party in 1874, allegedly thrown by
Jennie Churchill (mother of British prime minister Winston) to celebrate
Samuel J Tilden’s victory in the New York gubernatorial election. One of
the barmen decided to create a drink to mark the occasion, naming it in
honor of the bar.
Another New York classic was born that very year – the summer-centric
Tom Collins. A mix of dry gin, sugar, lemon juice and club soda, the long
drink’s name stems from an elaborate hoax in which hundreds of locals
were informed that a certain Tom Collins had been sullying their good
names. While many set out to track him down, clued-in bartenders relished
the joke by making the drink and naming it for the fictitious troublemaker.
When the aggrieved stormed into the bars looking for a Tom Collins, they
were served the drink to cool their tempers.
These days, NYC’s kicking cocktail scene is big on rediscovered recipes,
historical anecdotes and vintage speakeasy style. Once, obscure bartenders
such as Harry Johnson and Jerry Thomas are now born-again legends, their
vintage concoctions revived by a new generation of braces-clad
mixologists. Historic ingredients such as Crème de Violette, Old Tom gin
and Batavia Arrack are back in vogue. In the Financial District, cocktail bar
Dead Rabbit has gone one further, reintroducing the 17th-century practice
of pop-inns, drinks that fuse ale, liqueurs, spices and botanicals.
Other establishments give a single spirit prominence on their menus,
among them whiskey-versed Ward III and self-explanatory Brandy Library,

both in Tribeca, Rum House in Midtown, and, in Brooklyn, craft bourbon
creators Kings County Distillery and whisky-worshipping Moonlight Mile.
There’s even a drinking den devoted to Moonshine – Wayland – in the East
Village.

NYC Master Chef Cookbooks
Daniel: My French Cuisine
(Daniel Boulud & Sylvie Bigar)
The Babbo Cookbook
(Mario Batali)
A Girl and Her Greens
(April Bloomfield)
Momofuku
(David Chang & Peter Meehan)

Borough Brews
Beer brewing was once a thriving industry in the city – by the 1870s,
Brooklyn boasted a belly-swelling 48 breweries. Most of these were based
in Williamsburg, Bushwick and Greenpoint, neighborhoods packed with
German immigrants with extensive brewing know-how. By the eve of
Prohibition in 1919, the borough was one of the country’s leading beer
peddlers, as famous for kids carrying growlers (beer jugs) as for its bridges.
By the end of Prohibition in 1933, most breweries had shut shop. And while
the industry rose from the ashes in WWII, local flavor gave in to big-gun
Midwestern brands.
Fast-forward to today and Brooklyn is once more a catchword for a
decent brewski as a handful of craft breweries put integrity back on tap.
Head of the pack is Brooklyn Brewery, brewing IPAs, lagers, non-alcoholic
beers plus limited-release offerings like raspberry sour ale. The brewery’s
comrades-in-craft include SixPoint Craft Ales (www.sixpoint.com), Threes
Brewing (www.threesbrewing.com), Other Half Brewing Co
(www.otherhalfbrewing.com) and Transmitter Brewing
(www.transmitterbrewing.com).

In Queens, the dominant player remains SingleCut Beersmiths
(www.singlecut.com); its launch in 2012 saw Queens welcome its first
brewery since Prohibition. Its offerings include unusual takes on lager,
among them the summery, orange zesty Jan Alpine White Lager. The
borough is also home to beach-born Rockaway Brewing Company
(www.rockawaybrewco.com). Further north, the Bronx lays claim to Bronx
Brewery and Gun Hill Brewing Co (www.gunhillbrewing.com), the latter
making waves with its Void of Light, a jet-black, roastalicious stout.
The first public brewery in America was established by colonial governor Peter Minuit (1580–
1638) at the Market (Marckvelt) field in what is now known as the Financial District in Lower
Manhattan. Minuit is remembered for ‘purchasing’ Manhattan from the native Lenape people in
May 1626.

The Arts Scene
The spectacles of Broadway, the gleaming white-box galleries of
Chelsea, joints playing jazz, music halls blaring moody indie rock and
opera houses that bellow melodramatic tales – for more than a century,
New York City has been America’s capital of cultural production. And
while gentrification has pushed many artists out to the city’s fringes
and beyond, New York nonetheless remains a nerve center for the
visual arts, music, theater, dance and literature.

Dynamo of the Art World
That New York claims some of the world’s mightiest art museums attests to
its enviable artistic pedigree. From Pollock and Rothko to Warhol and
Rauschenberg, the city has nourished many of America’s greatest artists and
artistic movements.

Birth of an Arts Hub
In almost all facets of the arts, New York really got its sea legs in the early
20th century, when the city attracted and retained a critical mass of thinkers,
artists, writers and poets. It was at this time that the homegrown art scene
began to take shape. In 1905, photographer (and husband of Georgia
O’Keeffe) Alfred Stieglitz opened ‘Gallery 291,’ a Fifth Ave space that
provided a vital platform for American artists and helped establish
photography as a credible art form.
In the 1940s, an influx of cultural figures fleeing the carnage of WWII
saturated the city with fresh ideas – and New York became an important
cultural hub. Peggy Guggenheim established the Art of this Century gallery
on 57th St, a space that helped launch the careers of painters such as
Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning and Robert Motherwell. These
Manhattan-based artists, along with other leading artists such as Elaine de
Kooning, Joan Mitchell and Helen Frankenthaler, came to form the core of
the abstract-expressionist movement (also known as the New York School),
creating an explosive and rugged form of painting that changed the course
of modern art as we know it.
On any given week, New York is home to countless art exhibits, installations and performances.
Get a comprehensive listing of happenings at www.nyartbeat.com.

American Avant-Garde

The abstract expressionists helped establish New York as a global arts
center. Another generation of artists then carried the baton. In the 1950s and
’60s, Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns and Lee Bontecou turned
paintings into off-the-wall sculptural constructions that included everything
from welded steel to taxidermy goats. By the mid-1960s, pop art – a
movement that utilized the imagery and production techniques of popular
culture – had taken hold, with Andy Warhol at the helm.
By the ’60s and ’70s, when New York’s economy was in the dumps and
much of SoHo lay in a state of decay, the city became a hotbed of
conceptual and performance art. Gordon Matta-Clark sliced up abandoned
buildings with chainsaws and the artists of Fluxus staged happenings on
downtown streets. Carolee Schneemann organized performances that
utilized the human body. At one famous 1964 event, she had a crew of nude
dancers roll around in an unappetizing mix of paint, sausages and dead fish
in the theater of a Greenwich Village church.

New York’s Art World Today
Today, the arts scene is mixed and wide-ranging. The major institutions –
the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Museum of Modern Art, the Whitney
Museum of American Art, the Guggenheim Museum, the Met Breuer and
the Brooklyn Museum – deliver major retrospectives covering every-thing
from Renaissance portraiture to contemporary installation. The New
Museum of Contemporary Art, on the Lower East Side, is more daring,
while countless smaller institutions, among them the excellent Bronx
Museum, El Museo del Barrio and the Studio Museum in Harlem, focus on
more precise slices of art history.
New York remains the world’s gallery capital, with well over 1000 spaces
showcasing all kinds of art all over the city. The blue-chip dealers can be
found clustered in Chelsea and the Upper East Side. Galleries that showcase
emerging and midcareer artists dot the Lower East Side, while prohibitive
rents have pushed the city’s more emerging and experimental scenes further
out, with current hot spots including Harlem and the Brooklyn

neighborhoods of Bushwick, Greenpoint, Clinton Hill and BedfordStuyvesant (Bed-Stuy).
In January 2018 the Metropolitan Museum of Art started charging admission to out-of-state visitors
for the first time since 1970. The decision was controversial: while many recognized the museum’s
financial bind – only 8% of its budget is government funded – others mourned the loss of the opendoor policy that allowed universal access to a world-class art collection.

Graffiti & Street Art
Public art has come a long way since Emma Stebbins’ sculpture Angel of
the Waters (1873) was planted in Central Park. Contemporary graffiti as we
know it was cultivated in NYC. In the 1970s, the graffiti-covered subway
train became a potent symbol of the city and work by figures such as Dondi,
Blade and Lady Pink became known around the world. In addition, fine
artists such as Jean-Michel Basquiat, Kenny Scharf and Keith Haring began
incorporating elements of graffiti into their work.
The movement received new life in the late 1990s when a new generation
of artists – many with art-school pedigrees – began using materials such as
cut paper and sculptural elements. Well-known New York City artists
working in this vein include John Fekner, Stephen ‘ESPO’ Powers, Swoon,
and the twin-brother duo Skewville and Shepard Fairey, who later went on
to create the Obama ‘Hope’ poster. The city’s diverse canvas has also been
enlivened by the large-scale works of Tokyo-born artist Lady Aiko,
crocheted installations by Olek, and Alice Mizrachi’s murals.
Less celebratory was the 2013 closure of the iconic 5Pointz, a cluster of
Long Island City warehouses dripping with Technicolor graffiti. Not even a
plea from legendary British artist Banksy could save the veritable gallery,
condemned to demolition. These days, spray-can and stencil hot spots
include the Brooklyn side of the Williamsburg Bridge and the corner of
Troutman St and St Nicholas Ave in Bushwick, also in Brooklyn. In Astoria,
Queens, explore the Technicolor artworks around Welling Ct and 30th Ave.

Musical Metropolis
This is the city where jazz players such as Ornette Coleman, Miles Davis
and John Coltrane pushed the limits of improvisation in the 1950s. It’s
where various Latin sounds – from cha-cha-cha to rumba to mambo – came
together to form the hybrid we now call salsa, where folk singers such as
Bob Dylan and Joan Baez crooned protest songs in coffeehouses, and where
bands such as the New York Dolls and the Ramones tore up the stage in
Manhattan’s gritty downtown. It was the nerve center of disco. And it was
the cultural crucible where hip-hop was nurtured and grew – and then
exploded.
The city remains a magnet for musicians. The local indie-rock scene is
especially vibrant: groups including the Yeah Yeah Yeahs, LCD
Soundsystem and Animal Collective all emerged in NYC. Williamsburg is
at the heart of the action, packed with clubs and bars, as well as indie record
labels and internet radio stations. The best venues for rock include the
Music Hall of Williamsburg and Manhattan’s Bowery Ballroom.

And All That Jazz
Jazz remains a juggernaut – from the traditional to the experimental. The
best bets for jazz are the Village Vanguard in the West Village and the Jazz
Standard ( MAP ; % 212-576-2232; www.jazzstandard.com; 116 E 27th St,
btwn Lexington & Park Aves; cover $25-40; h shows 7:30pm & 9:30pm; b 6
to 28th St) near Madison Square Park. For more highbrow programming,
there’s Midtown’s Jazz at Lincoln Center, which is run by trumpeter
Wynton Marsalis and features a wide array of solo outings by important
musicians, as well as tribute concerts to figures such as Dizzy Gillespie and
Thelonious Monk.

World-Changing Women
You know Pollock, de Kooning and Rothko – but what about the women
who shaped 20th-century abstract painting? In Ninth Street Women (2018),
Mary Gabriel reveals how five female artists, including Lee Krasner and
Grace Hartigan, worked their way to the top of the NYC art world.

Classical & Opera
The classics are alive and well at Lincoln Center. Here, the Metropolitan
Opera delivers a wide array of celebrated operas, from Verdi’s Aida to
Mozart’s Don Giovanni. The New York Philharmonic (the symphony that
was once directed by one of the 20th century’s great maestros, Leonard
Bernstein) is also based here out of the newly refurbished David Geffen
Hall. Carnegie Hall, the Merkin Concert Hall ( MAP ; % 212-501-3330;
www.kaufman-center.org/mch; 129 W 67th St, btwn Amsterdam Ave &
Broadway; h box office noon-7pm Sun-Thu, to 4:30pm Fri, 1hr before
performances Sat; b 1 to 66th St-Lincoln Center) and the Frick Collection

also offer wonderful – and more intimate – spaces to enjoy great classical
music.
For more avant-garde fare, try the Center for Contemporary Opera
(http://centerforcontemporaryopera.org) and the Brooklyn Academy of
Music – the latter is one of the city’s vital opera and classical-music hubs.
Other excellent venues, featuring highly experimental work, are St Ann’s
Warehouse and National Sawdust, both in Brooklyn. If you like your
performances outré, keep an eye on their calendars.

On Broadway & Beyond
In the early 20th century, clusters of theaters settled into the area around
Times Square and began producing popular plays and suggestive comedies
– a movement that had its roots in early vaudeville. By the 1920s, these
messy works had evolved into on-stage spectacles like Show Boat, an allout Oscar Hammerstein production about the lives of performers on a
Mississippi steamboat. In 1943, Broadway had its first runaway hit –
Oklahoma! – that remained on stage for a record 2212 performances.
Today, Broadway musicals are shown in one of 41 official Broadway
theaters, lavish early-20th-century jewels that surround Times Square, and
are a major component of cultural life in New York. If you’re on a budget,
look for off-Broadway productions. These tend to be more intimate,
inexpensive and often just as good.
NYC bursts with theatrical offerings beyond Broadway, from
Shakespeare to David Mamet to rising experimental playwrights including
Young Jean Lee. In addition to Midtown staples such as Playwrights
Horizons and Second Stage Theatre, the Lincoln Center theaters and
smaller companies like Soho Rep are important hubs for works by modern
and contemporary playwrights.
Across the East River, Brooklyn Academy of Music and St Ann’s
Warehouse offer edgy programming. Numerous festivals, such as BAM’s
epic Next Wave Festival and the biennial Performa (www.performa-arts.org;
h Nov), offer brilliant opportunities to catch new work.
Brooklyn has a hopping indie-music scene, with local bands performing regularly in Williamsburg
and Bushwick. To hear the latest sounds, log on to www.newtownradio.com.

Bust a Move: Dance in NYC
For nearly 100 years, New York City has been at the center of American
dance. It is here that the American Ballet Theatre (ABT) – founded by
Lucia Chase and Richard Pleasant – was founded in 1939. The company
promoted the idea of cultivating American talent, hiring native-born dancers
and putting on works by choreographers such as Jerome Robbins, Twyla
Tharp and Alvin Ailey. The company continues to perform in New York and
around the world.
But NYC is perhaps best known for nurturing a generation of moderndance choreographers – figures such as Martha Graham, who challenged
traditional notions of dance with boxy, industrial movements on bare,
almost abstract sets. The boundaries were pushed ever further by Merce
Cunningham, who disassociated dance from music. Today, companies such
as STREB (http://streb.org) are still pushing dance to its limits.
Lincoln Center and Brooklyn Academy of Music host regular
performances, while up-and-coming acts feature at spaces including
Chelsea’s Kitchen, Joyce Theater and New York Live Arts, as well as
Midtown’s Baryshnikov Arts Center (http://bacnyc.org).

For comprehensive theater listings, news and reviews (both glowing and scathing), visit
www.nytimes.com/section/theater. You’ll also find listings, synopses and industry news at
www.playbill.com.

New York in Letters
The city that is home to the country’s biggest publishing houses has also
been home to some of its best-known writers. In the 19th century, Herman
Melville (Moby Dick), Edith Wharton (The House of Mirth) and Walt
Whitman (Leaves of Grass) all congregated here. But literary life became
even more exciting in the early part of the 20th century. There were the
liquor-fueled literary salons of poet-communist John Reed in the 1910s, the
acerbic wisecracks of the Algonquin Round Table in the 1920s and the
thinly veiled novels of Dawn Powell in the ’40s, whose work often
critiqued New York’s media establishment.
The 1950s and ’60s saw the rise of writers who began to question the
status quo. Poet Langston Hughes examined the condition of African
Americans in Harlem and Beat poets such as Allen Ginsberg rejected
traditional rhyme in favor of free-flowing musings. The last few decades of
the 20th century offered a wide gamut to choose from, including Jay
McInerney, chronicler of the greed and coke-fueled ’80s, to new voices
from under-represented corners of the city such as Puerto Rican-Cuban
writer Piri Thomas and Audre Lorde, a ground-breaking feminist poet and
civil rights activist.
NYC scribes continue to cover a vast array of realities in their work,
from the immigrant experience (Imbolo Mbue) and the Manhattan music
business (Jennifer Egan), to the crazy impossibility that is New York in
Michael Chabon’s Pulitzer-winning The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &
Clay. Among the latest crop of Gotham-based talent is award-winning Ben
Lerner, whose metafiction novel 10:04 is as much about the city’s visceral
intensity as it is about its neurotic protagonist with a heart condition.
Both Brooklyn Academy of Music and the New York Public Library host
widely attended lectures and readings. Neighborhood book stores often
have packed calendars of events, too.
