East Village & Lower East Side
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping

East Village & Lower East Side
Neighborhood Top Five

1 New Museum of Contemporary Art Admiring the off-white webbing of

the boxy facade of this museum, then wandering in to appreciate mindbending iterations of art across myriad media.
2 Lower East Side Tenement Museum Witnessing the shockingly cramped

conditions of 19th-century immigrants at this brilliantly curated museum.
3 St Marks Place Passing knickknack shops and sake bars on St Marks

Place, then exploring neighboring streets for a quieter round of nibbling and
boutique-ing.

4 Alphabet City Hitting up pubs and cocktail lounges, stopping for a bite to

eat or to peek into a lush community garden.
5 Essex Market Sampling an array of international cuisines at this spacious

new food hall and market.

Explore East Village & Lower East Side
If you’ve been dreaming of those quintessential New York City moments –
graffiti on crimson brick; skyscrapers rising overhead; punks, grannies and
financial-industry types walking side by side; cute cafes with rickety tables
spilling out onto the sidewalks – then the East Village is your Holy Grail.
Stick to the area around Tompkins Square Park, and the lettered avenues
(known as Alphabet City) to its east, for interesting little nooks in which to
eat and drink – as well as a collection of great community gardens that
provide leafy respite and the occasional live performance. The streets below
Houston St and east of the Bowery are packed with cool boutiques and
inventive restaurants, with the odd divey, grungy punk bar still surviving
amid the trendy speakeasies. During the day, the vibe is relaxed, whereas at
night, when the drinks are flowing, the hormones are pulsing and the
crowds descend, it’s a very different place. It’s a mixed bag, indeed, and
perhaps one of the most emblematic of today’s city.

Local Life
One block over Famed St Marks Place draws swarms of people shopping
and carousing – though it can be a bit of a circus. Hop a block over in either
direction for some great retail and restaurant finds with half the crowds.
A

Global taste tour The East Village and the Lower East Side are like no
other place in the city when it comes to sampling the finest spread of ethnic
cuisine. Many of the area’s restaurants don’t take reservations, so have a
A

wander and grab an open table to feast your way through Italy, India,
Indonesia or anywhere in-between.

Getting There & Away
A Subway

In the East Village the L train runs along 14th St, stopping at First

and Third Aves, while the F train at Second Ave at Houston St provides
access to the southern stretch. The 6 to Astor Pl lets you off on the western
side of the neighborhood. In the Lower East Side the B/D to Grand St and
F, J/M/Z to Delancey-Essex Sts will get you where you need to go.
For the eastern stretches of either neighborhood, the M14, M21 and
B39 buses that run down 14th, Houston and Delancey Sts, respectively, will
be your friend (although make sure to jump off the B39 before it runs into
Brooklyn).
A Bus

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
A lot of the restaurants in this neck of the woods don’t take reservations, so stop by the
restaurant of your choosing in the early afternoon (2pm should do the trick) and place your
name on the roster for the evening meal – chances are high that they’ll take your name and
you’ll get seated right away when you return for dinner later on.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Veselka
A Momofuku Noodle Bar
A Essex Market
A Hearth
A Mamoun’s

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Rue B
A Angel’s Share
A Immigrant
A Pouring Ribbons
A Ten Bells

For reviews, see here
7 Best Places to Shop
A Obscura Antiques
A A-1 Records
A Verameat
A Tokio 7 here
A Pickle Guys

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE
LOWER EAST SIDE TENEMENT MUSEUM
Spread across two 19th-century tenements in the gentrifying Lower
East Side, this wonderful, immersive museum gives some sense of what
life was like in the poorest parts of the world’s greatest city in the 19th
and early 20th centuries. For access, you must take one of numerous
tours that illuminate particular aspects of the period, the people and
the places.

DON’T MISS
A Themed neighborhood walks
A The ‘Hard Times’ tour
A A prix-fixe meal called Tastings at the Tenement (6:30pm Thursday)
A The free 30-minute film shown in the visitor center

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , C4
A % 877-975-3786
A www.tenement.org
A 103 Orchard St, btwn Broome & Delancey Sts, Lower East Side
A tours adult/student 6-17yr & senior $29/24
A h visitor center 10am-6:30pm Fri-Wed, to 8:30pm Thu
A b B/D to Grand St, F, J/M/Z to Delancey-Essex Sts

103 Orchard St
The visitor center at 103 Orchard St (originally three tenements, built 1888)
has an excellent museum shop and a small screening room that plays an
original film about the history and influence of immigrants on the Lower
East Side. Several evenings a month the museum hosts talks here, often
relating to the present immigrant experience in America.

Inside the Tenement
A wide range of tenement tours lead visitors into the building where
hundreds of immigrants lived and worked over the years. ‘Hard Times,’ one
of the most popular tours, visits apartments from two periods – the 1870s
and the 1930s. There you’ll see the squalid conditions tenants faced – in the

early days there was a wretched communal outhouse and no electricity or
running water – and what life was like for the families who lived there.
Recorded testimony from a surviving member of the Baldizzi family, who
lived here during the Depression, makes it easier to relate to what you see.
Other tours focus on Irish immigrants and the harsh discrimination they
faced, sweatshop workers and ‘shop life’ (with a tour through a recreated
1870s German beer hall).

Meet Victoria
Travel back to 1916 and meet Victoria Confino, a 14-year-old girl from a
Greek Sephardic family. Played by a costumed interpreter, Victoria ‘lives’ at
97 Orchard St, interacting with visitors and answering questions about what
her life was like in those days. It’s especially recommended for kids, as
visitors are free to handle household objects. This one-hour tour is held on
Saturday and Sunday year-round, daily during the summer.

Neighborhood Tours
A great way to understand the immigrant experience is on a walking tour
around the neighborhood. These tours, ranging from 90 minutes to two
hours, explore a variety of topics. ‘Foods of the Lower East Side’ looks at
the ways traditional foods have shaped American cuisine; ‘Outside the
Home’ and ‘Building on the Lower East Side’ look at life beyond the
apartment – where immigrants stored (and lost) their life savings, the
churches and synagogues so integral to community life, and the meeting
halls where poorly paid workers gathered to fight for better conditions.

TOP EXPERIENCE

NEW MUSEUM OF CONTEMPORARY
ART
The New Museum of Contemporary Art’s Lower East Side avatar,
designed by renowned Japanese architecture firm SANAA, is proof
that it’s not just what’s inside a museum that makes it noteworthy. The
street view of the museum alone manages to punctuate the
neighborhood with something unique, and its cache of artistic work will
dazzle just as much as its facade.

DON’T MISS
A The facade from across the street
A New Museum Cafe
A New Museum Store

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , A3
A % 212-219-1222
A www.newmuseum.org
A 235 Bowery, btwn Stanton & Rivington Sts, Lower East Side
A adult/child $18/free, 7-9pm Thu by donation
A h 11am-6pm Tue, Wed & Fri-Sun, to 9pm Thu
A b F to 2nd Ave, R/W to Prince St, J/Z to Bowery, 6 to Spring St

SANAA’s Vision
While exhibits rotate through the museum, regularly changing the character
of the space within, the shell – an inspired architectural gesture – remains a
constant, acting as a unique structural element in the diverse cityscape,
while simultaneously fading into the background and allowing the exhibits
to shine.
The building’s structure is the brainchild of hot Japanese firm SANAA –
a partnership between two great minds, Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue
Nishizawa. In 2010 SANAA won the coveted Pritzker Prize (think the
Oscars of architecture) for its contributions to the world of design. Its
trademark vanishing facades are known worldwide for abiding by a strict
adherence to a form-follows-function design aesthetic, sometimes taking
the land plot’s footprint into the overall shape of the structure. The boxatop-box scheme provides a striking counterpoint to the clusters of crimson

brick and iron fire escapes outside, while alluding to the geometric
exhibition chasms within.

In Orbit
It’s now been several years since the New Museum has taken hold,
inspiring nearby structures to adopt similarly ethereal designs. Perhaps most
interestingly, the museum has become somewhat of a magnetic force
attracting a clutch of small workshops and creative spaces to its orbit.

PAY-WHAT-YOU-WISH THURSDAYS
To save cash, stop by on Thursday evening between 7pm and 9pm, when admission is
‘pay what you wish.’ Depending on the show, the crowds can be sizable. We recommend
lining up by 6:45pm.
TAKE A BREAK
If nothing in the museum cafe tickles your fancy, Freemans is down the block and around
the corner for lunch or an afternoon cocktail.

Round K ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.roundk.com; 99 Allen St, btwn Delancey &
Broome Sts, Lower East Side; h 8am-10pm Mon-Wed, to midnight Thu & Fri, 9ammidnight Sat, to 10pm Sun; b B/D to Grand St, F, J/M/Z to Delancey-Essex Sts) on Allen
St makes a mean latte if you need a caffeine pick-me-up.

A Museum with a Mission
Founded in 1977 by Marcia Tucker and housed in five different locations
over the years, the museum’s mission statement is simple: ‘New art, new
ideas.’ The institution gave gallery space to artists Keith Haring, Jeff
Koons, Joan Jonas, Mary Kelly and Andres Serrano at the beginning of
their careers, and continues to show contemporary heavy-hitters. The city’s
sole museum dedicated to contemporary art has brought a steady menu of
edgy works in new forms, such as seemingly random, discarded materials
fused together and displayed in the middle of a vast room.

The museum also houses the New Museum Cafe, a great spot for
sampling the gourmet goodies of NYC purveyors, including baked goods
by Cafe Grumpy, teas by McNulty, coffee by Intelligentsia and sandwiches
by Duck’s Eatery.

In Orbit
If you aren’t so keen on the current exhibits, it’s still worth stopping by the
museum’s store to peruse some of the excellent coffee-table books –
sometimes the take-homes include savvy collaborations with showcased
artists. The shop has the same hours of operation as the museum.

First Saturdays for Families
On the first Saturday of the month, the New Museum hosts special events
for budding artists, with hands-on crafts and activities for kids aged four to
15. Free museum admission is included for two adults (it’s always free for
kids).

TOP EXPERIENCE

ST MARKS PLACE
In New York every street tells a story, from the action unfurling before
your eyes to the dense history hidden behind colorful facades. St Marks
Place is one of the best strips of pavement for storytelling, as almost
every building lining these blocks is rife with tales from a time when
the East Village embodied a far more lawless spirit.

DON’T MISS
A Spying out the Mosaic Trail
A Tasty brunch at a cafe
A Tompkins Square Park
A Sake bombs at one of the basement Japanese bars
A Shopping for knickknacks and odd souvenirs

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , C2
A St Marks Pl, Ave A to Third Ave, East Village
A b 6 to Astor Pl, L to 3rd Ave or 1st Ave, F to 2nd Ave

Third Ave to Ave A
Easily one of NYC’s most famous streets, St Marks Place is also one of the
city’s smallest, occupying only three blocks between Astor Place and
Tompkins Square Park. The road, however, is jam-packed with historical
tidbits that would delight any trivia buff. The bar at 2 St Marks Place was
once the famous Five-Spot, where jazz fiend Thelonious Monk got his start
in the 1950s. Alexander Hamilton’s widow Eliza lived in 4 St Marks Place
in the 1830s; author James Fenimore Cooper (Last of the Mohicans) lived
next door in number 6; and Yoko Ono’s Fluxus artists descended upon the
building in the 1960s. The buildings at 96 and 98 St Marks Place are
immortalized on the cover of Led Zepellin’s Physical Graffiti album.
Though it closed in the 1990s, 122 St Marks Place was the location of a
popular cafe called Sin-é, where Jeff Buckley and David Gray often
performed.

The Mosaic Trail

As you walk, keep an eye out for the tile-encrusted street poles of the Mosaic
Trail ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.mosaicmannyc.com; St Marks Pl, btwn Astor Pl & Ave A,
East Village; b 6 to Astor Pl). In the mid-1980s, a local Vietnam vet named Jim

Power began decorating lampposts with bits of tile, mirror, ceramics, beads
and coins as a way to deal with his PTSD and imbue the streets with
colorful (and often political) art. Many of them portray local East Village
landmarks or figures, such as ‘CBGB,’ ‘Patti Smith’ and ‘PDT (Please
Don’t Tell)’.

Astor Place
To the west of St Marks Place is Astor Place, a crowded crisscrossing of
streets anchored by a curious square sculpture that’s affectionately (and
appropriately) known to locals as ‘The Cube.’ A favorite meeting spot for
neighborhood dwellers, this work of art – actually named Alamo – weighs
over 1800lb and is made entirely of COR-TEN steel.
Originally Astor Place was the home of the Astor Opera House (now
gone), which attracted the city’s wealthy elite for regular performances in
the mid-1800s. The square was also the site of the notorious Astor Place
riots, a class struggle pitting immigrants against nativists that broke out
between supporters of two rival Shakespearean actors, Edwin Forrest and
William Macready. Police fired shots into the crowd, resulting in over two
dozen deaths and more than 120 people injured.
Today the square is largely known as the former home of the Village
Voice and the Cooper Union ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Foundation Building, Great Hall;
www.cooper.edu; 7 E 7th St, btwn Third & Fourth Aves, East Village; b 6 to Astor Pl, N/R to 8th StNYU) design-and-engineering institute.

TAKE A BREAK
In addition to all of its quirky and historical landmarks, St Marks has some wonderful
places to stop for a bite. Weekend brunches in the East Village are a great bet, as the local
restaurants are typically less expensive (and less scene-y) than the hot spots in nearby
‘hoods. Try Cafe Mogador, which fuses American favorites with an assortment of Middle
Eastern plates.

Mamoun’s falafel is a St Marks favorite and recently expanded to include ample seating.

If you’ve had enough of the busy streets, head up to 9th and have a beer or glass of wine
at Immigrant.
PUNK ROCK SHOPS
The East Village was once the home base for emerging punk-rock acts – many would
frequent the clothing shops along St Marks. Although most joints have gone the way of
the dodo in favor of more tourist-friendly wares, there are still a few spots that remain.
Mainstay Trash & Vaudeville is still around, though it had to move from St Marks Pl to a
few blocks over due to rising rents.

Tompkins Square Park
St Marks Place terminates at a welcome clearing of green deep in the heart
of the East Village. The 10.5-acre Tompkins Square Park honors Daniel
Tompkins, who served as governor of New York from 1807 to 1817 (and as
the nation’s vice president after that, under James Monroe). Today the
popular park is beloved by dog-walking locals, but it wasn’t always a place
for such clean fun. In the 1980s it was a dirty, needle-strewn, homeless
encampment, unusable for folks wanting a place to stroll or picnic. A
contentious turning point came when police razed the band shell and
evicted more than 100 squatters living in a tent city in the park in 1988 (and
again in 1991). That first eviction turned violent; the Tompkins Square Riot,
as it came to be known, ushered in the first wave of yuppies in the dog run,
fashionistas lolling on the grass and undercover narcotics agents trying to
pass as druggie punk kids. These days there’s not much drama, outside of

the occasional music and arts festival that attempts to briefly reclaim the
park’s bohemian glory days – such as the Charlie Parker Jazz Festival held here
every August.

SIGHTS

You’ll find a handful of key attractions in these twin neighborhoods,
though many visitors come simply to explore the tree-lined blocks,
particularly around Tompkins Square Park in the East Village. The
Lower East Side has the lion’s share of attractions, including the
Tenement Museum, a great place to delve into NYC history. On nearby
blocks, you’ll find a high concentration of art galleries (particularly
along Orchard St), as well as the cutting-edge New Museum of
Contemporary Art. Other draws include a lavishly restored synagogue,
a buzzing food market and the waterfront greenery of the East River
Park.

East Village

ST MARKS PLACE
( MAP

STREET

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
TOMPKINS SQUARE PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nycgovparks.org; btwn E 7th & E 10th Sts & Aves A & B, East
Village; h 6am-midnight; c ; b 6 to Astor Pl)

This 10.5-acre park dating from 1879 is like a friendly town square for
locals, who gather for chess at concrete tables, picnics on the lawn, and
spontaneous guitar or drum jams on various grassy knolls. It’s also the site
of basketball courts, a fun-to-watch dog run (a fenced-in area where
humans can unleash their canines), a mini–public swimming pool for kids,
frequent summer concerts and an always-lively playground.

ASTOR PLACE

SQUARE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 8th St, btwn Third & Fourth Aves, East Village; b N/R to 8th St-NYU, 6
to Astor Pl)

Even with the Alamo, an iconic piece of public art more often referred to as
‘The Cube,’ restored after several years absence, this is not the Astor Place
of old. No longer grungy, filled with gutter punks and squatters, this new
iteration is also no longer a plaza. It’s an orderly block that is situated
between Broadway and Lafayette surrounded by sleek, glittery buildings
and outfitted with well-designed benches and granite blocks good for
people-watching.

Lower East Side

LOWER EAST SIDE TENEMENT MUSEUM
( MAP

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.

MUSEUM

NEW MUSEUM OF CONTEMPORARY ART
( MAP

MUSEUM

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
MUSEUM AT ELDRIDGE STREET SYNAGOGUE

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-219-0302; www.eldridgestreet.org; 12 Eldridge St, btwn Canal &
Division Sts, Lower East Side; adult/child $14/8, Mon pay what you wish; h 10am-5pm Sun-Thu, to
3pm Fri; b F to East Broadway, B/D to Grand St)

This landmark house of worship, built in 1887, was a center of Jewish life
before suffering a decline in the congregation in the late 1920s. After
WWII, the main sanctuary was closed off and services relocated to the
basement. The badly deteriorated synagogue was restored following a 20year-long, $20-million restoration that was completed in 2007, and it now
shines with its original splendor – it’s a real stunner. Admission includes a
guided tour, which departs hourly (last one is 4pm).
In addition to the restored portion of the synagogue, there’s a hall of
exhibits and artifacts about the history of Jewish life on the Lower East
Side, as well as special events and seminars. Note that the museum is closed
on all major Jewish and national holidays.

ANASTASIA PHOTO

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-677-9725; www.anastasia-photo.com; 143 Ludlow St, btwn
Stanton & Rivington Sts, Lower East Side; h 10am-6pm Tue-Sat; b F, J/M/Z to Delancey-Essex Sts)

This small gallery specializes in documentary photography and
photojournalism. Expect evocative, thought-provoking works covering
subjects such as poverty in rural America, the ravages of war and
disappearing cultures in Africa. Works are beautifully shot, and the staff
member on hand can give a meaningful context to the images.
EAST RIVER PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nycgovparks.org/parks/east-river-park; FDR Dr & E Houston St,
Lower East Side; h sunrise-1am; b F to Delancey-Essex Sts)

In addition to the great ballparks, running and biking paths, 5000-seat
amphitheater that hosts concerts, and expansive patches of green, this park
has cool, natural breezes and fine views of the Williamsburg, Manhattan
and Brooklyn Bridges.

ALPHABET CITY’S COMMUNITY GARDENS
After a stretch of arboreal abstinence in New York City, the community gardens of Alphabet
City are breathtaking. A network of gardens was carved out of abandoned lots to provide the
low-income and mainly Hispanic neighborhood (nicknamed ‘Loisada,’ for the local
pronunciation of ‘Lower East Side’) with communal backyards. Trees and flowers were
planted, sandboxes were built, found-art sculptures erected and domino games played – all
within green spaces wedged between buildings or even claiming entire blocks. And while
some were destroyed – in the face of much protest – to make way for the projects of
developers, plenty of green spots have held their ground. You can visit most on weekends from
April through October, when the gardens tend to be open to the public; many gardeners are
activists within the community and are a good source of information about local politics.
Le Petit Versailles ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-529-8815;
www.alliedproductions.org; 346 E Houston St, at Ave C, East Village; h 2-7pm Wed-Sun AprOct; b F, J/M/Z to Delancey-Essex Sts) is a unique marriage of a verdant oasis and an
electrifying arts organization, offering a range of quirky performances and screenings to the
public. The 6th & B Garden ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.6bgarden.org; E 6th St & Ave
B, East Village; h 1-6pm Sat & Sun Apr-Oct; b 6 to Astor Pl; L to 1st Ave) is a well-organized
space that hosts free music events, workshops and yoga sessions; check the website for details.
Three dramatic weeping willows and a koi pond grace the twin plots of La Plaza Cultural (
MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.laplazacultural.com; 674 E 9th St, at Ave C, East Village;
h 10am-7pm Sat & Sun Apr-Oct; b F to 2nd Ave; L to 1st Ave). Also check out the All People’s

Garden ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.grownyc.org; 293 E 3rd St, btwn Aves C & D, East
Village; h hours vary Apr-Oct; b F to 2nd Ave) and Brisas del Caribe ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; www.lungsnyc.org; 237 E 3rd St, btwn Aves B & C, East Village; h 9am3pm Tue-Thu Apr-Oct; b F to 2nd Ave) – and feel free to pop into any open gardens you find
while you’re walking around the ‘hood.
A map of all the area’s gardens can be found on the website for Loisada United
Neighborhood Gardens (www.lungsnyc.org).
