Lower Manhattan & Financial District
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping
Sports & Activities

Lower Manhattan & Financial District
FINANCIAL DISTRICT | NEW YORK HARBOR | BATTERY PARK CITY | EAST RIVER
WATERFRONT | CITY HALL & CIVIC CENTER

Neighborhood Top Five

1 Statue of Liberty Climbing up America’s most famous statue, peering out

from her crown and seeing the world’s greatest city spread out before you.
2 National September 11 Memorial & Museum Reflecting on loss, hope

and resilience at New York City’s beautifully transformed Ground Zero.
3 One World Trade Center Zipping up to the top of the Western

Hemisphere’s tallest building for a knockout panorama of Manhattan and
beyond at One World Observatory.

4 Staten Island Ferry Taking in skyscrapers while crossing the harbor on

one of New York City’s floating (and free) icons.
5 Ellis Island Exploring American immigration at the country’s most

historically significant point of entry.

Explore Financial District & Lower Manhattan
A little planning will save you a lot of time here. Book tickets online to the
unmissable Ellis Island and Statue of Liberty (if you can, catch an early
ferry and avoid weekends, especially in summer). Budget four or five hours
to explore them properly, and you’ll want to bring lunch (the food on-site is
awful). Online ticket purchasing is also highly recommended for both the
National September 11 Memorial Museum and the neighboring One World
Observatory.
Several museums around the southern tip of Manhattan, including the
Skyscraper Museum, Museum of Jewish Heritage and National Museum of
the American Indian, can easily fill a half a day. To experience the Financial
District’s intensity, go during business hours. But to calmly contemplate the
area’s Federal homes and early-modern skyscrapers, go after hours or on
weekends.
In fine weather, soak up some rays and river views on Pier 17 at South
Street Seaport, or walk across the Brooklyn Bridge for jaw-dropping views
of Lower Manhattan. For an evening buzz, head to Tribeca’s renowned
eateries and drinking dens.

Local Life
Coffee Ditch the corporate chains for in-the-know Bluestone Lane and La
Colombe.
A

A

Wine Swill free vino on Saturday afternoons at Pasanella & Son.

Shopping Browse the aisles at Pearl River Mart for fun gifts with an Asian
flair.
A

Escape Cycle, relax and eye-up art on the summer oasis that is Governors
Island.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway The A/C, J/Z, 2/3 and 4/5 all meet at the Lower Manhattan hub of
Fulton St. The 1 terminates at South Ferry, from where the Staten Island
Ferry departs.
A

Boat The Staten Island Ferry Terminal is at the southern end of Whitehall
St. Ferries to Governors Island leave from the adjacent Battery Maritime
Building. Statue Cruises runs to Liberty and Ellis Islands from Battery Park.
On summer weekends and holidays, New York Beach Ferry
(www.newyorkbeachferry.com) runs from Pier 11 to Jacob Riis Beach Park in the
Rockaways.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
Looking for discounted tickets to Broadway shows? Skip the long lines at the TKTS Booth in
Times Square for the much quieter TKTS Booth (www.tdf.org; cnr Front & John Sts; h 11am6pm Mon-Sat, to 4pm Sun; b A/C, 2/3, 4/5, J/Z to Fulton St; R/W to Cortlandt St) at South
Street Seaport. Queues usually move a little faster and you can also purchase tickets for nextday matinees (something you can’t do at Times Square). The TKTS smartphone app offers
real-time listings of what’s on sale.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Locanda Verde
A Bâtard
A Maman
A Le District
A Two Hands

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Dead Rabbit
A Brandy Library
A Weather Up
A Smith & Mills
A Bluestone Lane

For reviews, see here
7 Best Places to Shop
A Philip Williams Posters
A Pearl River Mart
A Century 21
A Bowne & Co Stationers
A Pasanella & Son

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE

STATUE OF LIBERTY
Lady Liberty has been gazing sternly toward ‘unenlightened Europe’
since 1886. Dubbed the ‘Mother of Exiles,’ she’s often interpreted as a
symbolic admonishment to an unjust old world. Emma Lazarus’ 1883
poem ‘The New Colossus’ articulates this challenge: ‘Give me your
tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, the
wretched refuse of your teeming shore.’

DID YOU KNOW?
The Statue of Liberty weighs 225 tons, and stretches 305ft and 1in from ground to torch tip (or
about as tall as a 22-story building).

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , C8
A % 212-363-3200, tickets 877-523-9849
A www.nps.gov/stli
A Liberty Island
A adult/child incl Ellis Island $18.50/9, incl crown $21.50/12
A h 8:30am-6pm, hours vary by season
A f to Liberty Island, b 1 to South Ferry, 4/5 to Bowling Green, then ferry

From the Suez to the City
It comes as a surprise to many that France’s jumbo-size gift to America was
not originally conceived with the US in mind. Indeed, when sculptor
Frédéric-Auguste Bartholdi began planning the piece, his vision was for a
colossal sculpture to guard the entrance to the Suez Canal in Egypt, one of
France’s greatest 19th-century engineering achievements. Bartholdi’s ode to
Gallic ingenuity would incorporate elements of two of the Seven Wonders
of the Ancient World: the Colossus of Rhodes and the lighthouse of
Alexandria. Despite its appeal to human vanity, the ambitious monument
failed to attract serious funding from either France or Egypt, and
Bartholdi’s dream seemed destined for the scrap heap. Salvation came from
Bartholdi’s friend Édouard de Laboulaye. A French jurist, writer and
antislavery activist, de Laboulaye proposed a gift to America as a symbol of
the triumph of republicanism and of the democratic values that underpinned
both France and the US. Seeing an opportunity too good to miss, Bartholdi
quickly set to work, tweaking his vision and turning his Suez concept into

‘Liberty Enlightening the World’ – an immortal gift to commemorate
America’s centennial of the Declaration of Independence.

Creating the Lady
Bartholdi spent almost 20 years turning his dream – to create the hollow
copper colossus and mount it in New York Harbor – into reality. Along the
way the project was hindered by serious financial problems but helped in
part by the fund-raising efforts of newspaper publisher Joseph Pulitzer.
Lending a further hand was poet Emma Lazarus, whose ode to Lady Liberty
was part of a fund-raising campaign for the statue’s pedestal, designed by
American architect Richard Morris Hunt. Bartholdi’s work on the statue
was also delayed by structural challenges – a problem resolved by the
metal-framework mastery of railway engineer Gustave Eiffel (yes, of the
famous tower). The work of art was finally completed in France in 1884, a
bit behind schedule for the centennial. It was shipped to NYC as 350 pieces
packed into 214 crates, reassembled over a span of four months and placed
on the US-made granite pedestal. Its spectacular October 1886 dedication
included New York’s first ticker-tape parade and a flotilla of almost 300
vessels. The Lady was placed under the administration of the National Park
Service in 1933; a restoration of her oxidized copper began in 1984, the
same year she made it onto the UN’s list of World Heritage Sites.

TOP TIPS
To see both the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island, get a ferry before the 2pm sailing.

Security at the ferry terminal is tight – don’t take anything you wouldn’t take on a plane,
and allow for 90-minute waits in high season.

Don’t believe any street sellers who tell you otherwise – official tickets are sold only
through Statue Cruises ( MAP ; % 877-523-9849; www.statuecruises.com; Battery Park,
Lower Manhattan; adult/child from $18.50/9; h departures 8:30am-5pm, shorter hours
winter). Buying tickets in advance online is strongly recommended.

The 162-step slog up tight, narrow steps to the crown is arduous and should not be
undertaken by anyone with health conditions that might impair their ability to complete
the climb.
TAKE A BREAK
For a picnic lunch – Gourmet Garage (% 212-571-5850; www.gourmetgarage.com; 366
Broadway, at Franklin St; h 7am-9pm; v ; b N/Q/R/W, 6 to Canal St) is a great option for
fresh food to go.

Liberty Today
Folks who reserve their tickets in advance are able to climb the (steep) 162
steps from the top of the pedestal level to Lady Liberty’s crown, from
where the city and harbor views are breathtaking. Be advised: crown access
is extremely limited, and the only way in is to reserve your spot in advance;
the further ahead you can do it, the better (a six-month lead time is
allowed). Each customer can reserve a maximum of four crown tickets, and
children must be at least 4ft tall to be admitted.
If you miss out on crown tickets, you may have better luck with tickets to
the pedestal, which also offers commanding views. Like crown tickets,
pedestal tickets are limited and should be reserved in advance, either online

or by phone. Only crown- and pedestal-ticket holders have access to the
Statue of Liberty museum in the pedestal.
If you don’t have crown or pedestal tickets, don’t fret. All ferry tickets to
Liberty and Ellis Islands offer basic access to the grounds of Liberty Island,
including guided ranger tours or self-guided audio tours. There’s also a gift
shop and cafeteria open to all. (Tip: bring your own nibbles and enjoy them
by the water with the Manhattan skyline stretched out before you.)

TOP EXPERIENCE

ELLIS ISLAND
The most famous port of entry in the world, and a physical symbol of
the American immigrant story, Ellis Island is now a National
Monument. Operating only from 1892 to 1924, it nonetheless processed
some 12 million new arrivals. An estimated 40% of Americans today
descend from those millions, making this island central to the story of
modern America.
DON’T MISS
A Immigration Museum exhibits
A Great Hall
A American Immigrant Wall of Honor & Fort Gibson ruins

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , B8
A % 212-363-3200, tickets 877-523-9849
A www.nps.gov/elis
A Ellis Island
A ferry incl Liberty Island adult/child $18.50/9
A h 8:30am-6pm, hours vary by season
A f to Ellis Island, b 1 to South Ferry, 4/5 to Bowling Green, then ferry

Restoration

In 1990, following a long and expensive restoration, Ellis Island’s dignified
beaux-arts-style main building was reopened to the public as the Ellis Island
Immigration Museum. Now anybody who rides the ferry to the island can
experience a cleaned-up, modern version of the historic new-arrival
experience, with the museum’s interactive exhibits paying homage to the
hope, jubilation and sometimes bitter disappointment of the millions who
came here in search of a new beginning. Among them were Hungarian Erik
Weisz (Harry Houdini), Italian Rodolfo Guglielmi (Rudolph Valentino),
Frenchwoman Lily Chauchoin (Claudette Colbert) and Brit Archibald
Alexander Leach (Cary Grant).

Immigration Museum Exhibits
The museum’s exhibits are spread over three levels. To get the most out of
your visit, opt for the 50-minute self-guided audio tour (free with ferry
ticket, available from the museum lobby). Featuring narratives from a
number of sources, including historians, architects and the immigrants
themselves, the tour brings to life the museum’s hefty collection of personal
objects, official documents, photographs and film footage. It’s an evocative
experience to witness personal memories – both good and bad – in the very
halls and corridors in which they occurred.
The collection is divided into permanent and temporary exhibitions.
Journeys: The Peopling of America 1550–1890 on the 1st floor is
interesting, but the real focus begins on the 2nd floor, where you’ll find the
two most fascinating exhibitions. Through America’s Gate examines the
step-by-step process faced by the newly arrived (including the chalkmarking of those suspected of illness, a wince-inducing eye examination,
and 29 questions) in the beautiful, vaulted Great Hall, while Peak
Immigration Years: 1880–1924 explores the motives behind the
immigrants’ journeys and the challenges they faced once free to begin their
new American lives. Particularly interesting is the collection of old
photographs, which offers intimate glimpses into the daily lives of these
courageous new Americans.

For a history of the rise, fall and resurrection of the building itself, make
time for the Restoring a Landmark exhibition on the 3rd floor; its
assortment of trashed desks, chairs and other abandoned possessions is
strangely eloquent. Best of all, the audio tour offers optional in-depth
coverage for those who want to delve deeper into the collections and the
island’s history. If you don’t feel like listening to the audio tour, you can
always pick up one of the phones in each display area and hear the
recorded, affecting memories of real Ellis Island immigrants, taped in the
1980s. Another option is the free 45-minute guided tour with a park ranger.
If booked three weeks in advance by phone, the tour is also available in
American Sign Language.

Main Building Architecture
With the Main Building, architects Edward Lippincott Tilton and William A
Boring created a suitably impressive and imposing ‘prologue’ to America.
The duo won the contract after the original wooden building burnt down in
1897. Having attended the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris, it’s not surprising
that they opted for a beaux-arts aesthetic for the project. The building
evokes a grand train station, with majestic triple-arched entrances,
decorative Flemish bond brickwork, and granite cornerstones and
belvederes. Inside, it’s the 338ft-long Registry Room on the 2nd floor that
takes the breath away. Under its beautiful vaulted ceiling, the newly arrived
lined up to have their documents checked (people such as polygamists,
paupers, criminals and anarchists were turned back). The original plaster
ceiling was severely damaged by an explosion of munition barges at nearby
Black Tom Wharf. It was a blessing in disguise – the rebuilt version was
adorned with striking herringbone-patterned tiles by Rafael Guastavino.

HOSPITAL OF ALL NATIONS
At the turn of the 20th century, the hospital on Ellis Island (now defunct) was one of the
world’s largest. Consisting of 22 buildings and dubbed the ‘Hospital of All Nations,’ it
was America’s front line in the fight against ‘imported’ diseases. The institution’s
fascinating history is vividly relayed in writer-producer Lorie Conway’s documentary
and accompanying book Forgotten Ellis Island. A guided ‘Hard Hat Tour’ ($58.50) of the
unrestored hospital can be booked when you reserve your ticket online.
TAKE A BREAK
The menu in the island’s cafe is pretty uninspiring. Your best bet is to grab some
prepared food from the food trucks north of Bowling Green station on your way to the
ferry, or wait until you return to Manhattan and hit up the myriad options at Brookfield
Place.

American Immigrant Wall of Honor & Fort Gibson Ruins
Accessible from the 1st-floor Journeys: The Peopling of America 1550–
1890 exhibit is the outdoor American Immigrant Wall of Honor, inscribed with the
names of more than 700,000 immigrants. Believed to be the world’s longest
wall of names, it’s a fund-raising project, allowing any American to have an
immigrant relative’s name recorded in return for a donation. Construction of
the wall in the 1990s uncovered the remains of the island’s original
structure, Fort Gibson. Built in 1808, the fortification was part of a harbordefense system against the British that also included Castle Clinton in
Battery Park and Castle Williams on Governors Island. During this time,
Ellis Island measured 3.3 acres of sand and slush – between 1892 and 1934
the island expanded dramatically thanks to landfill brought in from the
ballast of ships and construction of the city’s subway system.

An Irish Debut
Ellis Island’s very first immigrant was 17-year-old Anna ‘Annie’ Moore.
After a 12-day journey in steerage from County Cork, Ireland, Annie
arrived on January 1, 1892, accompanied by her brothers Phillip and
Anthony; the three were headed to America to join their parents, who had

migrated to New York City four years earlier. She later married German
immigrant Joseph Augustus Schayer and gave birth to at least 11 children,
only five of whom survived. Annie died on December 6, 1924, and was laid
to rest at Calvary Cemetery, Queens.

TOP EXPERIENCE
NATIONAL SEPTEMBER 11 MEMORIAL & MUSEUM
The National September 11 Memorial and Museum is a dignified
tribute to the victims of the worst terrorist attack to occur on American
soil. Titled Reflecting Absence, the memorial’s two massive reflecting
pools feature the names of the thousands who lost their lives. Beside
them stands the Memorial Museum, a striking, solemn space
documenting that fateful day in 2001.

DON’T MISS
A Reflecting Absence pools
A Memorial Museum
A Santiago Calatrava’s Oculus

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , B5
A www.911memorial.org
A 180 Greenwich St, Lower Manhattan
A admission free
A h 7:30am-9pm
A b E to World Trade Center, 2/3 to Park Pl, R/W to Cortlandt St

Reflecting Pools
Surrounded by a plaza planted with more than 400 white oak trees, the 9/11
Memorial’s reflecting pools occupy the footprints of the ill-fated Twin
Towers. From their rim, a cascade of water pours 30ft down toward a
central void. The flow of the water is richly symbolic, beginning as
thousands of smaller streams, merging into a massive torrent of collective
confusion, and ending with a slow journey toward an abyss. Bronze panels
frame the pools, inscribed with the names of those who died in the attacks
of September 11, 2001, and in the World Trade Center (WTC) car bombing
on February 26, 1993. Designed by Michael Arad and Peter Walker, the
pools are both striking and deeply poignant.

Memorial Museum
The contemplative energy of the monument is further enhanced by the
National September 11 Memorial Museum (% 212-312-8800;

www.911memorial.org/museum; 180 Greenwich St, Lower Manhattan; memorial free, museum
adult/child $26/15, 5-8pm Tue free; h 9am-8pm Sun-Thu, to 9pm Fri & Sat, last entry 2 hours before
close; b E to World Trade Center, 2/3 to Park Pl, R/W to Cortlandt St). Standing between the

reflective pools, the museum’s glass entrance pavilion eerily evokes a
toppled tower. Inside the entrance, an escalator leads down to the museum’s
subterranean main lobby. On the descent, visitors stand in the shadow of
two steel tridents, originally embedded in the bedrock at the base of the North
Tower. Each over 80ft tall and weighing 50 tons, they once provided the
structural support that allowed the towers to soar over 1360ft into the sky.
They remained standing in the subsequent sea of rubble, becoming
immediate symbols of resilience.
The tridents are two of more than 10,300 objects in the museum’s
collection. Among these are the Vesey Street Stairs. Dubbed the Survivors’
Staircase, they allowed hundreds of workers to flee the WTC site on the
morning of 9/11. At the bottom of these stairs is the moving In Memoriam
gallery, its walls lined with the photographs and names of those who
perished. Interactive touch screens and a central reflection room shed light
on the victims’ lives. Their humanity is further fleshed out by the numerous
personal effects on display. Among these is a dust-covered wallet belonging to
Robert Joseph Gschaar, an insurance underwriter who worked on level 92
of the South Tower. The wallet’s contents include a photograph of
Gschaar’s wife, Myrta, and a $2 bill: when he proposed, Gschaar gave her a
$2 bill as a symbol of their second chance at happiness (theirs was a second
marriage for them both); he kept another with him.
Around the corner from the In Memoriam gallery is the NYC Fire
Department’s Engine Company 21. One of the largest artifacts on display, its
burnt-out cab is testament to the inferno faced by those at the scene. The
fire engine stands at the entrance to the museum’s main historical
exhibition. Divided into three sections – Events of the Day, Before 9/11 and
After 9/11 – its collection of videos, audio recordings, images, objects and
testimonies provide a rich, meditative exploration of the tragedy, the events

that preceded it (including the WTC bombing of 1993), and the stories of
grief, resilience and hope that followed.
The historical exhibition spills into the monumental Foundation Hall,
flanked by a massive section of the original slurry wall, built to hold back
the waters of the Hudson River during the towers’ construction. It’s also
home to the last steel column removed during the cleanup, adorned with the
messages and mementos of recovery workers, first responders and loved
ones of the victims.

CALATRAVA’S ARCHITECTURE
The image of a flying dove allegedly inspired Santiago Calatrava’s dramatic white
Oculus above the new WTC Transportation Hub. Made from 36,500 tons of steel, the
arresting structure streams natural light into the $3.9-billion transit center, which serves
250,000 train commuters daily. A whopping 2½ times bigger than Grand Central
Terminal, it also features multiple levels of retail and dining space. Every year on
September 11, the central skylight is opened for 102 minutes, the length of time from the
first attack to the collapse of the second tower.
TAKE A BREAK
Escape the swarm of restaurants serving the lunching Wall St crowd and head to Tribeca
for a variety of in-demand eateries, such as Locanda Verde.

A good alternative for less-expensive dining is Two Hands.

Angel of 9/11
One of the Memorial Museum’s most famous (and curious) artifacts is the
so-called ‘Angel of 9/11,’ the eerie outline of a woman’s anguished face on
a twisted girder believed to originate from the point where American
Airlines Flight 11 slammed into the North Tower. (Experts have a more
prosaic explanation: natural corrosion and sheer coincidence.)

TOP EXPERIENCE

ONE WORLD TRADE CENTER
Filling what was a sore and glaring gap in the Lower Manhattan
skyline, One World Trade Center symbolizes rebirth, determination
and resilience. More than just another supertall skyscraper, it’s a richly
symbolic giant, well aware of the past yet firmly focused on the future.
For lovers of New York, it’s also the city’s highest stop for dizzying,
unforgettable urban views.

DON’T MISS
A A photo from the base looking up
A Sky Pod elevators
A Observatory views

PRACTICALITIES
A One WTC
A MAP , B4
A www.onewtc.com
A cnr West & Vesey Sts, Lower Manhattan
A b E to World Trade Center, 2/3 to Park Pl, A/C, J/Z, 4/5 to Fulton St, R/W to Cortlandt St

The Building
Leaping from the northwestern corner of the World Trade Center site, the
104-floor tower is architect David M Childs’ redesign of Daniel Libeskind’s
original 2002 concept. Not only the loftiest building in America, this
tapered giant is currently the tallest building in the Western Hemisphere –
not to mention the sixth tallest in the world by pinnacle height. The tower
soars skywards with chamfered edges, resulting in a series of isosceles
triangles that, seen from the building’s base, reach to infinity. Crowning the
structure is a 408ft cable-stayed spire. Co-designed by sculptor Kenneth
Snelson, it brings the building’s total height to 1776ft, a symbolic reference
to the year of American independence.
Indeed, symbolism feeds several aspects of the building: the tower’s
footprint is equal to those of the original Twin Towers, while the
observation decks match the heights of those in the old complex. Unlike the
original towers, however, One WTC was built with a whole new level of
safety in mind, its precautionary features including a 200ft-high blast-

resistant base (clad in more than 2000 pieces of glimmering prismatic glass)
and 39.4in-thick concrete walls encasing elevators, stairwells, and
communication and safety systems.
Not only is the building one of the world’s tallest, but it’s also one of the
most sustainable, winning LEED Gold certification for its various
ecofriendly features. Almost half of the construction materials were made
from postindustrial recycled content, and 87% of the construction waste
was kept out of landfills. Rainwater is harvested for cooling machinery and
irrigating greenery. Natural light reaches 90% of office areas, reducing
electrical requirements, and low-consumption electrical and HVAC systems
are programmed to adapt to occupancy levels to maximize efficiency.
One thing not foreseen by the architects and engineers, though, was the
antenna’s noisy disposition: the strong winds that race through its lattice
design produce a haunting, howling sound known to keep some locals up at
night.

FAMOUS RESIDENTS
VIP buildings demand VIP clients, and One World Trade Center delivers. Its most
famous tenant is Condé Nast Publications, which made the move from 4 Times Square in
2014. The company’s portfolio includes high-end magazines like Vogue, Vanity Fair, GQ,
Architectural Digest, Wired and – aptly enough – The New Yorker. As is to be expected,
the company’s headquarters are nothing short of fabulous, complete with dramatic spiral
staircase and a glamorous cafeteria with gourmet bites and a million-dollar view.
TAKE A BREAK
There are dining options on level 101, but, being aimed at tourists, they’re wildly
overpriced. You’re better off holding on to your appetite until you’re down, then walking
a block west to Brookfield Place and grabbing a bite at Hudson Eats or Le District.

One World Observatory
Not one to downplay its assets, the skyscraper is home to One World
Observatory (% 212-602-4000; www.oneworldobservatory.com; adult/child/under-5s

$35/29/free; h 9am-9pm Sep-Apr, from 8am May-Aug), the city’s loftiest observation

deck. While the observatory spans levels 100 to 102, the experience begins
at the ground-floor Global Welcome Center, where an electronic world map
highlights the many homelands of the building’s visitors (with data relayed
from ticket scans). The bitter bickering that plagued much of the project’s
development is all but forgotten in the adjoining Voices exhibition, where
architects and construction workers wax lyrical about the tower’s formation
on 144 video screens.
After a quick rundown of the site’s geology, the real thrills begin as you
step inside one of five Sky Pod elevators, among the fastest in the world. As the
elevators begin their 1250ft skyward journey, LED wall panels kick into
action. Suddenly you’re in a veritable time machine, watching Manhattan’s
evolution from forested island to teeming concrete jungle. Forty-seven
seconds (and 500 years) later, you’re on level 102, where another short
presentation ends with a spectacular reveal.
Skip the overpriced eateries on level 101 and continue down to the real
highlight: level 100. Waiting for you is an epic 360-degree panorama guaranteed
to keep you busy searching for landmarks, from the Brooklyn and
Manhattan Bridges to Lady Liberty and the Woolworth, Empire State and
Chrysler Buildings. If you need a hand, interactive mobile tablets
programmed in eight languages are available for hire (included with the
combo ticket for $10 more). As expected, the view is extraordinary – try to
go on a clear day – taking in all five boroughs and three adjoining states.
For a close-up view of the Midtown skyscrapers, however, you’re better off
scaling the Empire State Building or the Rockefeller Center’s Top of the
Rock.

SIGHTS

Financial District

Most of Lower Manhattan’s must-see sights are in the Financial District,
among them Colonial-era New York churches and the site of George
Washington’s first presidential inauguration. Modern history is documented
in a string of commendable museums, including the unmissable National
September 11 Memorial Museum.
o NATIONAL SEPTEMBER 11 MEMORIAL & MUSEUM
( MAP

MUSEUM

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
MONUMENT

NATIONAL SEPTEMBER 11 MEMORIAL
( MAP

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
ONE WORLD TRADE CENTER
( MAP

NOTABLE BUILDING

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
o ONE WORLD OBSERVATORY
( MAP

VIEWPOINT

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-514-3700; www.nmai.si.edu; 1 Bowling Green, Financial
District; h 10am-5pm Fri-Wed, to 8pm Thu; c ; b 4/5 to Bowling Green, R/W to Whitehall St) F

An affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution, this elegant tribute to Native
American culture occupies Cass Gilbert’s spectacular 1907 Custom House, one
of NYC’s finest beaux-arts buildings. Beyond a vast elliptical rotunda
capped by a 140-ton skylight, sleek galleries play host to changing
exhibitions featuring Native American art, culture, life and beliefs. The
museum’s permanent collection includes stunning decorative arts, textiles
and ceremonial objects that document the diverse native cultures across the
Americas, while the imagiNATIONS Activity Center explores their technologies.
TRINITY CHURCH

CHURCH

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-602-0800; www.trinitywallstreet.org; 75 Broadway, at Wall St,
Lower Manhattan; h 7am-6pm, churchyard closes 6pm summer, dusk in winter; b 1, R/W to Rector
St, 2/3, 4/5 to Wall St)

New York City’s tallest building upon consecration in 1846, Trinity Church
features a 280ft-high bell tower and a richly colored stained-glass window
over the altar. Famous residents of its serene cemetery include Founding
Father and first secretary of the Treasury (and now Broadway superstar)
Alexander Hamilton, while its excellent musical program includes organrecital series Pipes at One (1pm Friday), and evening choral performances
including new works co-commissioned by Trinity and an annual December
rendition of Handel’s Messiah.
FRAUNCES TAVERN MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-425-1778; www.frauncestavernmuseum.org; 54 Pearl St, btwn
Broad St & Coenties Slip, Financial District; adult/6-18yr/under 6yr $7/4/free; h noon-5pm Mon-Fri,
11am-5pm Sat & Sun; b J/Z to Broad St; 4/5 to Bowling Green; R/W to Whitehall St; 1 to South
Ferry)

Combining five early-18th-century structures, this unique
museum/restaurant/bar pays homage to the nation-shaping events of 1783,
the momentous year in which the British officially relinquished control of
New York following the end of the Revolutionary War, and General George

Washington gave a farewell speech to the officers of the Continental Army
in the 2nd-floor dining room before returning to his home at Mt Vernon.
FEDERAL HALL

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-825-6990; www.nps.gov/feha; 26 Wall St, Financial District;

h 9am-5pm Mon-Fri year-round, plus 9am-5pm Sat Jul-Oct; b J/Z to Broad St; 2/3, 4/5 to Wall St)
F

A Greek Revival masterpiece, Federal Hall houses a museum dedicated to
postcolonial New York. Themes include George Washington’s inauguration,
Alexander Hamilton’s relationship with the city, and the struggles of John
Peter Zenger, a printer who on this site in 1734 was jailed, tried and
eventually acquitted of libel for exposing government corruption in his
newspaper. There’s also a visitor information hall with city maps and
brochures.
ST PAUL’S CHAPEL

CHURCH

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-602-0800; www.trinitywallstreet.org; 209 Broadway, at Fulton
St, Lower Manhattan; h 10am-6pm Mon-Sat, from 7am Sun, churchyard closes dusk; b A/C, J/Z,
2/3, 4/5 to Fulton St, R/W to Cortlandt St)

After his inauguration in 1789, George Washington worshipped at this
Classical Revival brownstone chapel, built in 1766 and narrowly avoiding
destruction in the fire of 1776. It avoided disaster again on September 11,
2001, when the destruction of the World Trade Center a mere block away
left the chapel untouched. Now famous as ‘The Little Chapel That Stood,’
St Paul’s offered round-the-clock refuge, spiritual and emotional support,
and food service to first responders and rescue workers.
USCGC LILAC

SHIP

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.lilacpreservationproject.org; Pier 25, at N Moore St, Tribeca; h 26pm Sat & Sun late May-Oct; c ; b 1 to Franklin St; A/C/E to Canal St) F

Lovers of all things maritime can step aboard the US Coast Guard Cutter
Lilac, the last existing steam-powered lighthouse tender in the US, which
once brought supplies to lighthouses and their keepers before American
lighthouses were automated. Launched in 1933, Lilac was decommissioned
in 1972 and since 2011 has been berthed at Pier 25, undergoing restoration
work and serving as an educational and community resource.

WORTH A DETOUR

STATEN ISLAND
Caricatures of Staten Island abound, and there’s a glimmer of truth in the tough-talking,
Italian-food-guzzling stereotypes. But these 60 sq miles are also dotted with impressive
historic sites, and a day trip to Staten Island offers some culture and good eating. Sights are
dispersed, so be selective: either start early or stay overnight if you want to tour more than one
or two cultural attractions.
Snug Harbor Cultural Center & Botanical Garden (% 718-425-3504; www.snugharbor.org; 1000 Richmond Tce; galleries & Chinese Scholar’s Garden adult/child $8/free,
grounds free; h grounds dawn-dusk daily, Chinese Scholar’s Garden noon-5pm Tue-Fri, from
10am Sat & Sun Apr-Nov, shorter hours Dec-Mar, building hours vary, usually noon-5pm
Thu-Sun; g S40 to Snug Harbor) offers a tranquil sweep of gardens, heritage buildings and
gallery spaces. Highlights include the artwork-packed Staten Island Museum, an ancient-style
Chinese Scholar’s Garden, an Italian garden and a fascinating maritime museum. It’s 2 miles
west of the ferry terminal. In the island’s center, 100-acre Historic Richmond Town (% 718351-1611; www.historicrichmondtown.org; 441 Clarke Ave; adult/child $8/5, Wed pay-as-youwish; h noon-5pm Wed-Sun; g S74 to Arthur Kill Rd & Clarke Ave) includes famous buildings
like the US’s oldest schoolhouse. Guides lead tours (included with admission) at 2pm on
weekdays and 1:30pm and 3pm on weekends. It’s about 45 minutes from the ferry terminal by
bus.
The harborside Alice Austen House (% 718-816-4506; www.aliceausten.org; 2 Hylan Blvd,
at Edgewater St; $5; h 1-5pm Tue-Fri, 11am-5pm Sat & Sun Mar-Dec, by appointment only
Jan & Feb; g S51 to Hylan Blvd & Bay St) explores the life and artistic legacy of the first
notable female American photographer. It’s a 15-minute bus ride from the ferry. A one-off
among Staten Island’s many scrap-metal yards, Lenny’s Creations (% 718-759-7344;
www.lennyscreation.com; 16 Rector St; suggested donation $5; h hours vary, usually 11am7pm; g S40 to Richmond Ter/Clove Rd) is the work of visionary metalsmith Lenny Prince,
who shapes old car parts into sculptures of Transformers, Chinese dragons, superheroes and
armor-clad knights.
Near the ferry terminal, Enoteca Maria (% 718-447-2777; www.enotecamaria.com; 27
Hyatt St; mains $17-25; h noon-8:30pm Thu-Sun) is a delightful, warmly lit Italian eatery that
attracts foodies for its exquisite old-world recipes made with care by sweet, deeply
knowledgeable nonne (grandmothers); cash only and reservations essential. Atmospheric
Lakruwana (% 347-857-6619; http://lakruwana.com; 668 Bay St, at Broad St; mains $14-17;
h noon-3:30pm Tue-Thu, 5-10pm Tue-Fri, noon-10pm Sat & Sun; g S51 to Oakwood Mill Rd)
serves up mouthwatering curries, saffron-tinged rice and other delicacies from Sri Lanka. The
weekend buffet offers a wide array of temptations. It’s about 1.2 miles south of the ferry
terminal. Don’t miss the small museum nearby with Sri Lankan art and artifacts. For a casual
veggie bowl or bagel sandwich, try the bookstore/cafe Everything Goes (% 718-447-8256;
www.etgstores.com/bookcafe; 208 Bay St; h noon-7pm Tue & Wed, to 9pm Thu, to 10pm Fri
& Sat; W ; g S76 to Victory Blvd/Bay St).
Near the ferry terminal, Flagship Brewing Company (% 718-448-5284;
www.flagshipbrewery.nyc; 40 Minthorne St; h 2-10pm Tue & Wed, noon-midnight Thu-Sat,

noon-8pm Sun) serves up craft brews in a sprawling taproom that also hosts live bands. In
summer, stay for a game of minor-league baseball at the Staten Island Yankees (% box office
718-720-9265; www.siyanks.com; Richmond County Bank Ballpark, 75 Richmond Tce;
tickets from $12; h ticket office 10am-5pm Mon-Fri, plus game days from 10am or noon;
f Staten Island), or take the S51 bus from the ferry to Midland Beach and South Beach, with
great views of the Verrazzano–Narrows Bridge.
To get here, take the free Staten Island Ferry, which runs around the clock from Lower
Manhattan to St George on Staten Island’s northern tip.

NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE

NOTABLE BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nyse.com; 11 Wall St, Financial District; h closed to the public;

b J/Z to Broad St; 2/3, 4/5 to Wall St)

Home to the world’s best-known stock exchange (the NYSE), Wall Street is
an iconic symbol of US capitalism. Behind the portentous neoclassical
facade, about one billion shares change hands daily, a sight no longer
publicly viewable due to security concerns. Feel free to gawk outside the
building, protected by barricades and police. Directly across the
cobblestones of Broad St stands the renowned Fearless Girl statue by Kristen
Visbal, which was moved here in 2018 from its original spot outside
Bowling Green.

BOWLING GREEN

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; cnr Broadway & State St, Financial District; b 4/5 to Bowling Green;
R/W to Whitehall St)

New York’s oldest public park is purportedly the spot where Dutch settler
Peter Minuit paid Native Americans the equivalent of $24 to purchase
Manhattan Island. At its northern edge stands Arturo Di Modica’s 7000lb
bronze Charging Bull, placed here permanently after it mysteriously

appeared in front of the New York Stock Exchange in 1989, two years after
a market crash.

WORTH A DETOUR

GOVERNORS ISLAND
Off-limits to the public for 200 years, former military outpost Governors Island ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; www.govisland.com; h 10am-6pm Mon-Fri, to 7pm Sat & Sun May-Oct,
later hours Fri Jun-Aug; c ; b 4/5 to Bowling Green, 1 to South Ferry) F is now one of New
York’s most popular seasonal playgrounds. The 172-acre oasis is a short ferry ride away is
threaded with cycling and walking trails and offers vistas of glinting skyscrapers across the
water. You won’t forget you’re in NYC – but it’s an invigorating interlude with historic sites
and fun activity areas to explore, including art-studded Liggett Terrace and Hammock
Grove, which has 50 hammocks for relaxing in.
In the northern corner, there’s star-shaped Fort Jay, built in 1794 and rebuilt 15 years later,
a failed attempt to prevent the British from invading Manhattan; Colonels Row, a collection of
eight lovely 19th-century brick officers’ quarters; and the red sandstone Castle Williams, a
19th-century fort with 8ft-thick walls, which was later converted to a military penitentiary. The
building exteriors and courtyards are free to explore, though visitors will enjoy deeper
historical insights with a ranger-led guided tour from the National Park Service
(www.nps.gov/gois). The Hills, in the southwest part of the island, have flower-fringed
walking trails up to panoramic views of Manhattan (from 70ft high); below is attractive Picnic
Point, with grassy spaces and lounge chairs. Inspiring views are also on tap along the Great
Promenade: running for 2.2 miles along the island’s perimeter, the path takes in everything
from Lower Manhattan and Brooklyn to Staten Island and New Jersey. On weekends The
Yard, a 50,000-sq-ft space, opens up for family-friendly play.
Originally named ‘Nut Island’ (Paggank) by the indigenous Lenape people, the island was
renamed first by the Dutch and then, when it became a military installation, dubbed Governors
Island. Besides serving as a successful military fort in the Revolutionary War, the Union
Army’s central recruiting station during the Civil War, and the take-off point for Wilbur
Wright’s famous 1909 flight around the Statue of Liberty, Governors Island is where the 1988
Reagan/Gorbachev summit signaled the beginning of the end of the Cold War. You can visit
the spot where that famous summit took place at the Admiral’s House, a grand, colonnaded
military residence completed in 1843 that’s part of the elegant ghost-town area of Nolan Park.
Ferries ( MAP ; www.govisland.com; Battery Maritime Bldg, 10 South St, Lower
Manhattan; round-trip adult/child $3/free, before noon Sat & Sun free; h departures 10am4:15pm Mon-Fri, to 5:30pm Sat & Sun May-Oct, later hours Fri & Sat Jun-Aug; b 1 to South
Ferry, R/W to Whitehall St, 4/5 to Bowling Green) travel to the island from Lower Manhattan
and Brooklyn. The island is easily walkable but cycling is a very pleasant way to get around;
rent wheels from Blazing Saddles (www.blazingsaddles.com, per day $25) or use one of three
Citibike stations around the island. Liggett Terrace hosts food trucks, from tacos to ice pops,
and an outpost of Brooklyn beer favorite Threes Brewing; weekends offer the biggest choice
of refreshments. Since 2018, the island has hosted a seasonal glamping site by Collective
Retreats (www.collectiveretreats.com); prices range from $149 to $549 per night and early
bookings are recommended.

New York Harbor

STATUE OF LIBERTY
( MAP

MONUMENT

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
ELLIS ISLAND
( MAP

LANDMARK

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.

Battery Park City

MUSEUM OF JEWISH HERITAGE

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 646-437-4202; www.mjhnyc.org; 36 Battery Pl, Financial District;
adult/child $8/free, 4-9pm Wed & Thu free; h 10am-9pm Sun-Thu, to 5pm Fri mid-Mar–mid-Nov, to
3pm Fri rest of year; c ; b 4/5 to Bowling Green, R/W to Whitehall St)

This evocative waterfront museum explores all aspects of modern Jewish
identity and culture, from religious traditions to artistic accomplishments.
The museum’s core exhibition covers three themed floors: Jewish Life a
Century Ago, Jewish Renewal and The War Against the Jews – a detailed
exploration of the Holocaust through thousands of personal artifacts,
photographs, documentary films and survivor testimony. Also
commemorating Holocaust victims is the external installation Garden of
Stones, a narrow pathway of 18 boulders supporting living trees.
The building itself consists of six sides, symbolizing the Star of David
and the six million Jews who perished in WWII. Exhibitions aside, the
venue also hosts films, music concerts, lecture series and special holiday
performances. Frequent, free workshops for families with children are also
on offer, while on-site LOX at Café Bergson serves light food, including lox

(smoked salmon) in intriguing flavors such as grapefruit and gin and
pastrami spice (mains $13 to $16).
The museum is closed on Saturday and major Jewish holidays, so check
the website’s holiday schedule before visiting. Be aware that some
temporary exhibitions require an extra admission ticket.
SKYSCRAPER MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-968-1961; www.skyscraper.org; 39 Battery Pl, Financial District;
adult/child $5/2.50; h noon-6pm Wed-Sun; b 4/5 to Bowling Green; R/W to Whitehall)

Fans of phallic architecture will appreciate this compact, high-gloss gallery,
examining skyscrapers as objects of design, engineering and urban renewal.
Temporary exhibitions dominate the space, with past exhibitions exploring
everything from New York’s new generation of superslim residential towers
to the world’s new breed of supertalls. Permanent fixtures include
information on the design and construction of the Empire State Building
and World Trade Center.
BATTERY PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nycgovparks.org; Broadway, at Battery Pl, Financial District;

h 6am-1am; b 4/5 to Bowling Green, R/W to Whitehall St, 1 to South Ferry)

Skirting the southern edge of Manhattan, this 12-acre oasis lures with
public artworks, meandering walkways and perennial gardens. Its
memorials include tributes to those who died in the Korean War and Italian
navigator Giovanni da Verrazzano. The first Dutch settlement on Manhattan
was founded here in 1625, and the city’s first battery was later erected in its
defense.
You’ll also find the lovely SeaGlass Carousel ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-3443491; www.seaglasscarousel.nyc; off State St; $5; h 10am-10pm), historic Castle Clinton (
MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-344-7220; www.nps.gov/cacl; h 7:45am-5pm) F and the
ferry service to Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty.

East River Waterfront

SOUTH STREET SEAPORT MUSEUM

MUSEUM

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-748-8600; www.southstreetseaportmuseum.org; 12 Fulton St,
btwn Water & Front Sts, Lower Manhattan; exhibitions & ships adult/child $20/free, printing press &
shop free; h ships & visitor center 11am-5pm Wed-Sun, print shop 11am-7pm Tue-Sun; c ; b 2/3,
4/5, A/C, J/Z to Fulton St)

Opened in 1967, this museum dispersed amid the cobblestone streets of the
seaport district ( MAP ; www.seaportdistrict.nyc) consists of fascinating exhibitions
relating to the city’s maritime history, an 18th-century printing press and
shop, and a handful of mighty sailing ships to explore on Pier 16. Besides
touring the moored 1885 Wavertree and the 1907 lightship Ambrose, in
warmer months you can take a harbor cruise on the 1885 Pioneer ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; adult/child $42/28; h hours vary) and the 1930 wooden tugboat WO
Decker ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; adult/child over 10yr $35/29, 7pm cruise $25; h 2pm & 7pm
Wed-Fri, 1:30pm, 3pm, 4:30pm & 7pm Sat & Sun).

PIER 17

PIER

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.pier17ny.com; 89 South St, South Street Seaport, Lower
Manhattan; b 2/3, 4/5, A/C, J/Z to Fulton St)

Formerly a shopping center, this large pier off South Street Seaport has
been redeveloped for dining and entertainment, with several upmarket
restaurants and a rooftop bar and outdoor concert venue. The best reason to
visit, however, is the expansive Riverdeck, which offers built-in wooden
loungers right on the water, where you can revel in grand views of the
Brooklyn and Manhattan Bridges, Governors Island and Brooklyn on the
opposite shore, as ferries cheerily ply their routes to and fro.

City Hall & Civic Center

AFRICAN BURIAL GROUND NATIONAL MONUMENT

MEMORIAL

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-637-2019; www.nps.gov/afbg; 290 Broadway, btwn Duane &
Reade Sts, Lower Manhattan; h 10am-4pm Tue-Sat; b J/Z to Chambers St, R/W to City Hall, 4/5/6
to Brooklyn Bridge-City Hall) F

In 1991, construction workers here uncovered more than 400 stacked
wooden caskets, just 16ft to 28ft below street level. The boxes contained the
remains of both enslaved and free African Americans from the 17th and
18th centuries (from 1697, nearby Trinity Church refused them burial in its
graveyard). Today, a poignant memorial site and a visitor center with four rooms
of educational displays honor the estimated 15,000 men, women and
children buried in America’s largest and oldest African cemetery.
WOOLWORTH BUILDING

NOTABLE BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 203-966-9663; www.woolworthtours.com; 233 Broadway, at Park Pl,
Lower Manhattan; 30/60/90min tours $20/30/45; b R/W to City Hall, 2/3 to Park Pl, 4/5/6 to
Brooklyn Bridge-City Hall)

The world’s tallest building upon completion in 1913 (it was only surpassed
in height by the Chrysler Building in 1930), Cass Gilbert’s 60-story, 792fttall Woolworth Building is a neo-Gothic marvel, elegantly clad in masonry
and terra-cotta. The breathtaking lobby – a spectacle of dazzling,
Byzantine-like mosaics – is accessible only on prebooked guided tours,
which also offer insight into the building’s more curious original features,
among them a subway entrance and a secret swimming pool. Check online
for the status of the tours.

CITY HALL

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % guided tours 212-788-2656; Park Row, City Hall Park, Lower
Manhattan; h guided tours noon Wed & 10am Thu; b 4/5/6 to Brooklyn Bridge-City Hall; R/W to
City Hall; J/Z to Chambers St) F

This Federal-style beauty has been home to NYC’s government since 1812,
and free guided tours of the building run twice weekly (you’ll need to book
a few weeks ahead online; search for ‘city hall tours’ on www.nyc.gov).
Tours take in the building’s elegant coffered rotunda, the City Council
chamber, and the Governor’s Room, which is where you’ll see portraits by
John Trumbull, George Washington’s writing table and the remnants of a
flag flown at the first president’s 1789 inaugural ceremony.
