West Village, Chelsea & the Meatpacking District
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping
Sports & Activities

West Village, Chelsea & the Meatpacking District
Neighborhood Top Five

1 High Line Packing a picnic lunch from Chelsea Market and having a

uniquely pastoral moment on the thin strand of green along the High Line
as it soars above the gridiron.
2 Chelsea Galleries Checking out the city’s brightest art stars at top

galleries, such as Pace Gallery.
3 Washington Square Park Walking through the park, pausing under the

signature arch, then loitering at the fountain to eavesdrop on gossiping
NYU kids.

4 Rubin Museum of Art Exploring fascinating exhibitions from the

Himalayas and beyond.
5 Stonewall National Monument Taking a few moments to reflect on the

night that sparked the LGBTIQ+ rights movement at this national park.

Explore the West Village, Chelsea & the
Meatpacking District
Quiet lanes carve their way between brown-brick town houses offering
endless strolling for locals appreciating good weather or tourists coming to
see what the fuss is about. The Village is indeed picturesque, and the best
way to uncover its treasures is to simply have a wander. When you grow
tired of walking the cobbled streets you’ll find that you’re never far from a
cafe serving a frothy cappuccino or a glass of wine.
A stroll through the Meatpacking District, once filled with
slaughterhouses, takes you past sleek boutiques and roaring nightclubs.
Chelsea, just to the north, sits between the West Village and Midtown, and
carries a bit of flavor from each. It’s the de facto neighborhood for the city’s
gay community, and its broad avenues are lined with breezy cafes, themed
bars and sweaty clubs. The neighborhood’s gallery scene can be found in
the West 20s.
The High Line, which travels from Gansevoort St at the southern end of
the Meatpacking District to 30th St and the Hudson Yards project, is a way
to cover a lot of ground with an elevated perspective – view street life and
the Hudson River, and peek into the lives of New Yorkers living in
apartments abutting the park.

Local Life

Eighth Avenue brunch If you’re a dude looking to meet (or at least look
at) other dudes, but the cruisey bar scene isn’t your style, try the weekend
brunch scene along Eighth Ave for piles of friendly Chelsea boys drinking
off their hangovers.
A

West Village cafes The West Village is Manhattan’s most desirable
residential neighborhood, so do as the locals do and make the most of this
quaint district filled with cute cafes. Grab a book and a latte and have a
blissful afternoon of people-watching.
A

Imbibing art Join the fashionable, art-minded crowds at the latest Chelsea
gallery shows. Thursday night, when some galleries have openings (and
free wine), is a good time to roam. In the Meatpacking District, the Whitney
Museum of American Art is beloved by locals and tourists alike.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway Sixth Ave, Seventh Ave and Eighth Ave have convenient subway
stations, but public transportation slims further west. Take the A/C/E or
1/2/3 lines to reach this colorful clump of neighborhoods – disembark at
14th St or W 4th St-Washington Sq.
A

Bus Try the M14, or the M8 if you’re traveling across town and want to
access the westernmost areas of Chelsea and the West Village by public
transportation.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
It’s perfectly acceptable to arm yourself with a map (or rely on your smartphone) to get around
the West Village’s charming-but-challenging side streets. Even some locals have a tricky time
finding their way! Just remember that 4th St makes a diagonal turn north – breaking away
from usual east–west street grid – and you’ll quickly become a Village pro.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Foragers Table
A Jeffrey’s Grocery
A RedFarm
A Chelsea Market
A Blue Hill

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Employees Only
A Buvette
A Pier 66 Maritime
A Smalls
A Duplex

For reviews, see here
7 Best Bookstores
A Printed Matter
A Strand Book Store
A Three Lives & Company
A 192 Books

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE

HIGH LINE
Snaking through the Meatpacking District at 30ft above street level,
this 1.5-mile urban park is a fabulous example of industrial reuse. Once
a freight line linking slaughterhouses to the Hudson River, it fell into
disuse by the 1980s, only to be resurrected as a green, art-strewn
ribbon running between the high-rises, hotels and art galleries
blossoming at its feet.

DON’T MISS
A The amphitheater-style viewing platforms at 17th and 26th Sts
A Chelsea Market
A Mammoth sculptures at the Plinth

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , A2
A % 212-500-6035
A www.thehighline.org
A Gansevoort St, Meatpacking District
A h 7am-11pm Jun-Sep, to 10pm Apr, May, Oct & Nov, to 7pm Dec-Mar
A g M14 crosstown along 14th St, M23 along 23rd St, b A/C/E, L to 8th Ave-14th St, 1, C/E to

23rd St, 7 to 34th St-Hudson Yards

The Industrial Past
Long before the High Line was a beacon for eager tourists, happy-snapping
families and New Yorkers seeking respite from the street-level grind, it was
an unglamorous freight line running through neighborhoods of industry and
slaughterhouses. In the early 1900s the western area around the
Meatpacking District and Chelsea was the largest industrial section of
Manhattan. With street-level freight lines causing disruption and even death
(Tenth Ave was nicknamed ‘Death Ave’ for rail accidents that claimed over
500 lives), an elevated freight track was planned, and the ‘West Side
Elevated Line’ moved its first train in 1933. The project drained over $150
million (equivalent to around $2 billion by today’s dime) and took roughly
five years to complete. After two decades of effective service, a rise in truck
transportation led to an eventual decrease in use of the line; finally, in the
1980s, the rails became obsolete, quickly growing thick with wild foliage.

Locals signed petitions to remove the eyesore the tracks had become, but in
1999 a committee called Friends of the High Line – founded by Joshua
David and Robert Hammond – was formed to save the rusting iron and
transform the tracks into a unique elevated green space.

A Green Future
On a warm spring day in 2009, the High Line – full of blooming flowers
and broad-leaved trees – opened to the public, the first of three phases that
today link the Meatpacking District and Midtown. Section 1 starts at
Gansevoort St and runs parallel to Tenth Ave up to W 20th St. Full of sitting
space in various forms – from giant chaises longues to bleacher-like
benches – the first part quickly became the setting for various public works
and activities, many geared toward the neighborhood’s growing population
of families. Two years later, Section 2 opened, adding another 10 blocks of
greenified tracks. In 2014 the High Line’s third section was completed,
from 30th up to 34th St, going up to and around the West Side Rail Yards in
a U-like fashion. As it veers west toward Twelfth Ave the path widens, and
you have open views of the Hudson, with the rusting, weed-filled railroad
tracks running alongside the walkway (the designers wanted to evoke the
same sense of overgrown wilderness in the heart of the metropolis that
greeted visitors who stumbled upon the tracks prior to the park’s creation).
This section also features a dedicated children’s play area – a jungle gym
made up of exposed beams covered in a soft play surface. Finally, in 2019,
the last remaining section of the original rail structure was completed.
Known as the Spur, this stretch extends east to 10th Ave, with a large-scale
art space known as the Plinth as its focal point.
There are numerous access stairways along the park, including at
Gansevoort, 14th, 16th, 17th, 20th, 23rd, 26th, 28th, 30th and 34th Sts.
There are also elevators at Gansevoort, 14th, 16th, 23rd and 30th Sts.

GASTRONOMIC DELIGHTS
The High Line invites various gastronomic establishments from around the city to set up
vending carts and stalls so that strollers can enjoy to-go items on the green. Expect a
showing of the finest coffee and ice cream during the warmer months.
FRIENDS OF THE HIGH LINE
If you’re interested in helping support the High Line through financial donations, you
can become a member of the Friends of the High Line association through the park’s
website. ‘Spike’-level members ($60) receive a discount at stores in the area, from Diane
von Fürstenberg’s boutique to Amy’s Bread ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ;
www.amysbread.com), a tasty food outlet in the Chelsea Market.
TAKE A BREAK
You’ll find a wonderland of food vendors behind the brick walls of the Chelsea Market,
at the 14th St exit of the High Line.

If you feel like treating yourself after a long walk, head to the Top of the Standard for a
pricey cocktail with a million-dollar view.

A Unique Public Space
The High Line’s civic influence extends far beyond being the trendsetter in
Manhattan’s regreening. As the West Village and Chelsea continue to
embrace their newfound residential nature, the High Line is becoming less
‘just’ an unusual park and more an inspiring meeting point for families and
friends. As you walk its length you’ll find staffers wearing the signature
double-H logo who can point you in the right direction or offer you
additional information about the converted rails. There are also myriad
staffers behind the scenes organizing public art exhibitions and activity
sessions, especially in summer. Special tours and events explore a variety of
topics: history, horticulture, design, art and food: check the schedule at
www.thehighline.org for the latest.

TOP EXPERIENCE

WHITNEY MUSEUM OF AMERICAN
ART
Even with Chelsea and the Meatpacking District’s plenitude of
galleries, the Whitney’s collection of American art is exceptional. Its
63,000 sq ft of cleverly designed indoor- and outdoor-exhibition space is
the perfect showcase for the world’s foremost collection of 20th-century
and contemporary American art.

DON’T MISS
A George Bellows, Dempsey and Firpo
A Joseph Stella, The Brooklyn Bridge: Variation on an Old Theme
A Alexander Calder, Calder’s Circus

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , A2
A www.whitney.org
A 99 Gansevoort St, Meatpacking District
A adult/child $25/free, 7-10pm Fri pay-what-you-wish
A h 10:30am-6pm Mon, Wed, Thu & Sun, to 10pm Fri & Sat
A b A/C/E, L to 8th Ave-14th St

The Building
Designed by Italian architect Renzo Piano, the Whitney’s asymmetrical,
glass-cloaked home quickly became a major landmark in the southern
reaches of the Meatpacking District, housing myriad galleries, theaters,
classrooms and outdoor spaces, and anchoring the first-opened section of
the High Line. One gallery in particular is noteworthy – an 18,000-sq-ft
space that is New York’s largest column-free exhibition space. Once the
decision was made to move from the Whitney’s original, Marcel Breuer–
designed home on Madison Ave, something on the scale of this nine-story
cultural colossus was always likely. Commenced in 2010, it cost $422
million to build, and opened to great acclaim in 2015.

The Collection
The Whitney’s collection of over 23,000 works by 3000+ different
American artists assumes greater significance when you consider it’s all

20th- and 21st-century work, much of it by still-practising artists. Works
from the permanent collection you might expect to encounter include Sol
LeWitt’s Five Towers (1986), looking like the load-bearing frame of an
abandoned building; several of Andy Warhol’s 10 luridly colored Mao TseTung prints (1972); Alice Neel’s Andy Warhol (1970) for which the pop-art
legend sat while recovering from a near-fatal shooting; Jasper Johns’s Three
Flags (1958); Marsden Hartley’s early-modernist Painting, Number 5
(1914–15); and plenty of comparable treasures.

TOP EXPERIENCE

WASHINGTON SQUARE PARK
What was once a potter’s field and a square for public executions is
now the unofficial town square of the Village. Encased in perfectly
manicured brownstones and gorgeous twists of modern architecture,
Washington Square Park is a striking garden space in the city –
especially as you’re welcomed by the iconic Stanford White Arch on the
north side of the green.

DON’T MISS
A Stanford White Arch
A Central fountain
A Greek Revival houses surrounding the park
A The birdman, often found on a bench near the southwest entrance with dozens of pigeons

roosting on him

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , G4
A www.nycgovparks.org
A Fifth Ave, at Washington Sq N, West Village
A h closes midnight
Ac
A b A/C/E, B/D/F/M to W 4th St-Washington Sq, R/W to 8th St-NYU

A Storied History
Although now quite ravishing, Washington Square Park had a long and
sordid history before finally blossoming into the paradigm of public space
we see today (thanks largely to a $30 million renovation completed in
2014).
When the Dutch settled Manhattan to run the Dutch East India Company,
they gave what is now the park to their freed Black slaves. The land was
squarely between the Dutch and Native American settlements, so, in a way,
the area acted as a buffer between enemies. Though somewhat marshy, it
was arable land and farming took place for around 60 years.
At the turn of the 19th century, the municipality of New York purchased
the land for use as a burial ground straddling the city’s limit. At first the
cemetery was mainly for indigent workers, but the space quickly reached

capacity during an outbreak of yellow fever. Over 20,000 bodies remain
buried under the park today.
By 1830 the grounds were used for military parades, and then quickly
transformed into a park for the wealthy elite who were constructing lavish
town houses along the surrounding streets.

A Political Stage
Washington Square Park has long provided a stage for political activity,
from local protests against proposed changes to the shape and usage of the
park, to issues of national importance such as the 1912 protests for better
working conditions.
In 2007 Democratic Party candidate Barack Obama led a rally here to
drum up support for his successful presidential bid. Turnout was,
unsurprisingly, overwhelming.

Stanford White Arch
The iconic Stanford White Arch, colloquially known as the Washington
Square Arch, dominates the park with its 72ft of beaming white Dover
marble. Originally designed in wood to celebrate the centennial of George
Washington’s inauguration in 1889, the arch proved so popular that it was
replaced with stone six years later and adorned with statues of the general in
war and peace. In 1916 artist Marcel Duchamp famously climbed to the top
of the arch by its internal stairway and declared the park the ‘Free and
Independent Republic of Washington Square.’

SIGHTS

If you’re an art-lover, this trio of neighborhoods is simply not to be
missed. The Whitney Museum of American Art (in the Meatpacking
District) should feature prominently in any itinerary, followed by an
exploration of Chelsea’s galleries (in the West 20s) – the epicenter of
NYC’s art world. Other major sights include the High Line, a former
rail line turned green space, the nearby Hudson River Park, which
provides a tranquil setting for relaxing along the waterfront, as well as
the historic Stonewall National Monument right in the center of the
West Village and across the street from the eponymous bar.

West Village & the Meatpacking District

HIGH LINE
( MAP

PARK

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
WHITNEY MUSEUM OF AMERICAN ART
( MAP

MUSEUM

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
WASHINGTON SQUARE PARK
( MAP

PARK

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
STONEWALL NATIONAL MONUMENT

NATIONAL PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.nps.gov/ston; W 4th St, btwn Christopher & Grove Sts, West
Village; h 9am-dusk; b 1 to Christopher St-Sheridan Sq, A/C/E, B/D/F/M to W 4th St-Washington
Sq)

In 2016 President Barack Obama declared Christopher Park, a small
fenced-in triangle with benches and some greenery in the heart of the West
Village, a national park and on it the first national monument dedicated to
LGBTIQ+ history. It’s well worth stopping here to reflect on the Stonewall
uprising of 1969, when LGBTIQ+ citizens fought back against
discriminatory policing of their communities – many consider the event the
birth of the modern LGBTIQ+ rights movement in the US.
There’s little ostentatious memorializing here, save a few plaques and
two sets of slender white statues: a male couple and a female couple,
holding hands and talking. Known as Gay Liberation, they are a tribute to
the normalcy of gay life. Plenty of pilgrims give the monument the gravity
it merits.
SALMAGUNDI CLUB

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-255-7740; www.salmagundi.org; 47 Fifth Ave, btwn W 11th &
12th Sts, West Village; h 1-6pm Mon-Fri, to 5pm Sat & Sun; b 4/5/6, L, N/Q/R/W to 14th St-Union
Sq) F

Far removed from the flashy Chelsea gallery scene, the Salmagundi Club
features several gallery spaces focusing on representational American art set
in a stunning historic brownstone on Fifth Ave below Union Sq. The club is
one of the oldest art clubs in the US (founded in 1871) and still offers
classes and exhibitions for its members.
The gallery spaces are large with a wide-ranging collection of styles and
mediums. The trip is worth it alone to linger a few minutes in the parlor
decorated with period furniture and historic paintings.
WHITE COLUMNS

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-924-4212; www.whitecolumns.org; 91 Horatio St; h 11am-6pm
Tue-Sat; b A/C/E, L to 8th Ave-14th St) F

Geographically, White Columns is part of the Meatpacking District, but
aesthetically speaking, it’s in Chelsea. The sedate, multiroom space hosts a

wide range of installations and exhibits, some of which are by fairly wellknown names, such as Andrew Serrano, Alice Aycock, Lorna Simpson and
a White Columns founder, Gordon Matta-Clark.
GRACE CHURCH

CHURCH

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-254-2000; www.gracechurchnyc.org; 802 Broadway, at 10th St,
West Village; h noon-5pm, services daily; b R/W to 8th St-NYU; 6 to Astor Pl)

This Gothic Revival Episcopal church, designed in 1843 by James Renwick
Jr, was made of marble quarried by prisoners at ‘Sing Sing,’ the state
penitentiary in the town of Ossining, 30 miles up the Hudson River (which,
legend has it, is the origin of the expression ‘being sent upriver’). After
years of neglect, Grace Church has been beautifully restored.
It’s now a National Landmark, whose elaborate carvings, towering spire
and verdant, groomed yard are sure to stop you in your tracks as you make
your way down this otherwise ordinary stretch of the Village. The stainedglass windows inside are stunning, and the soaring interior makes a perfect
setting for the frequent musical programming (recently there was a series of
‘Bach at Noon’ organ concerts). Free guided tours are offered at 1pm on
Sundays.
PIER 45

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; W 10th St, at Hudson River, West Village; b 1 to Christopher StSheridan Sq)

Still known to many as the Christopher St Pier, this is an 850ft-long finger
of concrete, spiffily renovated with a grass lawn, flower beds, a comfort
station, an outdoor cafe, tented shade shelters and a stop for the New York
Water Taxi.
Now part of the Hudson River Park, it’s a magnet for downtowners of all
stripes, from local families with toddlers in daylight to mobs of young gay
kids who flock here at night from all over the city (and beyond) thanks to
the pier’s long-established history as a gay cruising hangout. The spot offers

sweeping views of the Hudson and cool, relieving breezes in the thick of
summer.
ABINGDON SQUARE

SQUARE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; Hudson St, at 12th St, West Village; b A/C/E, L to 8th Ave-14th St)

This historical dot on the landscape (just a quarter-acre) is a lovely little
patch of green, home to grassy knolls, beds of perennial flowers and
winding bluestone paths, as well as a popular Saturday Greenmarket. It’s a
great place to enjoy a midday picnic or rest after an afternoon of wandering
the winding West Village streets.

TOP EXPERIENCE

HUDSON RIVER PARK
As its maritime industry dwindled, New York had to devise a future for the bristling ranks of
piers left behind. The answer, stretching from Manhattan’s southern tip to 59th St in Midtown,
is the Hudson River Park.
The Hudson River Greenway, a long path running between the river and the busy West Side
Hwy, invites strolling, blading, jogging and cycling. Waterfront Bicycle Shop ( MAP
GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-414-2453; www.bikeshopny.com; 391 West St, btwn W 10th &
Christopher Sts, West Village; rental per hour/day $7.50/20; h 10am-7pm; b 1 to Christopher
St-Sheridan Sq) is a convenient place to rent bikes. In summer, several boathouses offer kayak
hire and longer excursions for the more experienced. There’s also beach volleyball, basketball
courts, a skate park and tennis courts. Families with kids have loads of options, including four
playgrounds, a carousel (off W 22nd St) and mini-golf (Pier 25 off West St near N Moore St).
On warm summer evenings locals loll on the grass for people-watching and contemplation,
while those seeking sunset revelry can join the sangria-loving crowds at the dockside Frying
Pan, a historic ship serving food and drink from Pier 66 Maritime ( MAP GOOGLE MAP
).

DON’T MISS
A Kayaking on the river A Sunset strolls A Summertime drinks at Frying Pan

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , C7
A % 9am-5pm Mon-Fri 212-627-2020
A www.hudsonriverpark.org
A West Village A h 6am-1am A c
A g M23 crosstown bus, b 1 to Christopher St, C/E to 23rd St

NEW YORK UNIVERSITY

UNIVERSITY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; NYU; % 212-998-4550; www.nyu.edu; Welcome Center, 50 W 4th St,
West Village; b A/C/E, B/D/F/M to W 4th St-Washington Sq; N/R to 8th St-NYU)

In 1831 Albert Gallatin, formerly Secretary of the Treasury under President
Thomas Jefferson, founded an intimate center of higher learning open to all
students, regardless of race or class background. He’d scarcely recognize
the place today, as it’s swelled to a student population of around 50,000,
with more than 16,000 employees, and schools and colleges at six
Manhattan locations.
It just keeps growing, too – to the dismay of landmark activists and
business owners, who have seen buildings rapidly bought out by the
academic giant (or destroyed through careless planning, such as with the
historic Provincetown Playhouse) and replaced with ugly dormitories or
administrative offices. Still, some of its crevices are charming, such as the
leafy courtyard at its School of Law, or impressively modern, like the
Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, where top-notch dance, theater,

music, spoken-word and other performances wow audiences at the 850-seat
theater.
NYU’s academic offerings are highly regarded and wide-ranging,
especially its film, theater, writing, medical and law programs. For a unique
experience that will put you on the fast track to meeting locals, sign up for a
weekend or one-day class – from American history to photography –
offered by the School of Professional Studies and Continuing Education,
and open to all.
SHERIDAN SQUARE

SQUARE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; btwn Washington Pl & W 4th St, West Village; b 1 to Christopher StSheridan Sq)

The shape of a triangle, Sheridan Sq isn’t much more than a few park
benches and some trees surrounded by an old-fashioned wrought-iron gate.
But its location (in the heart of gay Greenwich Village) has meant that it has
witnessed every rally, demonstration and uprising that has contributed to
New York’s gay rights movement.

2 Neighborhood Walk

A Wander Through Greenwich Village

START COMMERCE ST
END WASHINGTON SQUARE PARK
LENGTH 1.2 MILES; ONE HOUR
Greenwich Village’s brick-lined byways break Manhattan’s signature grid pattern, striking off
on tangents that beg to be explored on foot. Start at 1 Cherry Lane Theatre, hidden in
handsome Commerce St. Established in 1924, the Cherry is the city’s longest continuously
running off-Broadway establishment, and has hosted many famous playwrights and thespians.
Make a left on Bedford and turn right into Grove St (number 90, on the corner, may be
familiar as the apartment building in Friends) to reach your first pit stop, 2 Buvette. Literally
‘snack bar,’ this Francophile wine bar is ideal for people-watching.
Next, for another TV landmark, turn left up Bleecker St and make a right on Perry – 3 66
Perry Street is famous as Carrie Bradshaw’s apartment in Sex and the City.
Turn right onto W 4th St and continue until you reach Christopher Park, home to the 4
Stonewall National Monument. On the north side of the green is the legendary Stonewall Inn,
where in 1969 LGBTIQ+ men and women rioted against routine police harassment, sparking
what came to be known as the Gay Rights Movement.

Follow Christopher St to Sixth Ave to find the 5 Jefferson Market Library just north.
Built as a courthouse in 1885, this gracious red-brick building rises from a tranquil garden of
the same name.
Head south again through Sixth Ave’s flurry of foot traffic, then turn left onto West 3rd St,
looking for legendary jazz venue 6 Blue Note on your left. Sarah Vaughan, Lionel Hampton
and other immortals have performed here; try to time your visit for jazz brunch on Sunday
(11:30am or 1:30pm).
Turn right onto MacDougal St to reach the famous 7 Comedy Cellar, where the likes of
Jerry Seinfeld and Amy Schumer have performed, then double back, heading north on
MacDougal to end your stroll in 8 Washington Square Park, the village’s unofficial town
square.

Chelsea

o PACE GALLERY

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-421-3292; www.pacegallery.com; 540 W 25th St, btwn Tenth &
Eleventh Aves, Chelsea; h 10am-6pm Tue-Sat; b 1, C/E to 23rd St)

With seven galleries across the world – including this eight-story Chelsea
flagship – and decades of experience showing the work of such artists as
Willem de Kooning, Barbara Hepworth and Julian Schnabel, gargantuan
Pace is a landmark on any tour. With a glimmering exterior constructed
from volcanic ash, the 75,000-sq-ft structure’s spaces span an 18ft-ceiling
gallery at street level, to more intimate confines like an appointment-only
research library and a 6th-floor open-air terrace.
RUBIN MUSEUM OF ART

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-620-5000; www./rubinmuseum.org; 150 W 17th St, btwn Sixth
& Seventh Aves, Chelsea; adult/child $19/free, 6-10pm Fri free; h 11am-5pm Mon & Thu, to 9pm
Wed, to 10pm Fri, to 6pm Sat & Sun; b 1 to 18th St)

The Rubin is the first museum in the Western world to dedicate itself to the
art of the Himalayas and surrounding regions. Its impressive collection
spans 1500 years to the present day, and includes Chinese embroidered
textiles, Nepalese gilt-copper bodhisattvas, Pakistani stone sculptures and

intricate Bhutanese paintings, as well as ritual objects and dance masks
from various Tibetan regions. Fascinating rotating exhibitions have
included Victorious Ones, comprising sculptures and paintings of the Jinas,
the 24 founding teachers of Jainism.
GAGOSIAN

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-741-1111; www.gagosian.com; 555 W 24th St, at Eleventh Ave,
Chelsea; h 10am-6pm Mon-Sat; b 1, C/E to 23rd St)

International works dot the walls at the Gagosian. The ever-revolving
exhibits feature the work of greats such as Jeff Koons, Andy Warhol and
Jean-Michel Basquiat. Gagosian has five New York locations, and 12 more
in San Francisco, London, Rome and other cities.
ARTECHOUSE

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; www.artechouse.com/nyc; 439 W 15th St, Chelsea Market; adult/child
$24/17; h 10am-10pm Sun-Thu, to 11pm Fri & Sat; b A/C/E, L to 8th Ave-14th St)

The previously unused boiler room beneath historic Chelsea Market has
finally found a tenant in Artechouse, a technology-forward creative space
where digital projections deliver hallucinatory experiences through
ambitiously large-scale installations. The innovative, 6000-sq-ft
experimental art house is a departure from Chelsea’s white-cube gallery
circuit, with immersive and participatory elements that’ll spark wonder in
all manner of visitors.
ANDREA ROSEN GALLERY

GALLERY

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-627-6000; www.andrearosengallery.com; 525 W 24th St, btwn
Tenth & Eleventh Aves, Chelsea; h 10am-6pm Mon-Fri; b 1, C/E to 23rd St)

Oversized installations are the norm at this spacious gallery, where curators
fill every inch of space (and the annex, Gallery 2, next door) in interesting
ways. Rosen opened her gallery in 1990 and quickly made a name for
herself. She has showcased John Currin’s ‘pale portraits,’ Felix Gonzalez-

Torres’ ‘Vultures’ and Tetsumi Kudo’s oil paintings, to name just a few of
her artists. Visits to the gallery are by appointment only.
CHELSEA HOTEL

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 222 W 23rd St, btwn Seventh & Eighth Aves, Chelsea; b 1, C/E to 23rd
St)

This red-brick hotel, built in the 1880s and featuring ornate iron balconies
and no fewer than seven plaques declaring its literary landmark status, has
played a major role in pop-culture history. It’s where the likes of Mark
Twain, Thomas Wolfe, Dylan Thomas and Arthur Miller hung out; Jack
Kerouac allegedly crafted On the Road during one marathon session here;
and it’s where Arthur C Clarke wrote 2001: A Space Odyssey.
Dylan Thomas died of alcohol poisoning while staying at the Chelsea
Hotel in 1953, and Nancy Spungen died here after being stabbed by her Sex
Pistols boyfriend Sid Vicious in 1978. Among the many celebs who have
logged time living at the Chelsea are Joni Mitchell, Patti Smith, Robert
Mapplethorpe, Stanley Kubrick, Dennis Hopper, Edith Piaf, Bob Dylan and
Leonard Cohen, whose song ‘Chelsea Hotel’ recalls a romp with Janis
Joplin (who spent time here, too).
Sadly, the hotel’s days of artistry and intrigue are long gone. A decadelong saga of battles with permanent tenants plus revolving ownership sees
its destiny in limbo; at the time of research, development for a luxury hotel
with a restaurant and two bars was underway.
GENERAL THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

GARDENS

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-243-5150; www.gts.edu; 440 W 21st St, btwn Ninth & Tenth
Aves, Chelsea; h 10am-5pm Mon-Fri; b 1, C/E to 23rd St) F

Founded in 1817, this is the oldest seminary of the Episcopal Church in
America. The school, which sits in the midst of the beautiful Chelsea
historic district, has been working hard lately to make sure it can preserve

its best asset – the garden-like campus snuggled in the middle of its full
block of buildings – even as Chelsea development sprouts up all around it.
This peaceful haven is the perfect spot for finding respite, either before or
after your neighborhood gallery crawl. To visit, ring the buzzer at the
garden gate, located halfway down 21st St between Ninth and Tenth Aves.
