Union Square, Flatiron District & Gramercy
Sights
Eating
Drinking & Nightlife
Entertainment
Shopping
Sports & Activities

Union Square, Flatiron District & Gramercy
Neighborhood Top Five

1 Flatiron Building Puzzling over the arresting triangularity and snapping

photographs of one of New York’s most iconic constructions.
2 Union Square Watching the eclectic mix of New Yorkers pass by at this

bustling town square, which transforms into a delightful Christmas market
come late November.
3 Union Square Greenmarket Inspecting fresh regional produce, meats and

cheeses and sampling artisanal treats and baked goods at this frequent
farmers market.

4 Raines Law Room Sipping flawless cocktails in upholstered-leather

luxury at this dimly lit bar that feels like it’s from another era.
5 Eataly Savoring a culinary trip through Italy at this gigantic, venerated

food hall and market with a picturesque rooftop bar and restaurant.

Explore Union Square, Flatiron District & Gramercy
There’s not a lot of ground to cover, so the best plan of attack is to use the
two major public spaces – Union Square and Madison Square Park – as
your anchors. From Union Square you’ll feel the Village and university vibe
(NYU is just south and the New School just to the west) spilling over with
good cafes, sign-wielding protesters and buskers in the square itself.
Walking east or west along 14th St takes you to the East or West Village
respectively.
Up toward 23rd St you’ll find the Flatiron Building looming over the
commercial quarter that also bears its name, replete with crowded lunch
spots and after-work watering holes. East of both public spaces is
Gramercy, its distinctly residential vibe tempered with notable, buzzing
restaurants.
In Madison Square Park you’ll find young PR mavens chatting over
lattes, harried lawyers getting away from the office for a moment of peace
and, in the warmer months, foodies flocking to the Mad Sq Eats market.

Local Life
A

Mad Sq Eats Each spring and fall, foodies flock to tiny General Worth Sq

– wedged between Fifth Ave and Broadway, opposite Madison Square Park
– for Mad Sq Eats, a month-long culinary pop-up market. Its 30 or so
vendors include some of the city’s hottest eateries, cooking up anything
from proper pizza to brisket tacos using top local produce.

Gourmet groceries Eataly has made a name for itself as the place to go
for Italophile food buffs, but locals do much more of their everyday
shopping at health-conscious supermarket Whole Foods, at the southern end
of Union Square.
A

Getting There & Away
Subway A slew of subway lines converge below Union Square, running
up Manhattan’s East Side on the 4/5/6 lines, out to Williamsburg on the L,
or to Queens on the N/Q/R lines. The L also travels to the West Side. The Q
runs express to Herald Square and Times Square.
A

Bus The M14A and M14D Select Bus Service (SBS) lines provide crosstown services along 14th St, while the M23 runs cross-town along 23rd St.
The bus is better if you’re traveling between two eastern points in
Manhattan.
A

Lonely Planet’s Top Tip
Human traffic can be overwhelming in Union Square, especially along 14th St. If you’re in a
rush, or trying to hoof it on foot, switch over to 13th St and you’ll cover a lot more ground in
much less time.
5 Best Places to Eat
A Eleven Madison Park
A Maialino
A Gramercy Tavern
A Clocktower
A Cosme

For reviews, see here
6 Best Places to Drink
A Flatiron Room
A Raines Law Room
A Serra
A Old Town Bar & Restaurant
A Lillie’s Victorian Establishment

For reviews, see here
7 Best Places to Shop
A Union Square Greenmarket
A Fishs Eddy
A ABC Carpet & Home
A Bedford Cheese Shop
A Books of Wonder

For reviews, see here

TOP EXPERIENCE

UNION SQUARE
Union Square is like the Noah’s Ark of New York, rescuing at least two
of every kind from the curling seas of concrete. Amid the stone steps
and fenced-in foliage you’ll see denizens of every ilk: suited business
types gulping fresh air during their lunch breaks, dreadlocked loiterers
tapping beats on tablas and skateboarders flipping tricks on the
southeastern stairs.
DON’T MISS
A Union Square Greenmarket
A Metronome art installation
A The view from DSW shoe store
A Eclectics, sit-ins and buskers

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , D4
A www.unionsquarenyc.org
A 17th St, btwn Broadway & Park Ave S, Union Square
A b 4/5/6, N/Q/R, L to 14th St-Union Sq

Riches & Rags
Opened in 1831, Union Square quickly became the central gathering place
for those who lived in the mansions nearby. Concert halls and artist
societies further enhanced the cultured atmosphere, and high-end shopping
quickly proliferated along Broadway, which was dubbed ‘Ladies’ Mile.’

When the Civil War broke out, the vast public space (large by New York
standards, of course) was center stage for protesters of all sorts, from union
workers to political activists. By the height of WWI, the area had fallen
largely into disuse, allowing politically and socially driven organizations
like the American Civil Liberties Union, the Communist and Socialist
Parties, and the Ladies’ Garment Workers Union to move in. Many decades
later, the square remains a popular site for political and social protests, as
well as one of NYC’s best regular farmers markets.
For an unforgettable, sweeping view of Union Square and the Empire
State Building beyond, hit DSW, a 3rd-floor discount shoe store at the
southern end of the square, or the cafe of the Whole Foods supermarket
next door.

The Factory
After over a century of the continuous push-and-pull between dapper-dom
and political protest, a third – artistic, if not thoroughly hippie-ish –
ingredient was tossed into the mix when Andy Warhol moved his Factory to
the 6th floor of the Decker Building at 33 Union Sq West. It was here, on
June 3, 1968, that disgruntled writer Valerie Solanas shot Warhol three
times, seriously wounding him. The ground floor of the building is now
occupied by a brightly colored candy-store chain – very Warholian.

Metronome
A walk around Union Square will reveal a string of whimsical, temporary
sculptures. Of the permanent offerings is an imposing equestrian statue of
George Washington (one of the first public pieces of art in New York City)
and a statue of peacemaker Mahatma Gandhi. Trumping both on the
southeastern side of the square is a massive art installation that either earns
confused stares or simply gets overlooked by passersby. A symbolic
representation of the passage of time, Metronome has two parts: a digital
clock with a puzzling display of numbers, and a wand-like apparatus with
smoke puffing out of concentric rings. We’ll let you ponder the latter while

we give you the skinny on what exactly the winking orange digits denote:
the 14 numbers must be split into two groups of seven: the seven from the
left tell the current time (hour, minute, second, tenth-of-a-second) and the
seven from the right are meant to be read in reverse order; they represent
the remaining amount of time in the day.

SIGHTS

Though short on sights per se, there’s lots happening on and around
Union Square, which bustles with buskers, suits and appetite-piquing
produce stalls. To the northwest are the dignified streets of Gramercy,
while to the north is Madison Square Garden ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ), where
dogs and squirrels meet art installations, readings and a famous little
burger shack.
UNION SQUARE
( MAP

SQUARE

GOOGLE MAP )

See here.
UNION SQUARE GREENMARKET

MARKET

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-788-7476; www.grownyc.org/unionsquaregreenmarket; E 17th
St, btwn Broadway & Park Ave S, Union Square; h 8am-6pm Mon, Wed, Fri & Sat; b 4/5/6,
N/Q/R/W, L to 14th St-Union Sq) S

Don’t be surprised if you spot some of New York’s top chefs prodding the
produce here: Union Square’s green market is arguably the city’s most
famous. Whet your appetite trawling the stalls, which peddle anything and
everything from upstate fruit and vegetables to artisanal breads, cheeses and
cider.
MADISON SQUARE PARK

PARK

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-520-7600; www.madisonsquarepark.org; E 23rd to 26th Sts,
btwn Fifth & Madison Aves, Flatiron District; h 6am-11pm; c ; b R/W, F/M, 6 to 23rd St)

This park defined the northern reaches of Manhattan until the island’s
population exploded after the Civil War. These days it’s a much-welcome
oasis from Manhattan’s relentless pace, with a popular children’s
playground, dog-run area and the Shake Shack ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 646-889-

6600; www.shakeshack.com; burgers $6-11; h 9am-11pm) burger joint. It’s also one of

the city’s most cultured parks, with specially commissioned art installations
and (in the warmer months) activities ranging from literary discussions to
live-music gigs. See the website for more information.
It’s also the perfect spot from which to gaze up at the landmarks that
surround it, including the Flatiron Building to the southwest, the
Metropolitan Life Tower to the southeast and the New York Life Insurance
Building, topped with a gilded spire, to the northeast.
Between 1876 and 1882 the torch-bearing arm of the Statue of Liberty
was on display here, and in 1879 the first Madison Square Garden arena
was constructed at Madison Ave and 26th St. At the southeastern corner of
the park, you’ll find one of the city’s few self-cleaning, coin-operated toilets
(25¢).
NATIONAL ARTS CLUB

ARTS CENTER

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-475-3424; www.nationalartsclub.org; 15 Gramercy Park S,
Gramercy; h galleries 10am-5pm Mon-Fri; b N/R, 6 to 23rd St) F

Founded in 1898 to promote public interest in the arts, the National Arts
Club holds art exhibitions, with free admission to the public during
weekdays; check the website for upcoming shows as well as evening
events. Calvert Vaux – one of the creators of Central Park – designed the
building itself, with a picture-lined front parlor adorned with a beautiful,
vaulted stained-glass panel. The mansion was once home to Samuel J
Tilden, a former New York governor and the failed 1876 presidential
candidate.

TOP EXPERIENCE
FLATIRON BUILDING
Designed by Daniel Burnham and built in 1902, the 20-story Flatiron Building has a narrow
triangular footprint that resembles the prow of a massive ship. It also features a beaux-arts
limestone and terracotta facade that gets more complex and beautiful the longer you stare at it.
Until 1909 it was the world’s tallest building.
Publisher Frank Munsey was one of the building’s first tenants. From his 18th-floor offices
he published Munsey’s Magazine, which featured the work of short-story writer O Henry. His
musings, the paintings of John Sloan and photographs of Alfred Stieglitz best immortalized the
Flatiron back in the day. Actress Katharine Hepburn once quipped that she’d like to be
admired as much as the grand old building.
While there are plans to transform the Flatiron into a luxurious five-star hotel, progress is on
hold until the final business tenants willingly vacate the premises. In the meantime, the ground
floor of the building’s ‘prow’ has been transformed into a glassed-in art space. Past
installations have included a life-size 3D-cutout replica of Edward Hopper’s 1942 painting
Nighthawks, its angular diner remarkably similar to the Flatiron’s distinctive shape.

DON’T MISS
A The facade view from Madison Square Park A Getting up close to the fine exterior
detail A Flatiron Prow art space

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP

GOOGLE MAP , C2

A Broadway, cnr Fifth Ave & 23rd St, Flatiron District A b N/R, F/M, 6 to 23rd St

THEODORE ROOSEVELT BIRTHPLACE

HISTORIC SITE

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; % 212-260-1616; www.nps.gov/thrb; 28 E 20th St, btwn Broadway &
Park Ave S, Flatiron District; h visitor center 9am-5pm, 40min guided tours 10am, 11am, 1pm, 2pm,
3pm & 4pm Tue-Sat; b R/W, 6 to 23rd St) F

This National Historic Site is a bit of a cheat, since the physical house
where the 26th president was actually born was demolished in his own
lifetime. But this building is a worthy reconstruction by his relatives, who
took painstaking steps to bring together original furniture from the
residence with true-to-the-period restorations.
METROPOLITAN LIFE TOWER

HISTORIC BUILDING

( MAP GOOGLE MAP ; 1 Madison Ave, btwn E 23rd & E 24th Sts, Flatiron District; b N/R,
F/M, 6 to 23rd St)

Completed in 1909, this 700ft-high clock tower soaring above Madison
Square Park’s southeastern corner is the work of Napoleon LeBrun, a
Philadelphia-born architect of French stock. Italophiles may feel a certain
déjà vu gazing at the tower as LeBrun’s inspiration was Venice’s worldfamous campanile (bell tower) in Piazza San Marco. Ironically, this New
World version is now older than its muse: the original Venetian tower
collapsed in 1902, with its replacement not completed until 1912.

TOP EXPERIENCE

GRAMERCY PARK
Manhattan’s early Dutch settlers named the area now known as Gramercy ‘Krom Moerasje’
(Little Crooked Swamp). The swamp would meet its end in 1831, when lawyer and public
official Samuel Ruggles purchased the land. He had the swamp drained and the land carved
into 108 lots. Forty-two of these were set aside for an English-style private park, to be held in
perpetuity by the residents of its surrounding 66 lots.
Almost two centuries later, Gramercy Park ( MAP GOOGLE MAP ) remains a private
oasis. Only once has it been made accessible to nonresidents, when Union soldiers were
permitted inside during the Draft Riots of 1863.
Many of the original town houses facing the park were replaced by high-rise apartment
buildings through the 1920s. Along the park sits the National Arts Club; its elegance attests
to the district’s desirable pedigree. Indeed, Gramercy Park has had its fair share of illustrious
residents. The town house at 4 Gramercy Park W was home to American publisher James
Harper from 1847 to 1869. Mayor of New York City from 1844 to 1845, Harper’s flouncy
‘mayor’s lights’ still grace the front of the building. Another famous local was Stanford White,
eponymous designer of the triumphal arch in Washington Square.

DON’T MISS
A A slow walk around the park to admire the stunning architecture of the surrounding

buildings.
A Taking in a gallery show at the National Arts Club.

PRACTICALITIES
A MAP , D3
A E 20th St, btwn Park & Third Aves, Gramercy
A b N/R, 6 to 23rd St
