THE UPPER
EAST SIDE
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
Start: The statue of William Tecumseh Sherman at Fiftyninth Street and Fifth Avenue. Trains: N/R to Sixtieth
Street; 4/5 to Fifty-ninth and Lexington. 
the upper east sidecan be justifiably considered New York’s “Gold Coast,” and Fifth Avenue its “Millionaires’ Row.” It is in this neighborhood that Lady Caroline Astor countenanced the four hundred most important
New Yorkers (those who would attend her illustrious parties); it is on these streets that J. P. Morgan had built—
“damning the expense”—his famous Metropolitan Club;
and it is here that the longest single uninterrupted set of
mansions once stood. If ever there were a competition for
wealth and power in one neighborhood, the Upper East
Side would win hands down. Yet, despite its undeniable
standing as an area of prominence and renown, the Upper
East Side has a broader appeal. The neighborhood maintains a diversity to its history that is often overlooked amid
the goings-on of Manhattan’s haute bourgeoisie. This diversity can be observed not only in the eclecticism of its buildings but, as we shall see, in the many layers of development
207
7
➢

in its past. In short, it is more than the home turf to New
York’s rich and famous.
Traditionally, the Upper East Side is thought of as that
area spanning Fifty-ninth Street to Ninety-sixth Street
south to north and Central Park to the East River west to
east. In the present tour, you will walk on a lower slice of
this, from Fifty-ninth Street up to Seventy-fifth, weaving
your way through Fifth, Madison, and Park Avenues.
Much of the area you will see is now part of the Upper East
Side Historic District, which runs from Fifty-ninth Street
to Seventy-eighth (sometimes as far east as Third Avenue)
and was designated in 1981. There are several other historic
districts in the neighborhood as you head farther north.
(Carnegie Hill, established in the 1980s and 1990s, is perhaps the most serene.)
Although the Upper East Side is New York’s most expensive address, in the 1850s this area was mostly farmland,
with the land that would become Central Park inhabited by
a few thousand residents in towns and shanties. New York’s
richest families lived only as far north as Twenty-sixth
Street, and the grid system laid down north of Fourteenth
Street in 1811 had only just begun to take hold. With the acceleration of commercialization and immigration, however, New York’s aristocracy was pushed increasingly farther north.
Perhaps the strongest reason for the development of the
neighborhood, and Fifth Avenue in particular, was the
clearing of land for Central Park, which began in 1857. The
park’s completion in 1865 set off a frenzy of mansion development that utterly transformed the landscape of residential living.
As the twentieth century progressed and living conditions changed, many of these one-family homes were replaced by luxury apartment buildings. Today, the Upper
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
208

East Side contains a mixture of modest brownstone rowhouses, opulent townhouses, mansions, and impressive
apartment houses. Some of the finest American examples
of urban residential architecture can be found on these
streets. You will see a rich variety of these over the course
of the tour.
But to repeat, the streets of the neighborhood boast
more than lovely homes. They embody a history of social
and economic change that has produced fantastic mobility
in both the population and its institutions. As you walk, you
will see abundant examples—whether a social club, armory, synagogue, or former park for the working class. Ultimately, the Upper East Side is like all other New York
City neighborhoods, in that it is an area that has evolved
dramatically over the past two centuries.
We begin at the gilded statue of General William Tecumseh Sherman, best known for his bloody march through the
South in the fall of 1864 where, as the Union’s commander
in the West, he burned large portions of Georgia and South
Carolina. Sherman himself showed little remorse at Georgia’s fate. As he famously put it: “War is cruelty and you
cannot refine it.”
The award-winning statue was cast by the well-known
New York sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens and presented
in 1900 at the Paris Exposition. It was erected in the present
location in 1903. The base is Charles McKim’s, of McKim,
Mead and White. Walking before Sherman, waving an
olive branch, is the figure of Victory; the pine branch on
the granite pedestal signifies Georgia, and the horses
stomping on the pines are a painful reminder of the destruction of Sherman’s March. The statue was regilded in
the late 1980s to considerable complaint, as Sherman’s
bloody history was now seen as unseemly.
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 209

Walk south to Pulitzer Fountain, located in the small plaza
across Fifty-ninth Street, in front of the Plaza Hotel.
The fountain was erected in 1916 with a $50,000 gift from
Joseph Pulitzer, who hoped to outdo his newspaper-magnate rival William Randolph Hearst, who had financed the
Spanish-American War’s Maine monument at Central
Park’s Broadway entrance.
The statue on top is Pomona, the Greek goddess of
abundance. Pomona was finished by Karl Bitter, protégé of
the architect Richard Morris Hunt. The day he finished the
clay model in 1915, Bitter was tragically killed crossing the
street as he left the Metropolitan Opera (then on Forty-seventh Street), and his apprentices were left to complete the
statue.
➢
Karl Bitter’s statue Pomona (financed by Joseph Pulitzer) as it appeared before the Sherry Netherland, Savoy, and Pierre Hotels were built. Across Fifth
Avenue stand the precursors to those great hotels: the hulking dark turreted
building is William Hume’s 1892 New Netherland Hotel; to its right stands Ralph
Townsend’s 1892 Hotel Savoy; and to the very far right is a piece of Alfred
Zucker’s 1895 Bolkenhayn apartment house. Second from the left is the Metropolitan Club. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

Facing west, admire the Plaza Hotel.
The Plaza, which dates from 1907, is one of New York
City’s great luxury hotels. Frank Lloyd Wright, who hated
New York, would stay only here when he passed through.
Other luminaries who made this their temporary residence
have included the Beatles, Mark Twain, Groucho Marx,
and Eleanor Roosevelt. The first guest to sign the register
of the Plaza was Alfred Gwynne Vanderbilt, who later lost
his life in the sinking of the Lusitania.
The French Renaissance building was designed by
Henry Hardenbergh (the same person responsible for the
Dakota and the Art Student’s League). Its two majestic elevations overlook both Central Park and Fifth Avenue. A
shallow pond that the wealthy used for ice-skating once occupied the site. The Oak Bar and adjoining Oak Room inside are two of the most grand and imposing spaces in New
York. Back in the day, George M. Cohan was a perennial
luncheon guest. Regulars also included Gloria Swanson
and Rita Hayworth.
Donald Trump bought the hotel in 1988 but today holds
onto only a small stake.
Turn around, now face east, and have a look at the two
hotels across Fifth Avenue on Fifty-ninth and Sixtyfirst Streets, the Sherry Netherland and the Pierre,
respectively.
Along with the Savoy, replaced in the late 1960s by the
banal General Motors building, the Sherry Netherland,
Pierre, and Plaza formed a quadrumvirate of powerhouse
hotels at the Fifth Avenue approach to Central Park. After
all, if one had money where better to reside? In fact, many
did reside in these buildings—full time. In the 1930s and
1940s, the great majority of residents at these hotels were
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 211
➢
➢

year-round occupants. The Sherry Netherland advertised
itself as “more than a place to live—a new way of living.”
Only in the last twenty-five years have the numbers flipflopped, making the hotels’ occupants predominantly
overnight guests.
The Sherry Netherland, distinguished by its French
Gothic pinnacle, holds in its lobby sculpture panels salvaged from Commodore William Vanderbilt’s mansion,
the largest mansion of those that used to dot Fifth Avenue.
It contained a whopping 137 rooms. Bergdorf Goodman,
across the plaza on Fifty-eighth Street, succeeded the mansion when it was torn down in 1928. The Sherry Netherland has 165 apartments that were converted to cooperatives in 1954. On Fifth Avenue, north of the entrance,
Diane von Furstenberg commissioned architect Michael
View of the grand hotels clustered around Central Park Southeast in 1939. They
are, from left to right, the Pierre, the Sherry Netherland, the Savoy, and the
Plaza. The Savoy was torn down for the 1968 General Motors Building. Photo
courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

Graves in 1984 to design an upscale salon, which shortly
thereafter was taken over by Geoffrey Beene.
The Pierre, founded by the noted chef Charles Pierre
(whose restaurant was located at 230 Park Avenue), has its
own illustrious history. In 1932, Dashiell Hammett stayed
here while working on The Thin Man; he wasn’t able to
meet the bill he ran up, so he donned a disguise to avoid
paying his tab.
The Pierre had a rocky beginning and went into bankruptcy in 1932, only several years after its construction
(even with luxury hotels, the depression took its toll). J.
Paul Getty bought it six years later for $2.5 million. The
Four Seasons Chain is the most recent owner (from 1986).
Both the Sherry Netherland and the Pierre were designed by Schultze and Weaver, the same architects responsible for the best-known hotel in New York, the Waldorf Astoria.
Cross the avenue and walk up to Sixtieth Street and Fifth
Avenue.
As you walk from Fifty-ninth to Sixtieth Street, have a look
at the cast-iron sidewalk clock—one of the few left in the
city—on the east side of Fifth Avenue. Also see New
York’s only example of the work of great postmodernist
Michael Graves, in his facade for Geoffrey Beene’s store.
J. Pierpont Morgan formed the Metropolitan Club,
here on the northeast corner of Fifth Avenue and Sixtieth
Street, in anger. Some of his close comrades and fellow
captains of industry were unable to win entrance into the
other elite clubs of the time, principally the Union Club.
Morgan, the great New York City banker, had proposed
membership at the Union for John King, president of the
Erie Railroad, whose “career and character have won him
the universal respect of all who know him.” It was said,
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 213
➢

however, that King’s table manners were not up to snuff,
and he was promptly denied membership.
Morgan’s retribution was to get New York’s most famous architect, Stanford White, to build “the largest, most
imposing, and most luxurious of the clubhouses of New
York” (or so noted the man who was then dean of architectural criticism, Montgomery Schuyler). The Italian palace facade is similar in style to that of the University Club
on Fifty-fourth Street and Fifth Avenue. Morgan, it is said,
summoned White with the words “Damn the expense.”
In its temerity to challenge the Union Club, the Metropolitan Club was dressed in an all-marble facade. One lure
to new Metropolitan members was a dining room sequestered from the all-male enclaves and set aside for female guests. The Ladies Restaurant overlooked the courtyard. Joining Morgan in his new venture were Cornelius
Vanderbilt and Robert Goelet.
Never to be outdone, the Metropolitan Club erected a
thirty-fiveby sixty-foot courtyard, set off by an entryway
of paired Doric columns and wrought-iron gates, at the 1
East Sixtieth Street entrance. The Metropolitan at the time
was unrivaled in size—the main building measured 90 feet
on Fifth Avenue by 150 feet on Sixtieth Street.
Walk east on Sixtieth Street toward Madison Avenue.
Across from the Metropolitan Club stands the Harmonie
Club at 4 East Sixtieth Street. The club was formed in 1852
by the German Jewish community as the Harmonie
Gesellschaft (Harmony Society) and distinguished by having German as its official language and by hanging the
kaiser’s portrait in its hall. It was the first men’s club in the
city to admit women at dinner and the first eventually to
have women as members.
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
214
➢

The club dates back to a period when the chasm between first-wave German Jews and second-wave Eastern
Europeans was massive. Many Harmonie denizens, in their
eagerness to assimilate, had little desire to associate with
their impoverished and “unAmerican” brethren from the
East. This disturbing trend was partially offset by several
far-sighted, if high-handed, German Jews such as Lillian
Wald and Jacob Schiff. (See chapter 2 on the Lower East
Side for further details.) While Harmonie’s descendants
today may hail from both central and eastern Europe,
classwise they still have more in common with their German predecessors.
The Copacabana was at 14 East Sixtieth Street. This
club was a venue for New York’s stage and sports celebrities as well as your average New Yorker. Ask many a New
Yorker of a certain generation and learn of high school
proms, college balls, and first (and sometimes last) dates
that took place here.
May 1957 saw one of the more notorious events ever to
occur at the Copa. With Sammy Davis Jr. on the stage and
Yankee Billy Martin celebrating his twenty-ninth birthday
with fellow players Mickey Mantle, Yogi Berra, and Hank
Bauer, a brawl broke out between the Yankee players and a
New Jersey bowling team. Police charges were ultimately
dropped, but the Yankees owner blamed Martin and traded
him that July to Kansas City. He would not return until the
1970s, when he became the Yankees’ manager.
Four years later, in October 1961, New York City detectives Eddie Egan and Sonny Grosso were having drinks
after work at the club. They noticed a “little man in a silk
suit, with a diamond stickpin in his tie, flashing a huge
bankroll.” Egan and Grosso decided to follow the man.
The chase was to last eighteen months, turning into The
French Connection. In the end there were nine arrests, and
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 215

112 pounds of heroin were secured ($32 million worth in
1960s dollars).
The film’s justly famous car-chase scene was filmed over
five weeks underneath the Bensonhurst Elevated Railway—twenty-six blocks of Brooklyn’s Stillwell Line from
Bay Fiftieth Street Station along Stillwell Avenue, into
Eighty-sixth Street, and finally into New Utrecht Avenue,
ending at Sixty-second Street Station. The chase was
filmed at full speed, with real pedestrians and traffic!
Next door to the Copacabana, at 14 East Sixtieth, was
“Hotel 14.” A lovely 1907 residential hotel turned into
commercial offices in the 1970s; the British newspaper the
Financial Times has top-floor offices. When the building
was still a hotel, the first Israeli delegation to the United
Nations stayed here, in 1948.
Look at Madison Avenue, one of New York City’s narrowest avenues, which is named for America’s fourth president (who sadly died in 1836, the year of its opening).
Madison Avenue has a curious history, having gone from a
predominantly residential thoroughfare to an outstanding
commercial zone. You can get a taste of its former identity
from several lovely brownstone vestiges along the avenue.
Because of zoning, many of the fashionable stores are now
housed in these very townhouses or brownstones.
Of the three avenues that dominate this tour, Madison
was the first to emerge, fully formed, when it became an
early nineteenth-century roadway. Fifth Avenue, as we
noted, took off with Central Park’s development in the latter part of the nineteenth century, and Park Avenue as the
present day boulevard developed only in the early part of
the 1900s. Of the three, however, Madison turned headfirst
toward the commercial, becoming in the early postwar period the advertising capital of the world. No longer the cen-
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
216
➢

ter of advertising, Madison has reinvented itself (at least in
this part of the Upper East Side) as “Boutique Row.”
If you want to get a feel for the avenue’s narrowness,
take a detour south to Fifty-sixth Street. Here, at 550 Madison Avenue, you will find the Sony (formerly AT&T)
building, a landmark postmodern skyscraper designed by
Philip Johnson, which provides a staggering sense of the
avenue’s compressed quality. Johnson’s hulk literally overpowers the street.
Cross Madison Avenue and continue walking east toward
Park Avenue, on the north side of Sixtieth Street.
The Grolier Club is located at 47 East Sixtieth Street. In
contrast with the business-titan appeal of the Metropolitan
down the road, here is a club for book lovers. Named for
the sixteenth-century bibliophile Jean Grolier de Servières,
the club was founded for “the literary study and promotion
of the arts pertaining to the production of books.” Bertram
Goodhue, best known for his St. Bartholomew’s Church
next to the Waldorf Astoria, designed the club in 1916. The
original Grolier Club is on 29 East Thirty-second Street.
On the northwest corner of Sixtieth Street and Park Avenue stands Christ Church, built in 1931 by noted church
architect Ralph Adams Cram. Sign of the times: this
church has an impressive Web site, www.christchurchnyc.org! (Those interested in furthering their study of
New York Methodism can venture downtown to 44 John
Street, where the John Street United Methodist Church,
America’s oldest Methodist society, still stands.)
From dirt road to railroad to road of riches, Park Avenue has gone through several prominent permutations,
reflective of social and economic changes wrought over
two centuries. In the first half of the nineteenth century,
when only two major thoroughfares existed in Upper
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 217
➢

Manhattan (Boston Post Road, now Third Avenue, and
Bloomingdale Road, now Broadway), Park Avenue was indeed a dirt road, employed as the thoroughfare to the village of Harlem. In the 1830s, the road was filled with railroad track and became known as Fourth Avenue. New
Yorkers still refer to Park south of Grand Central as Fourth
Avenue, although the name has been officially changed to
Park Avenue South.
The idea of the New York and Harlem Railroad was to
attract commuters and shoppers away from the riverboats
normally used for the trip downtown. The line ran along
the Bowery and then Fourth Avenue. The first occupants of
Park Avenue were hospital institutions and educational establishments that took advantage of the inexpensive space
adjacent to the railroad lines. Hunter College and the Armory to the north, which you will view later, are some of
the last occupants remaining from that period.
The Park Avenue Rails, 1899. The view is from the Forty-sixth Street Bridge,
overlooking the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Yards. Prior to the
1907 track electrification, the tracks along Park Avenue were open to the sky.
Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

With the New York Central Railroad’s transition from
steam to electric in 1907, the railroad lines were put underground and Park Avenue became, as its name implies, a
beautifully landscaped boulevard with dignified apartment
houses.
In the post–World War II period, the major changes on
the avenue have actually transpired south of Fifty-ninth
Street. Most of the former apartment buildings and hotels
in this part were either torn down or reclad in glass and
steel as the area was transformed to conform to the modernist standards prevailing in the 1950s. The change itself
was prompted by several decades’ respite in financial and
commercial office construction downtown and the attendant move of such offices to the Park Avenue environs.
Although this tour is headed uptown, enjoy some of the
bona fide classics of 1950s commercial architecture a tad
south such as the Lever House and the Seagram Building.
Park Avenue in 1936, looking south from Forty-eighth Street. Now known as the
Helmsley Building, this office tower was originally built as the New York Central Building by architects Warren and Wetmore in 1929. Photo courtesy of the
New-York Historical Society.

(Detour down to Fifty-third and Fifty-second Streets, respectively.) For Frank Lloyd Wright fans, the master’s
“other” Manhattan building (the first being the Guggenheim) stands on Fifty-sixth Street—believe it or not, the
Mercedes Benz showroom. Built in 1955, four years before
the showroom went in, it is still in use.
Look across the street from Christ Church on the southeast corner of Sixtieth and Park.
You’re looking at 515 Park Avenue, the latest luxury condos
by William Zeckendorf and his brother. They are, at press
time, the most expensive per-square-foot apartment building in New York City, charging an average of $3,000 per
foot. The brick and limestone forty-four-story building
boasts eight floor-through duplexes with servants’ quarters. The $4,000 monthly condo fees won’t be optional, but
a $25,000 climate-controlled wine cellar is. Goldman Sachs
head, turned Senator, John Corzine of New Jersey bought
an apartment here but never moved in. Has Zeckendorf
outtrumped Trump?
Walk north along Park Avenue to Sixty-second Street.
The Colony Club (northwest corner of Sixty-second and
Park) was formed in 1903 by Florence “Daisy” Jaffray
Harriman. It was (with the Cosmopolitan) New York’s
most important all-women’s social club and the first in the
United States to build its own clubhouse.
When the club moved into these facilities in 1915, the
brass window fixtures had been ordered from France and
the chandeliers from Germany, though World War I had
already begun. The delay in deliveries turned out to be
so long that some members were said to be in favor of
joining the peace expedition and going after their needed
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
220
➢
➢

elite accessories. Who says the rich are pawns for the war
machine?
The original Colony Club building on Thirtieth and
Madison, still standing, was designed by Stanford White.
Honorary club members once included the wives of J. P.
Morgan and Stanford White.
Walk west on Sixty-second Street to Madison Avenue.
The low building on the northeast corner of Sixty-second
and Madison was originally the famed Louis Sherry’s
restaurant. It was often heard that if you were to take tea
there, “you are sure to see a certain number of Our Best
People.” Louis Sherry’s downtown restaurant and apartment hotel was earlier on Thirty-seventh Street and Fifth
Avenue in 1890(in 1898 at Forty-fifth and Fifth) and was a
competitor of the famed Delmonico’s. Sherry made his
money as a first-class “confectionaire,” providing sweets to
the rich. His lavender boxes and tins were a standard item
in the staterooms of the ocean liners that left New York
weekly.
Louis Sherry’s restaurant was better known in some circles for the antics that went on at its premises. One particularly outrageous affair was the 1903 dinner for the New
York Horseback Riding Club, sponsored by Chicago millionaire Cornelius Billings, at which diners ate on—you
guessed it—horseback. The tab? A mere $50,000.
Although there is no plaque, across Madison Avenue on
the west side stood the home that Theodore Roosevelt
lived in from 1895 to 1897, during his tenure as police commissioner of New York. Appointed under the reform administration of Mayor William Strong, his official title was
“President of the Police Board.” As commissioner, he
forced the resignation of the chief of the uniformed police,
who had justified recently amassing $300,000 as the result
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 221
➢

of successful stock picks. Roosevelt adopted the practice of
prowling the streets at night, dressed in a black cape, looking for policemen shirking their duty. While these strolls
made for good public relations, his popularity suffered
when he insisted on enforcing the Sunday blue laws, closing saloons. New Yorkers were happy to see him move on
when, in 1897, he accepted President William McKinley’s
appointment as assistant secretary of the navy. He became
McKinley’s vice president after the 1900 election.
The youngest person ever to succeed to the presidency
(after the assassination of McKinley in 1901), Roosevelt
also had his childhood home (a re-creation now, but with
original furnishings) in Manhattan, on East Twentieth
Street. Go and visit; there’s a lovely museum too.
Continue walking west on Sixty-second Street to Fifth
Avenue.
The fabulous beaux-arts townhouse at 11 East Sixty-second
Street is known as the Fabbri Mansion. It was commissioned and built in 1900 for William Vanderbilt’s eldest
daughter, Margaret Louisa Vanderbilt Shepard, who then
presented it to her daughter Edith and her son-in-law. The
name Fabbri is for Edith’s husband—note the F’s designed
into the wrought-iron balconies. Some of the many splendid trappings of this extraordinary building include a
wholly original nineteenth-century interior, with 1890s
mahogany paneling in a twenty-fiveby forty-one-foot
dining room and walk-in safes and coal bins untouched for
generations.
Despite the fact that the block between Fifth and Madison was the heart of New York prestige (if the Social Register is any guide), the Fabbris left after only a year, preferring the more bucolic qualities of Carnegie Hill to the
north. The house was recently purchased as the residence
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
222
➢

for the permanent representative of Japan to the United
Nations, for the whopping sticker price of $30 million—
the highest ever for a townhouse in New York.
Just a few doors from the Fabbri Mansion, at 5 East
Sixty-second Street, is the Fifth Avenue Synagogue. Check
out the mid-1950s cat’s-eye windows, with elliptical stained
glass. The architect, Percival Goodman, ingeniously dealt
with the synagogue’s narrow lot by finding a solution in the
traditional Sephardic layout, which calls for a bimah and
ark in a clear central area, with facing sections of worshipers. This centralized plan, in contrast to the more common layout where rabbi and cantor face the audience from
the front, allows congregants to better hear the service.
New York City is one of those classic urban spaces
where a prominent place of worship can be sandwiched
next to other buildings (rather than being, say, prominently
displayed on a street corner).
One of the most famous congregants is the irrepressible
Abe Hirschfeld, who has set up an organization to register
as many Kohanim and Levites as possible throughout the
world. It is his attempt to organize so-called Jewish royalty.
Hirschfeld, former owner of the New York Post, as we go to
press is serving time for hiring a hit man to kill his business
partner.
Architect Percival Goodman is the brother of the great
social critic Paul Goodman. They cowrote the late 1940s
tract Communitas, attributing the breakdown of the city to
postwar consumerism and other modern maladies. In all,
Goodman has designed more than fifty synagogues.
The Knickerbocker Club is located on the southeast corner of Fifth Avenue and Sixty-second Street. One of the
most exclusive clubs in New York, it was founded in 1871 as
a reaction to the eased entry requirements at other clubs. It
was Washington Irving who coined the word knickerbocker
to refer to New York’s most socially prominent families—
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 223

more specifically, to describe any New Yorker who could
trace his or her family to the original Dutch settlers. The
word derived from Irving’s 1809 comic history of the
Dutch regime in New York, A History of New York, authored by the imaginary “Dietrich Knickerbocker,” who
was supposed to be an eccentric Dutch American scholar.
The book became part of New York folklore and the historical fiction part of the vernacular.
Club founders include Alexander Hamilton’s grandson,
John Jacob Astor, and Moses Lazarus, father to Emma, author of The New Colossus, the poem said to be—though not
really—carved on the Statue of Liberty—“Give me your
tired, your poor. . . .” (Long after being written in 1883,
Lazurus’s poem was affixed to the inside of the statue’s
base.) Today the club still boasts some eight hundred
members. As a club, it is one of the last bastions of old New
York society; as a building, it’s lovely, exceptionally well
proportioned with marble trim from basement to roof
balustrade. The same architectural team that designed the
Georgian Colony Club—Delano and Aldrich—handled
the equally Georgian Knickerbocker Club.
Walk north along Fifth Avenue one block to Sixty-third
Street.
Directly across from the Knickerbocker Club stand what
replaced many of the imposing mansions that once dotted
the length of Fifth Avenue—apartment buildings. But
these, as you shall see, are not ordinary apartment buildings. It would be more fitting to label them “apartment
houses,” a term reminiscent of the grandeur and style of
these early progenitors. It took some time before the new
edifices were accepted as equivalent in stature to what came
before. Certainly, their size and luxury helped make the
transition smoother.
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
224
➢

The apartment house 810 Fifth greets you with a grand
iron marquee. Like many apartment buildings of the time,
it was laid out with just one apartment per floor (it has remained such), at an average size of five thousand square
feet. The aristocratic life was not difficult to come by with
four bedrooms, four servants’ rooms, living and dining
rooms, and library. Those in search of an apartment in
New York City today might gag, however, at the 1913 asking price; the thirteen-room apartments ranged from
$72,000 to a whopping $96,000. One would be lucky to get
a studio in Manhattan for that amount in 2002(Manhattan,
Kansas, that is).
This building has had many noted residents over the
years, but perhaps the best known to New Yorkers was former governor Nelson Rockefeller. In fact, Rockefeller was
so charmed by the building’s locale that he lived here with
both his first and second wives.
Architectural historian Andrew Alpern tells the story of
how, in 1963, Richard Nixon purchased the fifth-floor
apartment at 810 Fifth Avenue, shortly after Nelson and his
second wife, Happy, moved into their new apartment.
Steadfastly denying that his relocation to New York from
the West Coast was politically motivated, Nixon averred:
“I’m going to New York for the purpose of practicing law
and not for practicing politics.” Five years later, Rockefeller and Nixon were dueling Republican candidates for
the nomination. During the political battle, they used different elevators to get to their respective apartments. Nixon
might have been better off sticking to the law.
After Nixon’s aborted second term, he decided to move
back to New York, this time just down the way from his
previous abode. Having lived at 810 in the 1960s, Nixon felt
it might be easy to return to his former block. The co-op
board of 817, however, disagreed—not because of Nixon’s
politics or because he was now out of a steady job, for they
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 225

even claimed they believed him when he said he wasn’t a
crook! The co-op board rejected him on the grounds that
they did not want to draw attention to themselves—from
the media and potential protestors. The Secret Service
presence would also have been rather noisome. To paraphrase Phil Ochs: “Richard Nixon, find yourself another
co-op to be part of.”
Nixon did—well, sort of. Shortly after his rejection, he
purchased a twelve-room townhouse at 142 East Sixty-fifth
Street for $750,000. He sold it in 1982 for $2.6 million. The
townhouse had three bedrooms, seven baths, a study, two
living rooms, two kitchens, two fireplaces, a paneled library, and an elevator. His yard backed onto the home of
noted historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. When asked about
his new neighbor, Schlesinger said: “He’s a very lucky
man, living out his days in luxury when he ought to be in
the federal penitentiary.”
Continue walking to the northeast corner of Fifth Avenue
and Sixty-third Street, to 820 Fifth Avenue.
This apartment building, like many on the East Side known
simply by its number, was renowned in the 1920s as the residence of Governor Alfred E. Smith. The first Catholic to
run for U.S. president, Smith came up short in his race
against Herbert Hoover in 1928. Perhaps as a consolation
prize, Smith cashed in and became the well-paid head of
the Empire State Development Corporation (the company
that was soon to build the legendary skyscraper on Thirtyfourth Street).
Richard Nixon has company here. Ronald Perelman,
owner of Revlon, was turned down by 820’s co-op board.
Cross the avenue and walk up to Sixty-fourth Street.
Head into Central Park for a moment.
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
226
➢
➢

Directly in front of you is the Arsenal (1848–51). It has the
distinction of being one of only two structures  in Central
Park that actually predates the park’s development. When
built, it housed the majority of New York State’s ammunition during the war with Mexico. It was deliberately housed
four miles from City Hall, a safety measure, since highly
explosive arms and ammunition were stored in the relatively modest brick building. During the Civil War, the arsenal was a bunkhouse for Union troops. It later became, in
turn, New York City’s Museum of Natural History; park
headquarters for Manhattan and Richmond (today’s Staten
Island); a police station; a weather observatory; and, since
1934, home to the city’s Headquarters for Parks and the
Central Park Conservancy.
Check out the eagle over the door and the pyramids
made of cannonballs on the facade. The Arsenal also has
eight crenellated octagonal towers.
If small children are involved in your walk, consider a
quick stroll behind the Arsenal to Central Park’s Children’s Zoo.
Return to Fifth Avenue and cross to the southeast corner
of Sixty-fourth Street.
The 1896 building at 2 East Sixty-fourth Street is a fine example of one of the few remaining mansions on Millionaires’ Row. Long since converted to condos, it was built as
the city residence of coal magnate Edward J. Berwind
(who also built “The Elms” at Newport). Berwind is perhaps best known for his fueling of U.S. steamships
throughout World War I.
Berwind was also for a time head of the Interborough
Rapid Transit (IRT). He is said to have belonged to some
forty clubs and societies. The building was occupied for a
number of years by the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences.
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 227
➢

Walk East on Sixty-fourth toward Park Avenue.
New India House stands at 3 East Sixty-fourth Street. Built
in 1903 as a private residence for Mrs. Astor’s daughter
Carrie, and designed by Warren and Wetmore, the firm responsible for Grand Central Terminal, this is an ideal example of beaux-arts townhouse style. Check out the brilliantly detailed mansard roof; the small windows, offering
minimal air and light, denote the prior status of those
rooms as servants’ quarters.
Since 1950 the building has been the headquarters of the
Indian Consulate and delegation to the United Nations.
Donald Trump’s ex-wife number two, Ivana, lives at 10
East Sixty-fourth Street. In her modest way (she at least
learned something from the Donald), she wanted to build a
$500,000 indoor swimming pool in her backyard. While
appreciative of her nautical needs, the Landmarks Preservation Commission (LPC) thought twice about the pool’s
viability on a landmarked block. Across from Ivana’s are
several new townhouses that are conforming well with the
requirements of the Landmarks Commission.
It is worth noting here the serious questions raised in the
area of landmarking. Buildings that are landmarked (or in
the case of the Upper East Side, whole streets) cannot be
touched (usually only the exterior but sometimes the interior as well) without the express, written consent of the
Landmarks Preservation Commission. While absolutely
vital in a culture prone to destruction and ambivalence
(witness the hundreds of extraordinary structures demolished in the era prior to the LPC’s existence), landmarking
is not without contradictions. Simply put, landmarking a
street freezes it in time. It makes an aesthetic and social decision that how we value a street today is how it should be
valued decades into the future. Undoubtedly this has the
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
228
➢

advantage of preserving “beauty” at the expense of greed.
But definitions of beauty and importance are enmeshed in
notions of power and culture. How to decide?
The famous Wildenstein Gallery is found at 19 East
Sixty-fourth Street. Founded in Paris in 1875 by Nathan
Wildenstein (1852–1934), who chose to leave his native Alsace in the wake of the Franco-Prussian War in order to remain a French citizen, this is one of the premier art galleries
in the city. Raphael’s Madonna and Child (ca. 1504) and Van
Gogh’s Entrance to the Public Garden at Arles (1888) are but
two of the thousands of works sold over the years by
Wildenstein to major museums and collectors. Jocelyn, the
ex-wife of the current gallery owner, was christened by
New York’s tabloids the “bride of Wildenstein” for her interesting plastic surgery during the Wildensteins’ very
public divorce trial.
The structure was built in 1932 by Horace Trumbauer
with Julian Abele, one of the few black architects working
in a major firm at that time. Just a little farther north is one
of Abele’s early works, New York’s graduate Institute of
Fine Arts, the mansion at 1 East Seventy-eighth Street on
Fifth Avenue, completed in 1912. Originally it was the residence of James B. Duke. It is thus no coincidence that
Abele is the lead architect of the Duke University campus
in North Carolina.
Crossing Madison Avenue, be certain not to miss the
Verona on the southeast corner at 32 East Sixty-fourth
Street.
The Verona is the precedent-setting building for luxury
apartment houses. Compare this Venetian Renaissance opulence with the cool, staid apartment edifices you just
passed on Fifth Avenue. The Verona, built in 1908, originally housed only twenty apartments (two per floor), each
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 229
➢

with eleven rooms and three baths. Mike Wallace lived here
for many years; Kitty Carlisle Hart still lives here; Charles
Evans Hughes, Supreme Court justice and Republican
nominee for president in 1916, lived here from 1917 to 1921.
Perhaps the Verona’s most distinctive feature is its monumental, eight-foot-high metal cornice that projects seven
feet from the main structure. A stellar building.
As you reach Park Avenue, gaze across to the 1922 Central Presbyterian Church. This congregation began as the
Norfolk Street Baptist Church on the Lower East Side and
is now Riverside Church near Columbia University. The
congregation’s claim to fame, however, was the affiliation
of John D. Rockefeller; the grand man himself taught Sunday school classes when the congregation was the Fifth Avenue Baptist Church.
Step inside to have a peek at the wonderful old manually
operated passenger elevators.
Walk north along Park Avenue to Sixty-fifth Street.
New York’s flamboyant and notorious ninety-seventh
mayor (from 1925 to 1932), Jimmy Walker, moved into a
suite at 610 Park Avenue in 1928, soon after leaving his
wife, Janet, for showgirl Betty Compton. The building was
the Mayfair Hotel at the time. He lived here until 1932
when amid accusations of corruption, he was forced to resign his office. He immediately left for Europe, married
Betty Compton, and lived broad for the next three years.
Walker’s penchant for frequenting nightclubs and enjoying
the company of celebrities earned him the nicknames
“Beau James” and the “Night Mayor.” (See chapter 6 on
Central Park for Gentleman Jimmy’s role in the park’s
casino.)
Jimmy Walker was also known as a talented songwriter,
who composed such legendary hits such as “Will You Love
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
230
➢

Me in December as You Do in May?” In the first two years
of his administration, Walker indulged himself with several vacations overseas, spending 143 days out of office,
and was fond of saying, “I refuse to live by the clock.”
Walker ultimately returned to New York City, where his
onetime political nemesis, Fiorello La Guardia, appointed
him municipal arbiter to the garment industry in 1940.
Lillian Hellman lived at 630 Park from 1970 until her
death in 1984. Hellman was a well-known playwright,
whose works include The Little Foxes and Toys in the Attic.
She has been labeled a Stalinist apologist for her longstanding defense of the former Soviet regime but was singularly courageous in her refusal to give names of associates in the theater world during the harrowing McCarthy
period. Hellman also had a well-known and long-standing
relationship with Dashiell Hammett until his death in 1961.
Walk east on Sixty-fifth Street toward Madison Avenue.
Sara Roosevelt, mother of Franklin Delano Roosevelt,
commissioned architect Charles Adams Platt to design the
buildings (which appear to be a single building) at 47–49
East Sixty-fifth Street in 1907, shortly after FDR married
Eleanor. The house was meant to be a wedding present.
The buildings have a single entranceway and interconnecting doors linking the two homes. Eleanor, however, was
not fond of Sara’s penchant for bursting into her home (as
she often did). Franklin and Eleanor lived here from the fall
of 1908 until he was elected to the state legislature in 1910.
They continued to live here on and off for the next twenty
years. It was in the fourth-floor bedroom that FDR convalesced from polio in 1921–22. After Sara’s death in 1941, the
building was purchased for use by Hunter College.
Take a brief detour and stand on Madison Avenue between Sixty-fourth and Sixty-fifth Streets and face the east
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 231
➢

side of Madison Avenue. Have a look at the two rowhouse
vestiges at 741 and 743 Madison. Madison Avenue’s development preceded Fifth Avenue’s by more than a decade;
from the early 1880s, downtown residents began building
the rowhouses and small manors that emerged on Madison.
Several residents, Richard Morris Hunt and Charles
Tiffany, for example, were quite well known.
The first known storefront on Madison emerged in
1904, but it was well into the 1920s that Madison Avenue remained primarily residential. Heavy automobile traffic and
city decrees ordering house owners to remove all stoops
beyond the building line sped the conversion from residential to retail avenue.
Continue walking on Sixty-fifth Street toward Fifth Avenue.
One of Manhattan’s few significant modernist townhouses
(1941) can be found at 17 East Sixty-fifth Street. The building has two separate wings, one on the street and one in the
rear. It was built originally for Sherman Fairchild, the
founder of the Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corporation and of Fairchild Engine and Airplane Corporation. He
was a pioneer in the fields of photography, aviation, and
sound engineering. Fairchild became known as one of the
preeminent venture capitalists in the country (and was so
recognized by cover stories in, among other magazines,
Time and Business Week, the former calling him “the epitome of the new scientist-businessman-inventor”).
The former residence of Mrs. Astor’s son-in-law is at 16
East Sixty-fifth Street. Built in 1917 for James Van Alen,
who in 1919 sold the house and moved to Europe in protest
over the impending Prohibition, the building has been controlled by the Ko´sciuszko (pronounced Kos-ts-iush-ko)
Foundation since 1945. The foundation supports Polish ed-
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
232
➢

ucational and humanities programs and is named in honor
of Tadeusz Ko´sciuszko, who designed the fortress at West
Point and who was instrumental in the American victory in
Saratoga, New York, during the American Revolution.
Ko´sciuszko Bridge spans Brooklyn and Queens.
Temple Emanu-El, at 840 Fifth Avenue on the corner of
Sixty-fifth Street, is the largest Reform synagogue in the
world (edging out the Dohany synagogue in Budapest). It
joined in 1927 with Temple Beth-El (formerly on Sixtyseventh and Fifth Avenue). On this site once stood Richard
Morris Hunt’s double-size mansion for the Mrs. Astor—
Caroline Schermerhorn Astor. Alongside hers was the
Temple Emanu-El, formed in 1845, is New York City’s first Reform congregation. This is their third building, built in 1927. This Art Deco limestone synagogue seats twenty-five hundred people and is considered to be the largest Reform temple in the world. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

home of her son, John Jacob Astor. Both masterpieces
came down to make way for the synagogue. Temple
Emanu-El previously had its building (from 1862) on
Forty-third Street and Fifth Avenue, near to where the
New York Public Library now stands. Members of the congregation helped found and support Mount Sinai Hospital,
the Educational Alliance, and the Federation of Jewish
Charities.
Built in the Byzantine/Romanesque style and reflecting
the mixture of western European and Near Eastern forms,
the synagogue is particularly expressive of the Jewish diaspora. Temple Emanu-El’s main sanctuary rises to 103 feet
(St. Patrick’s Cathedral, by contrast, is 108 feet high) and
holds twenty-five hundred persons. The auditorium is 150
feet long (St. Patrick’s nave is 144 feet) and 77 feet wide (St.
Patrick’s is 48 feet). The side walls, running parallel eastwest, are some of the largest load-bearing masonry walls
anywhere, supporting huge transverse steel beams. For a
people not known for their ecclesiastical architecture, this
is pretty heady stuff. Do step inside, entering at 1 East
Sixty-fifth Street. The rose window, stained glass, mosaics,
and marble and granite podium are otherworldly. Believer
or not, you will be transported.
Walk north on Fifth Avenue one block to Sixty-sixth
Street, then east toward Park Avenue. 
Until the mid–nineteenth century, the area between East
Sixty-sixth and Sixty-eighth Streets and from Fifth Avenue
to Third Avenue was a city park that modified the relentless
grid system of the streets in the neighborhood and provided sorely needed public space. Hamilton Park, as it was
called, served, on a much smaller scale, many of the same
purposes of Central Park today. The area was described in
1807 as “the most elevated of any land on this island south
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
234
➢

of Harlem [which] commands a superb view of the East
River, and the variegated landscape in the vicinity of Hellgate [the narrow strait that connects the East River and
Long Island Sound].” Twenty-six lots around the square in
1807 went up for sale with the city’s stipulation that the
buyers themselves should maintain the square. It was
hoped this would preserve the serenity of the neighborhood. Sadly, Hamilton Park was destroyed in 1869, and
streets run through it.
At 3 East Sixty-sixth Street was the last home of President Ulysses S. Grant (elected in 1868 and 1872, the latter
year over New York’s newspaper reformer Horace Greeley), who lived here from 1881 to 1885. He was forced to declare bankruptcy after a disastrous presidency that was
marred by scandal, and he retired here to spend his last
years and write his personal memoirs. Though he was battling cancer, Grant held on long enough to complete the
memoirs, garnering not only favorable reviews but half a
million dollars for his family.
Grant is indeed buried in Grant’s Tomb. He and his wife
are actually lying in polished black sarcophagi at ground
level in what is the largest mausoleum in the United States.
Later, take a trip uptown (to 122 d and Riverside) to see this
lovely copy of Mausoleus’s tomb at Halicarnassus, one of
the seven wonders of the ancient world.
The Lotos Club, dedicated to literature and the fine
arts, is directly adjacent to the Grant home, at 5 East
Sixty-sixth Street. Built in 1900 as the city residence of
William J. Schieffelin, a grandson of John Jay, the club
moved here in 1947. Former sites were at Irving Place,
Twenty-first Street, Forty-sixth Street, and Fifty-seventh
Street. Women were admitted in 1976. The Lotos is one of
the oldest literary and arts clubs in the country (founded
in 1870). Check out its wooden doors and elegant stonework detail.
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 235

Schieffelin was a reformer who is best known for his
fierce opposition to Tammany Hall–style corruption in the
city. The architect for the house was Richard Howland
Hunt, eldest son of Richard Morris Hunt. Richard Howland Hunt carried on the work of the central wing of the
Metropolitan Museum of Art after his father’s death and,
with his brother, Joseph Howland Hunt, continued his father’s practice into the 1920s.
Just down the block, at No. 9, is the 1909 Charles and
Louise Flagg Scribner House. This townhouse is now Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to the United
States.
Scribner, the son of the founder of the Scribner company and, by 1879, the president of that firm, married the
sister of architect Ernest Flagg, whose housing you can see
on “The Other Boroughs: A Driving Tour” (chapter 10).
For his sister and brother-in-law, Flagg designed this brick
and marble townhouse. The main entry is through an arch
designed to allow automobile access; an elevator took the
car down to the basement. The facade was restored in 1994.
Be certain to note the lavishly detailed French Gothic
cooperative apartment building on the northeast corner of
Madison Avenue and Sixty-sixth Street. Check out the windows (twelve panes over twelve panes—see what a difference fenestration makes). When built in 1908, by architects
Harde and Short, at the extraordinary cost of $1 million,
the building dominated the Madison Avenue brownstones,
and its distinctive round-corner tower was unusually
prominent. The building was divided into only two apartments with twelve and thirteen rooms respectively—on
each floor. The corner tower was occupied by bedrooms;
only a handful survive intact. Originally built with no
stores, shops were added in 1929. By the 1970s, the owner
of the building had allowed it to deteriorate to the point
that the tenants went on a rent strike.
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
236

Boris Karloff lived here in the early 1940s while performing in the Broadway production of Arsenic and Old
Lace, which ran for 1,444 performances from 1941 to 1944.
Architects Harde and Short went on to design Alwyn
Court at Fifty-eighth Street and Seventh Avenue, according to a similarly sumptuous French plan. By the 1910s,
however, the fashion for flamboyant design had passed, and
subsequent buildings were in the more reserved Renaissance and Georgian styles (e.g., the Verona on Sixty-fourth
and Madison).
On reaching Park Avenue, cross and walk north along the
east side of Park to the Armory.
The Seventh Regiment Armory, built by Charles Clinton
in 1877–80, is the only serious holdover from when the
New York Central Railroad came barreling down Fourth
Avenue. The socially prominent Seventh Regiment was
formed in 1806 and in 1824 became the first regiment to
adopt the term National Guard. In 1874 the city leased this
site to the regiment, which raised the money to build a
monumental new armory. The building became a prototype for the later medieval-inspired armories throughout
New York City. The Seventh Regiment Armory, an extravagantly turreted red brick and brownstone structure, is
a triumph of nineteenth-century architecture and engineering. This Park Avenue colossus defined the armory as
a building type and became the prototype for armory
buildings for the next fifty years.
The wealth and importance of the Seventh Regiment
are evident in the decoration of the Armory’s interiors, notably in the different first-floor regiment rooms, used by officers and the second-floor company rooms. Louis Tiffany,
Stanford White, and the Herter Brothers all were responsible for parts of the interior. The drill room, a massive two
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 237
➢

hundred by three hundred feet and one hundred feet high,
is one of the largest unobstructed spaces in New York.
All ten original companies of the regiment commissioned the foremost New York design firms for their second-floor rooms. Most of the rooms were decorated with
Renaissance-style woodwork, often with a large fireplace
and an ornamented piano alcove. To round things out were
ceiling and wall decorations, mirrors, ornate gas and electric chandeliers, ironwork, cast-iron radiators, stainedglass window screens, clocks, armor, decorative hardware,
and parquet floors.
And yes, the building is still a living, breathing armory.
You will often see National guardsmen mingling here amid
Sunday-afternoon antique enthusiasts.
Continue to walk north on Park Avenue to Sixty-eighth
Street. Cross Park to the southwest corner of Park Avenue and Sixty-eighth Street.
Prior to the 1903 covering up of Park Avenue’s train
tracks, the avenue served as the structural divider between
swanky Fifth Avenue and the poverty of Yorkville, east of
Lexington Avenue. A quote from the 1880 American Architect and Building News describes one of the Upper East
Side squatter areas (East Sixty-seventh and Sixty-eighth
Streets) as follows: “The condition of the district is extremely bad, the ground soaked with filth, and the huts unusually crowded and close. It appears that the effluvium
which hangs about the place is so offensive that the officers
of the neighboring foundling asylum are obliged to keep
their windows closed. Mount Sinai Hospital, also, which is
situated on high ground nearby, is so invaded by the pestilential atmosphere that erysipelas, dysentery, and diphtheritic troubles are constantly prevalent in the wards nearest the foul village.” Times certainly have changed.
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
238
➢

The 1920 Delano and Aldrich townhouse at 60 East
Sixty-eighth Street was originally the home of Harold
Pratt, son of Charles Pratt, whose refining company was
famous in its time for Astral Oil. The company eventually
merged with the Standard Oil Trust. Harold Pratt was also
the founder of the fine arts and design school—Pratt Institute—in Brooklyn.
At present, the building houses the prestigious Council
on Foreign Relations (better known as “the Council”), a
club for those in elite policy circles (with very strict entry
requirements). The Council publishes the bimonthly Foreign Affairs magazine. Henry Kissinger can walk from here
to his home by the river (River House).
Across the avenue at Sixty-eighth Street is Hunter
College of the City University of New York (CUNY).
Founded as the Normal College for Women in 1868, a
teacher-training institution, in 1914 it was renamed for its
first president, Thomas Hunter. By the late 1930s, Hunter
was one of the largest women’s colleges in the country. (It
became co-ed in 1965.) Hunter is considered one of the top
schools in the CUNY system. The Clinton administration’s Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala was president of Hunter from 1980 to 1987.
Continue walking north on Park Avenue to Seventy-first
Street.
Here, on the west side of Park between Sixty-eighth and
Sixty-ninth Streets, is a splendid block of Georgian buildings: all four built as private homes between 1909 to 1926
and now serving diplomatic or cultural institutions. These
include the Spanish Institute, the Italian Cultural Institute,
the Italian Consulate, and the Center for Inter-American
Relations. The last of these was the former Soviet mission,
where Nikita Khrushchev once stood on the balcony and
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 239
➢

addressed students across the way at Hunter College (the
same week as his infamous United Nations “We shall bury
you” speech).
These buildings were saved from the wrecking ball in
the 1960s by the Marquesa de Cuevas, a Rockefeller who
rescued the houses with her magnanimity and handed them
over to the organizations that now occupy them.
On the northeast corner of Sixty-ninth Street and Park
Avenue, at 701 Park, is the prestigious Union Club.
Founded in 1836 by men from the top echelons of New
York City’s upper crust, it is New York’s oldest social club
and the infamous one that kept out J. P. Morgan’s comrades. Many of the younger clubs in the city are descendants from the Union. One in particular, the Union League
Club on Thirty-eighth and Park, was founded by Republicans who left the Union Club in 1863, incensed by its failure to expel Confederate sympathizers. Morgan, we now
see, was not alone.
The Asia Society, on the northeast corner of Park and
Seventieth Street, was founded in 1956 by John D. Rockefeller III to foster understanding between Asians and
Americans (and to have a repository for his massive Asian
art collection). Asia House on East Sixty-fourth Street was
the first home of the institution. In 1981, the Asia Society
moved to this location on Park Avenue, a red sandstone
(courtesy of Rajasthan, India) and polished granite (from
Oklahoma) building. The combination of stone further illustrates the cooperation between Asia and America. The
society currently mounts about four major exhibitions per
year, thematically focusing on a country, culture, or
medium. Its bookstore has one of the largest selections of
books relating to Asia. Under its current expansion, the Society will be able permanently to display the entire Rockefeller collection.
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
240

Walk west on Seventy-first Street one block to Madison
Avenue.
The radioand television-broadcasting pioneer David
Sarnoff lived in the six-story, thirty-room townhouse at 44
East Seventy-first Street for many years, until death in
1971. Sarnoff rose from a $5.50-a-week office boy to chairman of RCA Corporation and later NBC. (See our “Immigrant New York” walk in chapter 2 for information on
Sarnoff and the Educational Alliance.) On April 14, 1912,
Sarnoff was working at the Marconi station atop Wanamaker’s department store on Eighth Street when he picked
up a message relayed from ships at sea: “S.S. Titanic ran
into iceberg, sinking fast.” For the next seventy-two hours,
the story goes, he remained at his post, giving the world the
first authentic news of the disaster.
Walk one block north on Madison Avenue to Seventy-second Street.
The Gertrude Rhinelander House, now Polo Ralph Lauren, stands at 867 Madison, on the southeast corner of Seventy-second Street. The Rhinelanders where heavily involved in the colonial-era sugar business. They owned the
Rhinelander Sugar House, which was behind the current
site of the Municipal Building downtown. During the
British occupation of New York City from 1776 to 1783,
their warehouse was a brutal prison for American soldiers.
The Rhinelanders parlayed their sugar fortune into vast
swathes of land in the then-uninhabited Upper East Side.
Alas, Gertrude Rhinelander never had the good fortune to
reside here—her husband (a former police commissioner
who can be found in the novel Ragtime) died while it was
being built, and she couldn’t afford to keep the home.
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 241
➢
➢

Turn around and walk back down to Seventieth and then
west to Fifth Avenue.
The Frick Collection is located at 1 East Seventieth Street.
This Indiana limestone building by Carrere & Hastings,
designers of the New York Public Library, is the former
home of the art collector, coal magnate, and union buster
Henry Clay Frick. He is infamous for helping instigate the
crackdown on the Homestead strikers at the Carnegie Steel
Plant in Pennsylvania in 1892. Apart from his strike-smashing tendencies, Frick knew his art and was fearful that the
Pittsburgh fumes would tarnish his prized works.
The addition on Seventieth Street (finished in 1977) is
based on the Grand Trianon at Versailles. In the 1930s, at
the time of Frick’s wife’s passing (Frick himself died in
1919), John Russell Pope turned the building into a museum. The central court with fountain is one of New York
City’s finest public spaces. 
The gallery itself is full of superior works that range
from the Renaissance to the nineteenth century (but, according to the gallery’s charter, nothing travels). There are
several Vermeer, Rembrandt, Titian, Bellini, and other old
masters.
Cross Fifth Avenue and locate the Richard Morris Hunt
Memorial directly opposite the Frick between Seventieth
and Seventy-first Streets.
This memorial commemorates one of America’s most influential architects. Richard Morris Hunt (1827–95) is
known for the base of the Statue of Liberty; the Fifth Avenue facade of the Metropolitan Museum of Art; New
York City’s “first” apartment house, which stood at 142
East Eighteenth Street (1869–1957); and numerous mansions. To honor Hunt, a founder of the Municipal Art So-
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
242
➢
➢

ciety and the AIA, colleagues erected this monument in
1898. Daniel Chester French, of Lincoln Memorial fame,
sculpted the two female figures (the left representing Art
and the right Architecture), as well as the bronze bust of
Hunt. Hunt was the first American to be trained at the
famed École des Beaux Arts in Paris. He is perhaps best
known for his work at the World’s Columbian Exposition
of 1893 in Chicago (the “White City”)—an array of buildings designed in classical style, turning America toward visions of European splendor. A replica of one of these
buildings is being held in the hands of the female figure on
the right.
One of Hunt’s greatest works was the Lenox Library,
which stood on the current site of the Frick Gallery until it
was destroyed in 1912. In 1895 the library merged with the
Tilden Trust and the Astor Library to form the New York
Public Library.
Walk north along Fifth Avenue to Seventy-third Street.
Arnold Rothstein—the infamous gambler and underworld mobster who allegedly fixed the notorious Black
Sox 1919 World Series—lived at 912 Fifth Avenue (between Seventy-second and Seventy-third Streets) with his
wife during the last few years of his life. A favorite of
writers, Rothstein was Meyer Wolfsheim in The Great
Gatsby and Nathan Detroit in Guys and Dolls. He was
murdered at age forty-six on Election Day in November
1928 at the Park Central Hotel. True to form, Rothstein
had bet heavily on the election—had he lived, he would
have collected $570,000. His murder remains officially
unsolved.
At Seventy-third Street, take a brief detour to 11 East
Seventy-third.
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 243
➢
➢

After his house on East Fifty-fifth Street burned down in
1900, Joseph Pulitzer had Stanford White build him a
large, new, fireproof home here, at 11 East Seventy-third
Street. Borrowing from seventeenth-century Venetian architecture (White was a master for interpreting historical
styles), the architect built one of New York’s finest urban
mansions.
As an owner and publisher, Pulitzer made the St. Louis
Post-Dispatch a phenomenally successful newspaper, later
purchasing the New York World. His notorious methods of
popularizing the paper included the use of illustrations,
news stunts, crusades against corruption, and cartoons, as
well as aggressive news coverage.
Pulitzer was so sensitive to noise that he had a soundproof wing, set on ball bearings, added to the rear of his
home in 1904. He lived there until his death in 1911,
after which the building was eventually converted to
apartments.
Return to Fifth Avenue and continue north two blocks to
East Seventy-fifth Street.
The mansion at 1 East Seventy-fifth Street is the 1909 Edward S. Harkness House, built by James Gamble Rogers.
This elegant five-story neo-Renaissance mansion of Tennessee marble is now home to the Commonwealth Fund. It
is said that the beautiful wrought-iron fence surrounding
the mansion on both sides was a gift by the emperor of
Japan, in gratitude for the fuel Standard Oil provided to the
Japanese Navy during the 1904–5 Russo-Japanese War.
Harkness, the son of one of the six original partners in
Standard Oil, not only invested his inheritance but, more
important, gave most of it away, possibly some $130 million. The noted philanthropist gave much of his largesse to
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
244
➢

the Commonwealth Fund to improve children’s health and
rural hospitals, to the Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital,
and to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Harkness was also a well-known patron of Yale University. In fact, he was so fond of his architect, James Rogers,
that he had him build ten of the residential colleges at Yale.
Boola boola!
Walk along Seventy-fifth Street to Madison Avenue.
Across Madison Avenue is the imposing, and perhaps outof-place, Whitney Museum of American Art. Designed by
Bauhaus architect Marcel Breuer and built between 1963 to
1966, the Whitney houses the twentieth-century art collection of Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney (1875–1942).
Fifth Avenue and Fifty-second Street in 1885. The corner mansion, designed by
Richard Morris Hunt, was home to William K. Vanderbilt, the grandson of Cornelius Vanderbilt. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.
➢

Gertrude was the great-granddaughter of Cornelius
Vanderbilt, a Staten Island farmer who ran ferries to Manhattan in the early nineteenth century. His business expanded into steamships (giving Cornelius the nickname
“Commodore”) and, later, to a vast network of railroads
(discussed earlier along Park Avenue). Gertrude, the
daughter of Cornelius Vanderbilt II, grew up in the manor
we began our tour with—the 137-room mansion at Fifth
Avenue and Fifty-seventh Street, now the site of Bergdorf
Goodman. Her marriage to Harry Whitney took place at
The Breakers, the Vanderbilts’ 70-room Newport summer
cottage.
Whitney was a sculptor and patron of American art and
bought and exhibited painters such as John Sloan, Edward
Hopper, and Stuart Davis early in their careers. By 1929 her
collection contained hundreds of twentieth-century master
works. At that time she approached the Metropolitan Museum of Art to see if they had interest in permanently exhibiting her collection; the Met declined her offer. Whitney
instead decided to exhibit her collection on its own merits
and set up a museum that placed primacy on latter-day
artists.
As you have seen on your walk, the Upper East Side is
more than an area with attractive mansions and townhouses, although it certainly has more of these than any
other part of New York City. Like other neighborhoods,
the Upper East Side has changed from fields and hills to
apartments and restaurants. As we’ve noted, it moved
from mansions to apartment buildings on Fifth Avenue;
from residential to commercial development on Madison
Avenue; from dirt road to railroad to boulevard on Park
Avenue. Although the neighborhood seems “stable,” that
word is fraught with all sorts of baggage. There is no
telling what the Upper East Side will look like fifty or
THE UPPER EAST SIDE | Manhattan’s “Gold Coast”
246

one hundred years from now, or even if many people will
remember that it used to be known as the silk-stocking
district.
Manhattan’s “Gold Coast” | THE UPPER EAST SIDE 247
