WALL STREET
The Architecture of Capitalism
Start: Trains 4 and 5 to Bowling Green or the N/R to
Whitehall Street. Begin facing north on Broadway (facing
the bull) from the inside of Bowling Green Park.
new york citywas founded on money. The Dutch,
several years after Henry Hudson’s initial tour of duty in
1609, laid claim to a “new” Amsterdam. Their goals were
not to advance the cause of human liberty but to get rich.
Unlike Pennsylvania Quakers, New England Puritans, or
Maryland Catholics, who came to the New World to worship God as they saw fit, the Dutch had their hearts set on
trade and exploitation. Beaver trading was the prime avenue to this end and, tragically, slavery a means to achieve
it. The Dutch, whose winding streets are all that remain of
their four-decade control of the island, were swept away
bloodlessly by the British.
The period of British rule, mostly uninterrupted from
1664 until the conclusion of the Revolutionary War in
1783, saw the further development of New York as a center
for commerce and early industry. Far more interested in
money than politics, New Yorkers’ adjustment to British
leadership was none too difficult. Despite the devastation
wrought by the war, independent New York regained its
7
1
➢

financial footing rather quickly, spurred on by commercial
wizards such as Alexander Hamilton and geographic advantages such as the city’s location on the mouth of two
rivers. With the institutionalization of the stock exchange,
the rise of business and manufacturing, and the riches
guaranteed by the digging of the Erie Canal, New York
City became the premier financial center in America.
The twentieth century only furthered the empowerment of New York’s moneyed classes. New York had become the great symbol of wealth and power, with Wall
Street representing the embodiment of that prestige. The
first skyscrapers emerged around Wall Street’s canyons
during the initial years of the twentieth century and many
could claim to be the world’s tallest at different points in
time. The postwar period secured America’s economic
hegemony, reflected in the transition to glass and steel edifices dotting the downtown skyline. Yet, from the 1990s to
the present—with globalization the new rallying cry and
markets turning ever more quickly toward virtual exchange—the future of New York’s “downtown establishment” is being rethought. And, to be sure, the supreme
tragedy of the World Trade Center disaster has changed
our conception of the Wall Street environs forever. While
both the world and global capitalism will recover, its nearterm effects are anybody’s guess.
This walk will shed light on New York City’s downtown financial history as we take a winding jaunt through
many streets originally laid down by the Dutch in the seventeenth century. In fact, it will traverse the basic borders
of New York City—those that lasted until the second
quarter of the nineteenth century. Throughout you will see
how the Wall Street area has evolved—very much as politics and economics have—over the course of the past three
centuries.
• • •
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
8

Standing here at the bottom of Broadway, it is remarkable to imagine that over the next twelve miles lies the
longest avenue in America. But until the second quarter
of the nineteenth century, New York City went no farther than City Hall, a fifteen-minute walk to the north. At
Broadway’s base you find Bowling Green Park, New
York City’s first official park (1733), which possesses a
rich history due to the business and leisure activities of
the Dutch and English. It has been pasture for cows, parade ground for soldiers, and, yes, a bowling field for
colonists. “Taxation and recreation,” one might say, illustrates the park’s varied history.
By 1770, King George III was rewarded by the colonists
with a gilded statue in the center of the park for his alleged
efforts in repealing the Stamp Act; a year later the fence was
added, one of Lower Manhattan’s few colonial-era remnants. It was here that, in 1776, George’s statue was beheaded by enraged colonists and members of the Sons of
Liberty, hours after they read the Declaration of Independence in what is now City Hall Park. Supposedly, George’s
molten lead was then cast into musket balls later used to
shoot Tory soldiers. The fence around Bowling Green is
one of the oldest—if not the oldest—in the city. Iron
crowns adorned the gateposts until American revolutionaries sheared them off. Touch history; you can actually feel
where this happened.
Turn around 180 degrees and gaze at the wonders of the
U.S. Custom House.
While the Custom House is now the site of both the Museum of the American Indian and the U.S. Bankruptcy
Court, at one time it was the primary point for revenue collection in the United States. Before the advent of the income tax in 1913, this was where the government made its
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 9
➢

money. And since New York was by far the leading port
city in America, there was a huge amount of money to be
made. As historian Henry Hope Reed once noted: If City
Hall was run by the Democratic machine, the Custom
House was certainly Republican. In fact, it was Republican
Chester Arthur who, before becoming president on the
death of James Garfield, as collector of customs of the Port
of New York, set the wheels in motion for the construction
of this building.
The 1907 Cass Gilbert masterpiece is a great example of
New York City’s beaux arts heritage. Beaux arts translates
literally as “fine arts” and derives from the great French
school, the École des Beaux Arts. But in the New York
urban context, the term takes on a larger meaning. Here
“beaux arts” refers to those buildings that evince civic
pride, that express a grandeur and stateliness to match their
civic function, whether that function be to house trains,
books, or tax collectors.
In front of the Custom House are Lincoln Memorial
sculptor Daniel Chester French’s limestone statues representing Asia, America, Europe, and Africa, from left to
right. Notice on the facade of the building how Gilbert
skillfully illustrates various symbolic examples of commerce: atop the building’s cornice are twelve marble statues of history’s most successful commercial states. Although you can’t see it, the name Germany was effaced
during World War I and replaced with Belgium! And
look who’s gazing ahead from within every capital: none
other than Mercury, Roman god of commerce (as Hermes, he is also the Greek god of transportation and can
be seen in the heroic statue adorning Grand Central Station a few miles north). Stroll into the museum to view
the oval rotunda which is decorated with a series of 1930s
Works Progress Administration (WPA) murals by Reginald Marsh.
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
10

From the steps of the old Custom House, have a look
up Broadway at No. 26 on the east side of the street, on
the corner of Broadway and Beaver, at the building with
the cast-iron oil burner on the top. The lantern is expressive of the building’s function: it housed Standard Oil,
John D. Rockefeller’s monopolistic firm. However, by
the time this tower was built in 1924, the flame had long
been extinguished—Standard Oil Trust was broken up a
decade earlier. It was in 1911 that the U.S. Supreme Court
required the Standard Oil Holding Company to be dissolved and its directors to relinquish their control over its
John D. Rockefeller. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Trust erected its first building at
26 Broadway in 1886. The current structure on the site, finished in 1924, was
home to Standard Oil (which evolved into Exxon-Mobil) after the breakup of the
trust in 1911. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

numerous subsidiaries. Rockefeller himself had presided over the petroleum business until that year. Standard Oil’s offices remained here until the 1930s, when
Rockefeller Center was constructed. In 1796, the town
residence of another financial giant, Alexander Hamilton, stood on this site.
Even if Bill Gates’s net worth is a hundred times greater
than Rockefeller’s ever was, the latter’s largesse in turn-ofthe-century figures is the more significant. And the ravages
and rewards of capitalism remain better depicted by old
John D. in New York than by young Bill G. in Redmond.
For sheer architectural pleasure, take a moment and admire the graceful and humane way in which the base of the
building follows the course of Broadway north. Where else
but America would a veritable Greek temple end up on top
of a building!
Now look across the way, on the west side of the street.
Across from Rockefeller’s building stands 25 Broadway, the
former central ticket office of the Cunard Shipping Line.
Cunard, one of many steamship companies in that once
hugely profitable industry, was the leader of the pack. The
Cunard Building was put up in 1921 to house the company
that ran the fastest and most luxurious liners in the world.
In the age of expensive cruises and mass immigration, this
was big business. In fact, in the late nineteenthand early
twentieth-centuries, this bottom stretch of Broadway was
known as Steamship Row. Step inside (but not on Sunday)
to see some spectacular wall frescoes and maps outlining
some of the old Cunard routes.
Walk south on Broadway along the eastern side of the
Custom House as it turns into Whitehall Street. Continue
walking to Pearl Street.
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
12
➢
➢

On the corner of Pearl and Whitehall Streets, at 33 Whitehall, is the National Association for Securities Dealers, better known by its acronynm—NASDAQ. For those of you
who rode the turbulent markets of the past few years, this
is the building for you to love or hate. Unlike the New York
Stock Exchange (see below), NASDAQ’s visitor center is
not located in the neighborhood but in Times Square.
Across the street to the south was the site of the Whitehall
Induction Center, now immortalized in Arlo Guthrie’s
classic Alice’s Restaurant, and the site where Guthrie was
“injected, inspected, detected, infected, neglected, and selected.” It was here that Benjamin Spock, the famed baby
specialist turned antiwar leader, and poet Allan Ginsberg
were arrested in 1967 as part of Stop the Draft week.
Turn left onto Pearl Street and walk one block east to
Broad Street. Stop in front of 85 Broad Street, located on
the northeast corner of Broad and Pearl Streets.
Goldman Sachs, the notoriously secretive investmentbanking concern, is housed in this creatively built octagonal structure that slices through Stone Street. The
building was designed to conform to the irregular street
pattern, and paving stones representing Stone Street actually cut right through Goldman Sachs’s lobby. The
partnership between Marcus Goldman and Samuel Sachs
dates from 1882, when they joined forces to further the
commercial paper business that Goldman began thirteen
years prior. Goldman Sachs has recently gone public,
trading openly on the New York Stock Exchange. Is their
incognito status endangered? Stay tuned.
During the construction of the site, from 1979 to 1982,
a number of excavatory digs identified three-century-old
fragments from Lovelace Tavern, once housed nearby. It
was here that colonists gathered to deliberate municipal
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 13
➢

issues—a predecessor locale to the eventual first Stadt
Huys, or City Hall, a block away on Coenties Alley and
Pearl Street.
Look across Pearl Street at the southeast corner of Pearl
and Broad, at Fraunces Tavern.
Washington slept here? Well, in this case you might win the
bet. What we know for certain is that at this site G.W. bade
farewell to his loyal officers on December 4, 1783, nine
days after the British evacuation and the end of the Revolutionary War. In one of his most memorable speeches,
Washington said: “With a heart full of love and gratitude,
I now take leave of you. I most devoutly wish that your latter days may be as prosperous and happy as your former
ones have been glorious and honorable.” The tavern,
which was run at the time by an immigrant from the West
Indies who would soon become Washington’s steward,
Samuel Fraunces, was a popular watering hole of the day.
It was also the site where the Committee of Correspondence (later the Continental Congress) held its first meeting. Prior to its revolutionary history, the building was the
mansion of Stephen Delancey (as in Delancey Street), a
French immigrant who received it as a wedding present
from his father-in-law Colonel Stephanus Van Cortlant,
New York City’s tenth mayor.
The building, a conjectural reproduction—no original
bits save a few bricks remain—was financed by the Sons of
the Revolution in 1907. Its style is Georgian, named for
those nefarious British kings and soon renamed “colonial”
or “federal,” in keeping with the antiroyalist mood of the
newly independent states. Fraunces Tavern’s modern history is more surreal: it was the site of a bombing in January
1975 by the Armed National Liberation Front (FALN), a
group of Puerto Rican independence seekers, that killed
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
14
➢

four and injured fifty-three. Despite now-senator Hillary
Clinton’s resistance, President William Jefferson Clinton
offered other members of the FALN a pardon in 1999.
Have a look at the block east of Fraunces Tavern on
Pearl: this represents one of New York City’s few remaining block-long groups of late eighteenthand early nineteenth-century shipping offices and warehouses. Fortunately, these buildings were among the few that survived
the Great Fire of 1835 unscathed. Thanks should go to the
nonprofit New York Landmarks Conservancy for saving
these buildings from the wrecking ball in the twentieth century. The area is now part of the Fraunces Tavern Block
Historic District.
Walk north on Pearl Street two short blocks to Hanover
Square.
Here in Hanover Square sits lonely Abraham DePeyster,
former mayor of New York City, colonial chief justice in
the late seventeenth century, and prominent merchant,
who once had a more princely view up Broadway, when
he was planted in Bowling Green Park. Still, one could
do worse than Hanover Square, a lovely former public
common, today encircled by converted lofts and new
condominiums. In fact, a return to the residential is a
theme that is proliferating throughout Wall Street’s
canyons today, as space built for offices has become even
more attractive as apartments for those who want to walk
to work in the area.
The area around Hanover Square was once the center of
New York City’s publishing industry. William Bradford’s
New York Gazette, the city’s first newspaper (1725), had its
printing offices here. It was also the home base of Captain
Kidd, the privateer turned pirate. Interestingly, Hanover
Square retains the family name of the English kings. This
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 15
➢

is in sharp contrast to much of New York that changed its
nomenclature after the Revolution.
On the west side of the square is India House at One
Hanover Square. Built in the early 1850s, India House has
had various incarnations. It was originally the Hanover
Bank and later the New York Cotton Exchange, when cotton was king. Brownstone was once seen as unseemly for a
proper home, but this building, as well as Trinity Church,
helped change that. In the latter half of the nineteenth century, brownstone became a mark of dignity for New York’s
landed gentry. Today, India House is one of Lower Manhattan’s most exclusive business clubs. It takes its name
from nautical trips to (and Orientalist fantasies of) the
East. Its original members were less concerned with the vagaries of banking and finance than with maritime issues.
Have a glance at the former headquarters of the infamous Kidder Peabody on 10 Hanover Square. They were
housed here from 1969 through their Reagan-era junkbond scandals, until their merger with Paine Webber in
1995.
Take a look eastward toward Old Slip by the river,
which until 1973 housed the First Precinct Police (South
Street at Old Slip). Finished in 1911 and considered to be
New York City’s first modern police station, it is designed
in the form of a Renaissance palazzo. Formerly, it was
headquarters to the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
Irony aside, without the latter institution, this and over a
thousand other structures in New York City could have
met the fate of Pennsylvania Station—destruction.
Leaving Hanover Square, turn left onto William Street
and continue about four blocks to Wall Street.
Along the way, at 56 Beaver, on the southwest corner of
South William Street, is Delmonico’s. This venerable New
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
16
➢

York City restaurant was established in 1827 by the brothers Delmonico. The building, with a white marble portico
reputedly from Pompeii, dates from 1891. Go inside to experience the haute-bourgeois flavor of nineteenth-century
New York.
At 22 William, between Beaver and Exchange Place, is
the City Bank Farmers’ Trust Company Building, built in
1931. This building has always been a curiosity in the
canyons of Wall Street; it departs from the rectilinear and
pivots as if ready to blast off. The irregular site that it inhabits helped the architects push the envelope in their design. The bronze doors are the building’s pièces de résistance; enjoy its sumptuous decoration filled with trains,
boats, and airplanes. The interior uses over forty different
kinds of marble and is laced with nickel and copper.
Look skyward for a few moments and bask in the glory
of downtown New York’s canyons. Could the Dutch ever
have imagined that their twisted, circuitous roads would
one day be dotted with towers of masonry and steel? Even
present-day Amsterdam has nothing resembling a “small
skyscraper”!
Wall Street—the locus of world capitalism, the sine qua non
of corporate finance, the epicenter of the blue suit. This is
perhaps the most famous street in all of America. And
rightly so. Since the first market opened here under a buttonwood tree down on William and Wall after the Revolutionary War, Wall Street has been the lasting American
symbol of wealth and power. Even if it seems a tad passé to
envision one street as the embodiment of financial capital
in an age when capital is virtual, the name Wall Street continues to resonate symbolically.
The “Wall” in the name indeed comes from an actual
wall built by the Dutch that lasted from Governor Peter
Stuyvesant, who had it erected in 1653, through the latter
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 17

part of the seventeenth century, when colonists under British rule finally undermined it. The wall (known in Dutch as
De Wal) was made of wooden planks stacked roughly nine
feet high and was manned to keep both the British (until
1664) and the Indians away from New Amsterdam. Jews
were at first banned from standing guard at the wall and
were taxed instead. Asser Levy, a prominent Jewish resident, brought a suit against the Dutch West India Company, which eventually overturned Stuyvesant’s ruling and
allowed Jews to stand watch. Levy is now memorialized a
little bit further uptown, on Twenty-third Street, by Asser
Levy Place.
At the eastern end of Wall Street stood a number of
slave markets; in fact, on the eve of the American Revolution, New York City was an ignominious second to
Charleston, South Carolina, among urban slaveholding
cities. It was not until July 4, 1827, with the approval of
Governor Daniel D. Tompkins and the New York state
legislature, that slavery was officially laid to rest (see more
on slavery on page 26).
The building immediately to your right, at 55 Wall
Street, was designed by Isaiah Rogers in 1842 to replace the
Merchants Exchange, which, with seven hundred other
buildings, was lost in the Great Fire of 1835. It functioned
as the U.S. Custom House during 1863–99. In its most recent incarnation, it was a branch office of Citibank, which
was formed by the merger of First National Bank and the
City Bank Farmers’ Trust Company.
The building is notable for the amazingly seamless
arrangement of its structure, where the bottom Ionic
colonnade put up in 1842(and each a single block of stone!)
works hand in glove with the upper Corinthian colonnade
built seventy years later. The mammoth lobby measures
198 feet long and is 132 feet in height, and it houses the
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
18

largest display of Wedgewood china in the world around
its central chandelier.
At press time, the Cipriani family, caterers extraordinaire and foes of New York City labor unions, notorious
for hiring only nonunion labor, are converting this space
into a banquet hotel on floor one and a hotel with 142 guest
suites on floor two. For similar efforts by the same family,
check out the conversion of the former Bowery Savings
Bank building across the street from Grand Central Station
on Forty-second Street, as well as the Rainbow Room at
Rockefeller Center, which they also control. Across from
55 Wall Street we come to the J. P. Morgan Building. The
Pulitzer Prize–winning architectural critic Ada Louise
Huxtable, not known for her appreciation of the last several decades of New York City architecture, has sung the
praises of Kevin Roche’s rich postmodern monolith here at
60 Wall, and rightly so. The modern movement in architecture had become so moribund by the 1970s, producing a
surfeit of third-rate flat-topped knockoffs, that it seemed
the grace and grandeur of previous eras would be forever
sundered from the future.
Roche, however, in one of the finer examples of postmodernism in contemporary architecture, has achieved a
building that holds its own side by side with the pantheon
of financial structures down and around Wall Street. And
for a tall building, it does not impose upon or dominate its
neighbors; it blends in quite nicely (enacting one of postmodernism’s great critiques of modernism) as its own faux
colonnade speaks convincingly to 55 Wall’s colonnade
across the street. In an interesting quirk, it was 55 Wall that
sold its air rights to allow for the 55-story height of the J. P.
Morgan Building. The vast interior atrium open to the public is lovely as well.
To your left, at 40 Wall Street, was originally the Bank
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 19

of Manhattan. It’s hard to imagine that 40 Wall, polished,
waxed, and stylized by New York’s very own Donald
Trump, once was of unique importance in the history of
American skyscraper construction. But it was. New York
City has had a number of terrific rivalries in its past:
Dodgers/Yankees, Robert Moses/Jane Jacobs, Bronx Science/Stuyvesant. But in terms of the building trade, it’s
worth retelling the story of the Bank of Manhattan versus
the Chrysler Building during the summer of 1929.
Longtime professional rivals, former partners William
Van Alen and Craig Severance were hard at work trying to
outdo each other in the battle for dominant skyscraper
height. While the Great Depression lurked just around the
corner, New Yorkers were enthralled by the so-called race
to the top. The Woolworth Tower held sway as New York
City’s tallest building, but Severance was convinced until
the very last moment that his Bank of Manhattan would
outdo Van Alen’s automotive giant and dethrone Frank
Woolworth. But hidden from view, and unveiled only at
the final moment of the competition, was Chrysler’s razorsharp spire, which because of its additional 125 feet outdid
40 Wall and brought the Chrysler Building the fame of
being the tallest. Severance’s consolation prize? 40 Wall
broke all records for speed; it was finished in eleven
months, with over a million square feet of floor space.
For Van Alen’s Chrysler building, success was shortlived. The Empire State unseated the Chrysler after only
eighteen months. As for the Bank of Manhattan, in only
five years it would drop to being the fifth tallest building in
the United States. Today it’s at number 30 and counting.
Are the tallest buildings in the world in New York City?
or perhaps Chicago? Better head east—Far East—as the
giants are being built throughout China, Malaysia, and Singapore. Today, five of the world’s tallest ten buildings are
in Asia.
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
20

For many years, 40 Wall Street was the headquarters of
the late Manufacturer’s Hanover Trust (known by its avuncular nickname “Manny Hanny”). The site was home to
the original Bank of Manhattan building in 1799.
Walk north along William Street, one block to Pine Street,
and go up the steps on your left to Chase Manhattan
Plaza.
Finished in 1960, David Rockefeller’s Chase Manhattan
Bank Building is a shining example of sleek postwar modernism in action. The Chase building also helped usher in a
new “democratic” era of bank building, where banks became transparent structures that could be “seen through”
rather than maintaining the impenetrable fortress facades
of tradition. As the best example of the contrast, take a
look through the Chase building and have a peek at the
Federal Reserve, an impenetrable fortress—as well it
should be, to hold all the gold inside.
Standing on the plaza check out Jean Dubuffet’s Group
of 4 Trees sculpture; the AIA guide makes the clever remark that Dubuffet’s white-painted concrete work has the
effect of papier-mâché. David Rockefeller’s commitment
to modernist art and architecture is also seen in the sunken
fountain below, courtesy of the fine Japanese American
sculptor Isamu Noguchi. (One of New York City’s lesserknown outer-borough treats is his sculpture museum in
Queens.) For an additional taste of the fine arts, look north
for a moment at Louise Nevelson Plaza. It is here that seven
black sculpted objects by the noted American sit in a small
plaza.
Chase remains one of the largest banking firms in the
United States, with assets of almost $400 billion. Their historic merger in 1996 with Chemical Bank created what was,
at the time, the nation’s largest banking company.
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 21
➢

Notice the modest, self-effacing marker announcing
“The Trump Building” alongside the Pine Street facade of
40 Wall. Somehow, we don’t think Craig Severance ever
had this in mind.
Walk north to the other side of the plaza to the Federal
Reserve Bank. Built like a fortress in 1924, this structure
was made to resist the elements. It is not New York snobbery to recognize this as the most significant of the thirteen
Federal Reserve sites. The limestone facade of the bank is
noted for its capacity to weather in different tones. (Notice
how they change from light to dark.) Take a closer look as
well at the magnificent wrought-iron lanterns designed by
the Philadelphian Samuel Yellin.
The Federal Reserve Bank was set up in 1914 in order to
have a central bank, rather than one person, make decisions
on policy. In 1907, for example, J. P. Morgan was responsible for mobilizing enough banking support to help stave off
a collapse that could have rivaled the Great Depression.
The Federal Reserve currently holds upward of $110 billion in gold bullion, mostly in foreign holdings (in other
terms, one-quarter of the official monetary gold of eighty
countries—more than Fort Knox!). Wheelbarrows are still
in use transporting the gold bullion from one country’s
room to the next.
Double back, leaving Chase Plaza, and turn right and
head west one block to Nassau Street. Walk south on
Nassau Street one short block back to Wall Street.
Westward, at 14 Wall, stands the Bankers Trust Building.
Bankers Trust is no more (see Deutsche Bank for details),
but Trowbridge and Livingston’s pyramidal top, taken
from antiquity’s well-known mausoleum at Halicarnassus
(fourth century b.c.), remains. It is one of the great pinnacles in a city bathed in sumptuous finishing touches. In fact,
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
22
➢

J. P. Morgan shacked up beneath the pyramid to have a
bird’s-eye view of the construction of his own building
across the street. The pyramid became for years the logo of
Bankers Trust (although, in a testimony to the effect of
downtown canyons, you cannot see the pyramid from Wall
Street itself). Take a walk inside to have a peek at the
bronze gates in the lobby. Exquisitely finished, they represent the various enterprises of capitalism, including metallurgy, shipping, mining, agriculture, and power.
On the northeast corner of Nassau and Wall stands Federal Hall National Memorial, the “Parthenon of Wall
Street” as some have dubbed it. The site has a vigorous and
significant past as New York City’s second city hall, formerly the Custom House and subtreasury in the nineteenth
century and currently a federal museum. When New York
became the nation’s capital in 1789, the building on this site
was renamed Federal Hall. The current structure dates
The 1842 Federal Hall, formerly a subtreasury building and now a museum.
George Washington took his first oath of office as president in the previous
version of Federal Hall on this site, which also contained both houses of Congress and the departments of state, war and treasury. Photo courtesy of the
New-York Historical Society.

from 1842. In it the fledgling government of the United
States operated for its first eighteen months. It contained
both houses of Congress and the departments of state, war,
and treasury. Before its federal function, here John Peter
Zenger, editor of the critical New York Weekly Journal, was
both tried and acquitted in 1735 of seditious libel in a case
that was to be the lodestar for press and speech freedoms
thereafter. The famed Stamp Act Congress met here in
1765 to draft the Declaration of Grievances against “taxation without representation.” And the Declaration of Independence was read here on July 9. (It took some days to
travel from Philly to New York; no e-mail access then.)
The site even served as the British headquarters during the
Revolutionary War!
Take a look at the dignified statue of George Washington sculpted by the master John Quincy Adams Ward (no
relation to George Washington’s successor). Just about
where he now stands stood G.W. himself, in a plain brown
suit on the second floor of the original building, taking the
oath of office as the first president of the United States. In
1790, with the move of the federal capital to Philadelphia,
the building on this site, designed by Washington, D.C.’s
great master planner Pierre L’Enfant, was demolished.
Federal Hall’s Greek-revival style was typical for the
earlier nineteenth-century period, when Athenian democracy and the Greek independence movement led to a
bumper crop of Doric-templed civic buildings throughout
the nation. Only a short while later, when abolitionism
gained steam in the North, Greece became associated with
slavery rather than the demos, and those lovely classical
buildings lost their place in the sun.
Set your gaze across Wall Street at the plain, unornamented, unsigned building on the southeast corner of
Broad and Wall. Why the modesty? Why the restraint?
Well, this is J. P. Morgan’s bank building, and as Morgan
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
24

wanted all to realize, if you didn’t know what this building
was, you had no business (literally and figuratively) being
there. The only decoration on the facade of the building
are the pockmarks that dot the Wall Street side, remnants of
a bomb (blamed on anarchists) that killed thirty-one people
and wounded hundreds in 1920. The scars remain because
Morgan felt they were a testament to his invincibility.
Directly across Broad Street from Morgan’s building is
the sine qua non of capitalist institutions: the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE). Even if its address is, after all, on
Broad Street, this is the best known of Wall Street’s buildings. Its facade has contributed significantly to its status. In
contrast to the severe Grecian temple of Federal Hall
across the way, the NYSE’s Roman trappings are all pomp
and circumstance.
Take a look at the somewhat forlorn little tree out front
on Broad Street. This isn’t any old tree but a buttonwood
(or sycamore). Its symbolism? Well, in 1792, twenty-four
brokers met under a buttonwood (in actuality further east
on Wall Street) and began trading the massive debt from
the Revolutionary War. The so-called Buttonwood Agreement, Gotham’s Edwin Burrows and Michael Wallace tell
us, “laid the foundations for a structured securities market
without the now discredited auctions.” Early the next year
the traders moved into the Tontine Coffee House, which
was located on the northwest corner of Water and Wall
Streets. This site had been the locale for the infamous Royal
African Trading Company, where the English bought and
sold enslaved Africans.
Without question, the New York financial market has
seen a multitude of changes since the crash of 1929. With
the late-1990s boom cycle, the great crash has receded further into our cultural memory. But it was a full twenty-five
years before the Dow Jones Industrial Average surpassed
the summer highs of that fateful year. Even more telling, it
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 25

wasn’t until 1968 that the daily volume on the floor of the
exchange surpassed the 16 million shares traded on Black
Thursday. Today, 16 million shares are traded quite often
on one company in the course of a day; the NYSE trades 16
million in each day’s first few minutes.
Take a peek down Broad Street. It runs from Wall down
to the tip of Manhattan. It was originally a canal dug by the
Dutch in 1660 and filled in by their British successors in
1676.
slavery
New York City was no stranger to slavery. It was, in fact, the
largest slaveholding city in all the colonies until 1750, and the
number-one place for slave importation and auctions.
Slaves arrived in the city as early as 1626, brought in small
numbers from the Dutch West Indies. But on September 15, 1655,
the Witte Paert docked with three hundred African slaves. This
signaled New York City’s beginning as a large-scale port of destination for the transatlantic slave trade. Many slaves were then
shipped from New York to the Chesapeake, but by 1664, the city
was 20 to 25 percent black.
Under the Dutch, slaves were provided with some medical care,
food, and housing. The Dutch gave half freedom to some; this
meant a degree of freedom in finding housing and employment,
but even half-free blacks were required to work for the Dutch West
India company when labor was needed, and children were company
property. A few were allowed to settle outside the city on land
grants, as a buffer between European settlers and Indians, and a
few were free outright. Slaves could testify in court in cases involving whites and were allowed to serve in the militia during
emergencies. In 1663, a group of half-free blacks petitioned for
freedom in return for service to the Dutch under threat of English
invasion. The Dutch agreed and gave some full freedom in 1664,
but seven hundred remained in slavery.
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
26

The British recognized all residents’ slave property after their
conquest in 1664. They then made it more difficult each year for
blacks to be free, restricted slaves freed by the Dutch, and eliminated half-free status. In 1677, British law dictated that all blacks
brought to trial were presumed to be slaves, and in 1706, it decreed that conversion to Christianity did not affect slaves’ status.
The British needed labor. From 1730 to 1750 the black population
grew faster than the white. By 1746, one in five New Yorkers was
black, but that number declined to 16 percent at the time of the
Revolution. In King’s County at that time one-third of the residents
were black, and more than half of whites owned slaves.
In the city, owners typically had two or three slaves who lived
and worked in the master’s home. Slaves also worked as coopers,
tailors, bakers, tanners, carpenters, sailmakers, and masons and
were able to hire out their own labor. New York City had 3,137
slaves by 1771. Under the British occupation, slaves fled to New
York City in hopes of freedom. After 1781 the British evacuated
many blacks, some of whom ended up as slaves in the West Indies.
In 1784, the New York legislature granted freedom to slaves abandoned by departing Loyalists (property forfeiture). Others were
freed for service to patriot causes.
In 1785, the New York Manumission Society began to work for
the gradual abolition of slavery. The majority of both houses of the
New York legislature wanted to abolish the institution, but could
not decide on the future status of freed slaves; few wanted blacks
to have equal civil rights. French fleeing Haiti near the end of the
eighteenth century brought their slaves and increased New York
City’s slave population. The Gradual Manumission Act of 1799
freed males born after that year at age twenty-eight and females
at age twenty-five. In 1820, only 518 slaves remained in New York
City, and legislation emancipating all slaves finally took effect in
1827.
New York City saw several significant slave uprisings during
the eighteenth century, most notably the 1712 uprising on Maiden
Lane and Nassau Street (the present site of the Home Insurance
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 27

Company). It was here that more than fifty armed slaves gathered
for an uprising that eventually killed nine white settlers before the
slaves dispersed to the north. Ultimately nineteen participants
were captured and executed in gruesome fashion—by hanging,
burning, and goring—in order to intimidate the remaining slave
population.
Walk west on Wall Street toward Trinity Church.
The building at 1 Wall Street now houses the Bank of New
York, which absorbed the original owners, the Irving
Trust, in 1988; at the time the building had the highest real
estate price tag of any site in New York City. Inside the
three-story reception hall is one of the most glorious interiors in Manhattan, maybe even along the whole eastern
seaboard. This is Art Deco at its most majestic: soaring,
proud, and emboldened. Lewis Mumford called 1 Wall
Street a building of “untrammeled imagination.” It is one
of the sad fates in architectural history that the golden age
of Deco, reflected in a goodly number of powerfully
massed tall buildings, came to a screeching halt with the
onset of the Great Depression. At the very top of the fluted
skyscraper is a gilded mosaic boardroom, testament to the
extravagance of a different age.
Trinity Church (Wall Street and Broadway)—it is hard
to imagine in an age when skyscrapers, giant corporate
headquarters, and Starbucks dot the landscape, but there
was a time when churches were all one could see on the
skyline viewed from any part of the urban mise-en-scène.
Trinity, at 280 feet, was the highest point in New York City
until surpassed by the towers of the Brooklyn Bridge
(which says a lot about commerce). That Trinity was in
part a sanctuary for religious residents does not mean it
didn’t maintain close relations with the financial elements
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
28
➢

of the city, nor that the two can be separated. Indeed, its location at the foot of Wall Street. is evidence enough of its
relationship with the power structure’s financial elite.
Trinity began as a land grant from King William III to
the colonists in the late seventeenth century. Many of the
early belfrymen, pastors, and rectors now have New York
City streets named after them (Chambers, Murray, and
Reade Streets, for example). The church originally controlled all the land from Fulton up to Christopher Street.
Trinity Church has gone through three incarnations.
The first church (1698–1776) was burned in the fire of
1776. The second saw its roof implode in 1839. The present building by Richard Upjohn has fortunately withstood
the ravages of time.
The view west on Wall Street, from Broad Street to Trinity Church, with the
steps of Federal Hall to the right. Kiernan’s and the buildings to its left are on
the future site of the New York Stock Exchange building. Photo courtesy of the
New-York Historical Society.

Looking north up Broadway past the 280-foot Trinity Church spire, with the
open space of the churchyard around it. This 1846 structure by Richard Upjohn
is Trinity’s third incarnation on the site; the church’s original land grant included all the land from Broadway to the Hudson River, from Fulton to Christopher Streets. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

Today the church is no stranger to wealth and influence;
although many have been sold over time, parish holdings
still bring in approximately $40 million per year. A curiosity from yesteryear: Trinity still maintains the rights to all
unclaimed shipwrecks and beached whales along part of
the Hudson River.
Take a walk around the churchyard and you will run
into an illustrious gathering of New York City’s prominent
financial elite and early purveyors of freedom and liberty.
Alexander Hamilton was buried here after his fateful duel
with Vice President Aaron Burr in Weehawken, New Jersey; Robert Fulton, noted inventor of the steamship, is memorialized; and the churchyard provides the final resting
places for William Bradford, publisher of New York’s first
newspaper; and Francis Lewis, the only signer of the Declaration of Independence buried in Manhattan. Opposite
Pine Street, in the north part of the churchyard, stands the
Soldiers/Martyrs monument. Erected in 1852, it stands as a
memorial to soldiers who died during the American Revolution while imprisoned in Rhinelander Sugar House on
Liberty (originally Crown) Street. There were only 6,824
combat deaths among the revolutionaries, 29 percent of the
war’s total fatalities. Another 18,500 died in captivity, more
than half of them in New York.
Take a quick detour through the graveyard on the north
side of the church and down the set of stairs on the other
side to Trinity Place, and have a peek at the American
Stock Exchange.
The American Stock Exchange (AMEX) has its roots at
the curbstone of Broad Street and Exchange Place, where
curb brokers would literally stop at nothing to buy and
sell. It was only in 1921(after fifty-six years!) that the New
York curb market found a home. In 1953 it was officially
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 31
➢

designated the American Stock Exchange. The AMEX is
currently becoming a subsidiary of NASDAQ.
Return to Broadway and walk north to No. 120, the Equitable Building, filling the block between Pine and Cedar
Streets.
Standing on Thames Street opposite 120 Broadway offers
the tourist an ideal crash course in New York City’s first
zoning ordinance. The extreme mass of the Equitable
Building, where the floor area was thirty times the site’s
area and the shafts went straight up—all the way to the fortieth floor—was a bit discouraging. Forty-five acres of
floor space all on a site that was just over an acre in size!
Forget pork bellies; light and air are the most desired commodities on this block.
Among other things, the new ordinance called for a
“zoning envelope” that restricted pure shafts darting
straight into the sky and forced what became known as the
“setback”—the stepped-back, stairlike recesses one sees as
buildings grow taller. Spurred on by the exquisite drawings
of Hugh Ferris, setbacks became a design challenge for architects, each trying to outdo the next in terms of geometry and flair.
The top three floors of the Equitable were for a long
time taken up by the Banker’s Club, one of the most affluent and well heeled clubs in the city. The Equitable has long
since moved out.
Continue walking north on Broadway and take a breather
in Liberty Plaza.
You may be wondering how, in this dense and overoccupied downtown district, an open-air plaza (with benches!)
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
32
➢
➢

was able to emerge. If only we could credit the magnanimity of Wall Street bankers. In point of fact, it was the great
Seagram Building on Park Avenue, with its pristine plaza
and open space, that convinced the city to find incentives
for developers to allow more public use. Thus was born the
1961 zoning ordinance, which encouraged and rewarded
builders who provided public space integrated with private
buildings.
Directly west of the plaza once stood the complex of
seven buildings, the World Trade Center, spotlighted by
the “twin towers”—Towers 1 and 2—the third tallest
buildings in the world. In the greatest act of terror to occur
on American soil, almost three thousand persons lost their
lives on September 11, 2001, when two hijacked planes were
crashed into the twin towers, resulting in horrible fires and
the buildings’ implosion. As we write, it is too early to
know what will become of this now tragic space. But in
New York’s unceasing effort to rebuild that which is torn
down—part of the genetic make-up of America really—it
is unlikely that the area will remain fallow far into the future. Yet the question remains how and in what way to memorialize, a question long debated at the site of the African
burial ground, which still lies just north near City Hall.
Take a look across Liberty Street at the U.S. Steel Building at 1 Liberty Plaza. This building contrasts nicely with
the Marine Midland Bank across Broadway to your right.
Designed by the same firm seven years later (in fact Chase,
also by Skidmore Owings and Merrill, was designed seven
years before Marine Midland) it possesses none of the
grace and attention to detail of Marine Midland. One could
argue that, having been designed for U.S. Steel, it maintains an understandable girth and bulge, but this does not
excuse the tiny and inhuman base. U.S. Steel itself exists
today as USX.
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 33

the late great singer building
On the site of today’s U.S. Steel/1 Liberty and the outdoor plaza
stood one of the great downtown buildings in New York, the Singer
Building. Perhaps the mourning wasn’t as great as when Pennsylvania Station was slaughtered in 1963, but the Singer Building’s
demolition brought tears of rage consistent with its long-standing
importance in New York City’s skyline. Its tragic epitaph notes that
it is the tallest building ever to be demolished.
As this book goes to press, a rare occurrence has happened in
New York City: a bad building has lost the battle with developers.
Say goodbye to the Columbus Circle Coliseum, a colossal disaster
that New Yorkers had to live with for nearly fifty years and that is
now being replaced by AOL–Time Warner’s headquarters.
It was uncommon in the late 1960s and during the 1970s—
impossible, is more like it—for a real estate developer to
think about the quality of his building as a means of attracting tenants. Standard operating procedure called for
structures that were materially inexpensive and expeditiously completed. The end result is best witnessed in much
of the banal and uninspired last-gasp modernism that dots
the canyons of Third and Sixth Avenues. But in the case of
the Marine Midland Bank Building (140 Broadway), Harry
Helmsley was ahead of his time.
Helmsley was moved to hire one of the great international style architects, Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore Owings and Merrill (who also designed the Chase Manhattan
building behind it in 1960), as well as the sculptor Isamu
Noguchi (whose fountain you saw in Chase’s plaza). The
result is a sleek, refined, glass exterior that adds dignity to
this stretch of Broadway. Noguchi’s moving contribution
is an orange cube (well, to be exact, it’s a rhombohedron—
a six-sided figure) with a cut-out hole.
Marine Midland Bank is the principal U.S. subsidiary of
WALL STREET | The Architecture of Capitalism
34

the London HSBC Holdings, P.L.C., one of the world’s
largest banking and financial services organizations.
Continue north on Broadway five blocks, to the corner
of Barclay Place and the Woolworth Building at 233
Broadway.
Where have you gone, Frank Woolworth? It was the revolutionary genius of Woolworth to open a set of stores
where the buyer could touch, feel, and examine every item
he or she thought of purchasing. Sounds sentimental in an
age of virtual commerce, but it made Woolworth a mint.
The tallest building in the world from 1913 to 1929, the
Woolworth is symbolized by its trademarked name the
“Cathedral of Commerce.” Sadly, the great cathedral
closed its famous stores in the mid-1990s and sold its
Gothic-style tower in June 1998 for $155 million to the
Witkoff Group. But there is a happy ending: because of
landmark rulings, once a building has been landmarked it
forever retains the name of the original structure. Hence,
forevermore, the Woolworth will be the Woolworth. (The
same holds true for the Equitable, Lever House, and many
others; the Pan Am Building, however, is only a memory.)
The exterior of the building is dressed up in late Gothic
style, perhaps the best use of the period we have in New
York. Everything is right in this building: its materials,
specifically the terra cotta used throughout the facade; the
clear and articulated form of the base, shaft, and tower.
There is simply nothing extraneous. For most New York
building enthusiasts, it is the archetype of a skyscraper.
Take a look where possible at the extraordinary interior
as well. The central guards won’t let you wander too far
off, but you have time to appreciate several magnificent
gargoyles, including Cass Gilbert (the architect) and
Woolworth himself counting the nickels and dimes with
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 35
➢

Cass Gilbert’s “Cathedral of Commerce”—the Woolworth Building—just after
it was completed in 1913. For many New Yorkers, the building’s perfect form
makes it the archetype of skyscrapers—and Frank Woolworth paid for its entire cost with $13 million in cash. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical
Society.

which he (literally) paid for the building. (Since Frank
Woolworth paid in full with $13 million in cash, the building never had a mortgage.) It’s a fitting coda to this downtown romp through New York’s financial district.
When finished with Woolworth’s sumptuous interior,
go across the street and enjoy the newly redesigned City
Hall Park. The park has been landscaped as a nineteenthcentury meeting ground with actual gaslights and other accoutrements.
The Architecture of Capitalism | WALL STREET 37
