GREEN-WOOD
CEMETERY
A Garden Cemetery Revisited
Start: The N/R subway stop at Twenty-fifth Street and
Fourth Avenue in Brooklyn. Walk uphill to cemetery gates
and enter.
When Green-Wood Cemetery was chartered on April 18,
1838, New York City was already the commercial and financial center of America and, with a population of more
than three hundred thousand, its largest city. Manhattan
churchyard cemeteries were rapidly filling and the island
was quickly running out of available space. But newly incorporated Brooklyn had fewer than sixteen thousand residents and an abundance of unused land.
Our story begins when Henry Evelyn Pierrepont
(1808–1888), scion of one of Brooklyn’s most prominent
families, visited Cambridge, Massachusetts, to study the
newly opened Mount Auburn Cemetery, the first planned,
nondenominational, rural cemetery in America. He then
toured Europe, looking for a cemetery model to bring to
Manhattan. Pierrepont returned from Europe with an
image of a sprawling garden cemetery for Manhattan. His
idea was dismissed as a waste of valuable real estate. He
turned to Brooklyn and saw the opportunity to create a city
279
9
➢
like the great cities of Europe—with wide promenades,
public squares, and a grand cemetery. Many of his contemporaries could not grasp Pierrepont’s vision of the great
American city on the East River. In fact, when the City of
Brooklyn began to lay out its streets in 1835, it made no provisions for a cemetery site. Seeing the need for action, Pierrepont gathered a number of citizens who petitioned the
New York state legislature for a charter of two hundred
acres of land for a rural cemetery. The Hills of Gowanus,
where you now stand, were selected as the site. Within a
year, the Green-Wood Corporation, organized by Pierrepont plus other prominent Brooklynites, purchased nearly
two hundred acres of grazing land at $750 per acre, for a
total of $134,650, from the Wyckoff, Ibbotson, Dean, Sackett, Schermerhorn, Bennett, and Bergen families.
David Bates Douglass (1790–1849) was hired the next
month to transform this grazing pasture into a cemetery.
Douglass had served in the War of 1812 and had been a
professor of mathematics and engineering at the United
States Military Academy. Before working on Green-Wood,
he had also been the chief engineer for the Croton Aqueduct System. Among other things he designed the High
Bridge, which remains the oldest bridge still standing in the
city, to transport Croton’s water across the Harlem River
to Manhattan.
One of Douglass’s first tasks was to lay out 4.5 miles of
road that followed the contours of the terrain and demonstrated the beauty of the site. This route became known as
“the Tour” and was designed and used not only to display
Green-Wood’s charms but also to serve as an incentive for
potential lot buyers. One unexpected side effect of the
Tour was that Green-Wood quickly became a major recreational and tourist destination for New Yorkers, who had
access to almost no public parkland at all.
Under Douglass’s direction, Green-Wood was carefully
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
280
and artistically designed to reveal every natural feature in
its most advantageous light. Trees and shrubs were planted
as screens and foils in the proper locations to provide just
the right feeling and mood. Roads and paths followed land
contours whenever possible and wound around lakes and
ponds. Douglass even had songbirds imported from Europe to assist with the ambiance.
Although regarded as an aesthetic success, the early
years were difficult for Green-Wood. New Yorkers and
Brooklynites alike were unwilling to change from a local
“The Tour.” The original 1830s map and layout of Green-Wood Cemetery as envisioned by David Bates Douglass. His route conformed to the contours of the
land to enhance the pastoral garden setting of the cemetery. The Tour enabled
visitors to view the splendor of Green-Wood, visit interred family and friends,
and perhaps select a site for themselves. Illustration from Rural Cemeteries:
Green-Wood, Illustrated, by James Smillie.
church graveyard burial to one that seemed both distant
and insecure. Arrangements were quickly made to enclose
the cemetery with a two-mile-long fence. The current
fence, measuring some 21,120 feet in length, was erected
beginning in 1860, at a cost of $40,000. As you enter
Green-Wood, take note of this fence with its decorative
cast iron finials that cap each post. Beginning in the year
2000, the cemetery began a fund-raising campaign to restore 280 missing finials. The reconstruction and replacement will cost almost $50,000—more than the cost of the
entire original fence!
From the first interment on September 5, 1840, to December 1, 1842, only 162 burials took place. By 1843 the
total had risen to only 352. But in 1844 a dramatic change
occurred: 354 persons were buried in that year alone, and
lot sales reached $20,000. This tremendous increase was
caused by three factors: first, the growing acceptance of
nondenominational burial, which made Green-Wood’s
nonaffiliation with any church acceptable; second, an easing of the financial effect of the depression of 1837, which
gave people more disposable income; and third, the relocation of former senator, governor, and mayor DeWitt Clinton’s casket from Albany to Green-Wood, which showed
that the wealthy classes had accepted the place.
By 1855, just fifteen years after the first interment, 45,576
persons had been buried here and over one hundred thousand local people and tourists were visiting annually. Since
that time the cemetery has expanded to 478 acres by purchasing neighboring land. There are an estimated six hundred thousand people buried here today.
garden cemeteries
What is a garden cemetery? The garden cemetery emerged
from the English landscape-garden movement of the early eigh-
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
282
teenth century. Landscape gardeners altered and tamed the countryside to make it picturesque, literally to look like a picture.
Victorian garden cemeteries were strongly supported by ministers and religious liberals, who argued that they could be catalysts for civic virtue. They urged the young to visit and take away
life lessons from the biographies of famous or accomplished people buried there. At the same time, visitors would come to understand the shortness and unpredictability of life. They were to return home with a new resolve to work hard and to do good. The
cemetery was as much a civic space as a place for burial, and in
some sense, when we visit a cemetery today, we are engaged in
similar reflection on those whose lives we encounter.
Cemeteries in the Victorian age were also Romantic. They
served as a place to mourn not just for a passed loved one but for
a lost rural ideal. America in the mid–nineteenth century was a
nation undergoing tremendous change. Many older Americans
longed for the days of their youth, a time before mass immigration,
modern political parties, tremendous urban centers, and technological advancements such as the railroad and telegraph. The garden cemetery allowed for the nostalgia of days gone by.
We start our tour at the dramatic Gothic revival gates designed by architect Richard Upjohn. These gates were
built between 1861 and 1863, by which time Green-Wood
was an established success and its trustees wished for an
imposing entrance.
Richard Upjohn (1802–1878) was one of America’s most
renowned nineteenth-century architects. Building primarily in the Greek revival and Gothic revival styles, he specialized in churches. His greatest surviving work in New
York City is Trinity Church (1846) at the intersection of
Broadway and Wall Street. (See chapter 1, our “Architecture of Capitalism” walk.) Upjohn later joined architect
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 283
➢
Richard Morris Hunt in establishing the American Institute of Architects (AIA). Upjohn also helped found the
Long Island Historical Society, now known as the Brooklyn Historical Society, located in Brooklyn Heights. (See
our walk of Brooklyn Heights and the Brooklyn Bridge in
chapter 5.)
Gothic revival architecture was one of the dominant
styles of the Victorian era, an age of great romanticism.
The period saw the construction of buildings that appealed
to the imagination by stressing mystery, illusion, and nostalgia. Turning away from the rational and intellectual lines
of Greek revival, this new movement replaced the old
geometry and balance with texture, color, as well as a
complex and lively asymmetry. The Gothic revival style
reflects and celebrates the inherent irregularity of nature
itself. This style was a perfect match for Green-Wood
Cemetery and its vision of pastoral contemplation.
The entrance gates are a splendid example of Gothic
Revival architecture. The center tower stands 106 feet tall
and is flanked by two 90-foot peaks. While the towers are
symmetrical, they are counterbalanced by the office wings,
which are of differing shapes and sizes. The gates are made
of red sandstone from Belleville, New Jersey, which is the
same building material Upjohn used for Trinity Church.
Take special note of the tremendous array of details and architectural elements throughout the gates. They contain,
among other things, steep and colorful slate roofs, stone
trefoils and quatrefoils, cast-iron bannerettes, a variety of
columns, open gables, and detailed finials.
Embedded within the gates, above the entranceways,
are four reliefs. Carved by John M. Moffitt in Nova Scotia
yellow sandstone, they symbolize rebirth and resurrection.
They are titled “Come Forth,” “The Dead Shall Be
Raised,” “I Am the Resurrection and the Life,” and “Weep
Not.” Higher up on the gates are smaller reliefs of Faith,
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
284
Hope, Memory, and Love. In 1966 the Green-Wood
Cemetery main gates were designated a New York City
landmark.
There are public restrooms within the gates, on your
left, behind the office.
Our tour continues by walking toward the left, uphill onto
Battle Avenue. You will note that throughout the cemetery there are small, black iron street signs. These signs,
along with our map and detailed route, will help you find
your way in this most un-urban of settings. Our first stop
is the David Stewart tomb, located on the corner of Battle and Arbor Avenues on your right.
This tomb brings together two of the greatest and bestknown artists of the late nineteenth century. The tomb itself was designed by architect Stanford White, and the
bronzes were created in 1883 by Augustus Saint-Gaudens.
The tomb holds the remains of Pennsylvania coal and steel
magnate David Stewart (1810–1891), the father of Isabella
Stewart Gardiner (1840–1924), who was the doyenne of
Boston’s art scene and philanthropist extraordinaire.
The reliefs depict two robed angels. They were highly
controversial at the time of their creation because most depictions of death were gloomy and filled with despair. Instead, Stanford White depicts the angels as musicians, perhaps heralding the ascension to heaven. White, having little patience for the criticism he was receiving, wrote to
Saint-Gaudens that “some people are such God damned
asses they always think of death as a gloomy performance
instead of a resurrection.”
A few feet farther along Battle Avenue and on the other
side of the road, note the marble grave marker with the
large cross and bronze emblem of the American Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA). This is
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 285
➢
the grave of Louis Bonnard (1809–1871), a French émigré
who developed and patented a number of profitable inventions in the cellar workshop of his Mulberry Street tenement. His inventions included a mechanical brick maker
and a machine for molding cast iron. As he lay near death,
Bonnard became convinced that he was to be resurrected as
an animal and could be abused. He sent for Henry Bergh,
founder of the ASPCA, and promised his fortune to the
newly established organization. Bergh arrived to find his
new benefactor living in abject poverty. Bonnard told
Bergh that he was leaving his fortune to the ASPCA and
asked the skeptical Bergh to open a trunk that was also in
the room. When Bergh did so, he found it filled with money
and jewels. Bonnard’s family disputed the bequest, claiming the inventor was insane, but the courts upheld the donation and the ASPCA became one of the best-endowed
charities in New York.
Continue along Battle Avenue to the tall obelisk on the
corner of Bayview and Battle Avenues.
Burying the victims from the December 5, 1876, Brooklyn Theater Fire. One
this site, 103 bodies were interred in coffins donated by the City of Brooklyn.
As shown, some two thousand mourners attended this winter ceremony. Illustration: Harper’s Weekly, December 30, 1876, in John Grafton, New York in the
Nineteenth Century (New York: Dover), 1977.
➢
This monument was erected by the City of Brooklyn to
memorialize the 278 people who lost their lives during the
Brooklyn Theater Fire on December 5, 1876; 103 of the
victims are buried here.
Theater was a main source of entertainment for nineteenth-century America. One of the more prominent theaters, the Brooklyn, was located downtown, at the intersection of Johnson and Washington Streets. More than a
thousand patrons had gathered on a Tuesday evening to
watch the stage star Kate Claxton appear in the very popular Two Orphans.
As the play was ending, at approximately 11 p.m., someone told Claxton that a kerosene lamp had ignited a small
fire amid the scenery backstage. As the actors were unsure
what to do, Claxton supposedly whispered, “Go on, they
will put it out, if we say anything there will be panic, go
on.” The fire could not be extinguished and it started to
burn out of control. As the audience learned of the fire,
Claxton tried to reassure the crowd, saying, “We are between you and the flames.” Nonetheless, patrons fled in
panic, clogging the few narrow exits. Within half an hour
the roof of the building collapsed. In the end, 278 lives
were lost.
Kate Claxton was found the next morning, dazed and
burned, wandering in Manhattan near City Hall. She
claimed she could not recall how she crossed the river—
and this was years before the Brooklyn Bridge was completed. She was thereafter known as “Kate Claxton of the
Big Brooklyn Fire.”
The City of Brooklyn arranged for a mass grave in
Green-Wood for the unidentified bodies and for those families who could not afford burial. Cemetery workers dug a
seven-foot-deep crescent-shaped common grave, and 103
donated coffins were arranged with heads facing the center.
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 287
Two thousand mourners attended, accompanied by song,
speeches, and flowers.
Kate Claxton continued acting until her retirement in
1904. She died twenty years later and is buried elsewhere in
Green-Wood.
Across Battle Avenue from the Brooklyn Theater Fire
monument stand a cluster of graves. These are of Henry
Aaron Burr and his family.
Henry Aaron Burr (1811–1884) was the great-nephew of
the infamous vice president Aaron Burr and also a nephew
of minister Jonathan Edwards. Henry Burr was famous in
his own right an innovator in the hat industry. After working as the bookkeeper for milliner Elisha Bloomer, Burr decided in 1835 to open his own store across the street and became interested in perfecting a machine for forming hats.
After numerous failures, he perfected his invention and received a patent. His machine dramatically reduced cost of
hat making. By 1856, millions of his machines were in use
worldwide. His invention was so successful that he was
forced to sue for patent infringement fifty-six times, winning all but three cases. Burr was also a charter member of
the Union Club and director of the Mechanics’ National
Bank, and he unsuccessfully ran for Congress as a Republican in 1862.
Continue uphill along Battle. A few feet beyond the Burr
family, take a right onto Syringa Path. Walk up to the imposing statue of DeWitt Clinton. Along the way, note the
Uhl-Ottendorfer family plot to your left.
Anna and Jacob Uhl started the Staats-Zeitung (the City
Paper) as a German weekly in New York in December
1834. It became a triweekly and then a daily in 1845. Jacob
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
288
➢
➢
Uhl died in 1851, and the paper was left under the direction
of his wife, Anna, who in 1859 married Oswald Ottendorfer, a German immigrant who had been working at the
paper for over a decade. The Staats-Zeitung became the
preeminent German-language paper in New York, reaching a circulation of sixty-five thousand by 1880. Anna Ottendorfer, who remained active on the business side of the
newspaper, died in 1885, but the paper continued as a daily
until 1975. The Ottendorfers gave away much of their fortune to German American causes, including a free library
whose building still stands on Second Avenue near Tenth
Street in Manhattan.
The Uhl-Ottendorfers are one of many nineteenth-century newspaper publishing families to be buried in Green-
Wood Cemetery. Also buried here are Henry Raymond of
the New York Times, Horace Greeley of the Tribune, and J.
Gordon Bennett of the Herald.
Continue along Syringa Path to the imposing statue of
DeWitt Clinton. As you approach the statue, Clinton is
standing with his back to you on a small grass island.
DeWitt Clinton (1769–1828) was a remarkable man. The
son of Revolutionary War general James Clinton, DeWitt
chose a government career over a military one and secured
a position as the personal secretary to his uncle Governor
George Clinton around 1790. Within a decade DeWitt
Clinton had become one of the most powerful politicians in
New York State. After being appointed to the United States
Senate in 1802, he returned home the next year to serve as
mayor of New York. With the exception of two one-year
terms, he was mayor from 1802 until 1815. During his terms
he oversaw the creation of the New-York Historical Society
and the Orphan Asylum, the improvement of sanitation,
the adoption of the 1811 street-grid system, and the fortifi-
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 289
➢
cation of the harbor defenses in preparation for the feared
British invasion during the War of 1812. Clinton ran for
president in 1812, losing to James Madison by a slim margin.
He also served as a three-term governor of New York State.
Clinton was also known as the “Father of the Erie
Canal” because of his tireless support for this crucial infrastructure project, which assured New York’s dominance of
American commerce in the nineteenth century. He presided over the opening ceremonies of the canal in 1825.
The statue of Clinton was cast by Henry Kirke Brown
from 1850 to 1853, and the base was designed by Richard
Upjohn. It was sponsored by public subscription and displayed in Manhattan’s City Hall Park prior to being placed
here. Brown, by the way, also cast the George Washington–on–horseback sculpture at Union Square, where our
Four Squares tour begins. (See chapter 4.) Note the two
bronze reliefs on the base, which reflect the building of the
Erie Canal.
Sharing this small island of grass with DeWitt Clinton is
Nathaniel Currier. His grave is a few feet to the south,
among the trees.
Nathaniel Currier (1813–1888) was the senior partner of
the lithography firm of Currier and Ives. During the second half of the nineteenth century, Currier and Ives produced thousands of images for mass consumption. Their
work was excellent, but it was their unparalleled marketing
skill that made Currier and Ives the most successful lithography firm in the nation. James Merritt Ives is buried elsewhere in Green-Wood.
Opposite Clinton and facing his tomb, note the small,
white marble statue of a young man.
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
290
➢
➢
This life-size statue of a young boy marks the grave of
three-year-old Irwin Franklin, “Little Frankie.” It was
carved by the great American sculptor Daniel Chester
French, who is best known for carving the statue of Lincoln seated at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.,
and the statues in front of the U.S. Custom House in Lower
Manhattan. Frankie, who died in 1880, was the son of Rear
Admiral Aaron Ward (1851–1918). Father and son are
buried adjacent to each other. Green-Wood Cemetery is
filled with grave markers created by the master carvers of
the nineteenth century. In between large commissioned
works, this type of carving was quite often the “bread and
butter” of their trade.
Leave this area by taking the Bay Side Path up to Highland Avenue. Turn left on Highland and continue along,
past Green-Bank Path, to Fern Avenue and make a left.
Fern Avenue ends at the base of Battle Hill. While walking
along Fern Avenue, look downhill (to your left) at the
tomb of John Anderson. His tomb in a classic Greek revival style, with four columns.
John Anderson built his tomb himself in the early 1860s,
twenty years before his death. It uses a Greek revival design that was popular in antebellum America. The style adheres to the Greek sense of order and proportion and is
linked to what Americans believed were the enlightened
and educated ideals of ancient Greek democracy. Greek revival was the design of choice for numerous academic and
civic buildings. The style is represented in the tomb’s fluted
columns, Ionic capitals, pedimented gable, heavy cornices,
unadorned friezes, and horizontal transoms. The four statuettes (two front and two back) are of the Four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and were sculpted by
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 291
➢
John Moffitt, who did the reliefs within the cemetery’s entrance gates.
John Anderson (1812–1881) owned a tobacco shop on
Broadway, across from City Hall Park. He specialized in
“fine cut” tobacco that he packaged as Anderson’s Solace
Tobacco. In 1838 he hired an attractive young woman,
Mary Cecilia Rogers, to draw young men to the shop. Mary
Rogers and her mother had come to New York from New
England after the depression of 1837, hoping to rebuild the
family fortune in the growing city. While working for Anderson, Mary quickly picked up the nickname “the Beautiful Seegar Girl.”
In July 1842, Mary disappeared. When she turned up
three days later floating in the Hudson River, Anderson became the prime suspect. He was arrested, questioned, and
immediately released, with details of his arrest and police
John Anderson’s Greek revival mausoleum, with a wonderful view of New York
Bay. The mausoleum was built in 1860, some twenty years prior to Anderson’s
death. Photo from Green-Wood Illustrated, 1891.
statement hushed up by influential friends in the Democratic Party. Adding further mystery, although a number of
men were questioned, Anderson’s statement was the only
one not released to the press.
Even though he was officially cleared, Anderson remained a suspect for many New Yorkers because the murder of Mary Rogers was one of the early crimes sensationalized by the press in the city. The Herald, Sun, and Tribune
competed to create a “real-life mystery.” Rumors that
Rogers had died from a botched abortion led the state senate to pass a law criminalizing the practice, while law enforcement’s inability to solve the crime led to the Police
Reform Act of 1845. Rogers’s story also became the basis
for Edgar Allan Poe’s The Mystery of Marie Roget. When
Poe was hounded by the press to provide a solution to the
continued mystery of the death of Mary Rogers, he responded that
it will be seen that between the fate of the unhappy Mary Cecilia
Rogers; so far as that fate is known, and the fate of one Marie
Roget up to a certain epoch in her history, there has existed a parallel . . . but let it not for a moment be supposed that . . . it is my
covert design to hint at an extension of the parallel, or even to
suggest that the measures adopted in Paris for the discovery of the
assassin . . . would produce any similar result.
After Mary Rogers’s death, Anderson gave away much
of his personal fortune. He supported Italian patriot Garibaldi; he gave $60,000 to the mayor of Jersey City to field
troops for the Civil War; and he helped start a fund in
Massachusetts to educate teachers in natural history.
The story continues even after Anderson’s death, when
his daughter contested his will, claiming he was insane.
Anderson, she claimed, believed that Mary Rogers’s ghost
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 293
visited him regularly and that the ghost of Garibaldi inhabited his house. At the trial over his will, a witness in Anderson’s favor testified that Anderson had indeed said his
house was haunted—“by people who want money.” Anderson’s daughter lost her court battle.
Continue along to the very end of Fern Avenue. On the
right, about ten feet behind the Mulberry Avenue street
sign, is the grave of Colonel Abraham Vosburgh. Note the
symbolism on this column—the eagle holding a sword is a
reference to Vosburgh’s military service, and the broken
column is indicative of a life cut short.
On April 22, 1861, Colonel Abraham Vosburgh (1825–
1861) marched at the head of the Seventy-first New York
State National Guard as it traveled to Washington, D.C.,
responding to President Lincoln’s plea to defend the capital against Confederate attack. Without seeing any military
action, Vosburgh died of consumption in Washington.
After President Lincoln laid a wreath on his body, the
colonel was returned to Brooklyn for burial. The members
of the Seventy-first Regiment erected this monument,
which bears the inscription “Pro Patria” (For Country). It
was originally surrounded by a cast-iron fence with posts
shaped like bayoneted rifles and a gate decorated with a
cast-iron Union cap, belt, and sword. The fence has since
disappeared.
Vosburgh is far from the only officer buried in Green-
Wood. From the Civil War alone there are nearly twenty
generals from both sides, and there are thirteen Medal of
Honor recipients as well.
Turn around and continue walking around the Burnham
family plot (keeping Burnham on your right) toward Battle Avenue.
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
294
➢
➢
The Burnham burial site is a classic late nineteenth-century
family plot. It contains a central monument with an imposing statue, sculpted by John Moffitt, of a woman wearing a
classical dress and holding a Bible. Engraved on the marble
are the names and life spans of all buried here. Surrounding the plot is a stone wall. Many of these century-old plots
originally had iron fences, but as they decayed, the fences
were replaced by stone or concrete slabs.
Gordon W. Burnham (1803–1885) earned his millions as
president of the Waterbury Clock, Waterbury Watch, and
American Pin companies. He is buried here with his first
two wives—Ann Griswold and Maria Louisa Brownell.
Burnham died shortly before marrying a third time. He
caught a chill while waiting in his unheated carriage for his
fiancée Kate Sanborn’s ferry, which was an hour late. The
chill became pneumonia, and he died three days before his
planned wedding. A staunch Democrat, Burnham had delayed his wedding until after the March 4 inauguration of
Grover Cleveland so as not to be married under a Republican administration.
Walk behind the Burnham plot and turn right onto Battle
Avenue. Walk about one hundred feet farther along Battle Avenue for a short detour to the free-standing mausoleum of Marcus Daly. On arrival, be sure to note the
magnificent stained-glass windows at the rear.
Born in Ireland, Marcus “Copper King” Daly (1841–1900)
came to America at age fifteen with virtually no money or
immediate prospects. In 1880, after years of struggling, he
acquired enough money to buy a small mine near Butte,
Montana. Although nominally a silver mine, in some
places its veins held ore that was 55 percent copper. As luck
would have it, Daly had hit the proverbial mother lode of
copper at the same time that Thomas Edison was using
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 295
➢
copper to conduct electricity in his new lights. Soon,
Daly’s original Anaconda Mining Company was joined by
a group of California financiers, and together they bought
up many neighboring claims. At the peak of his influence,
Daly’s mines controlled nearly one-quarter of the world’s
mined copper. About twenty-five miles from Butte he built
the city of Anaconda as a company town, diversified into
coal mines and lumber, and became a millionaire several
times over.
Daly was very active in Montana Democratic politics
and was at constant war with his mining rival Andrew
Clark. These formidable men fought with money and the
press for control of the state. Clark’s ambition was to becomeaU.S.senator;Daly’swassimplytostopClark.Clark
spent $450,000 to keep the state capitol from being built in
Daly’s Anaconda. Clark won his battle and also, ultimately,
the Senate seat—but not until 1901, after Daly’s death.
Backtrack on Battle Avenue a few paces to the corner of
Battle and Border Avenues. Climb up the steps marked
“Battle Path” that lead to the Soldiers Monument, a monument to the New York Volunteers.
Erected in 1869, the Green-Wood Cemetery’s Soldiers’
Monument honors the 148,000 New York men who fought
“in aid of the war for the preservation of the Union and the
Constitution.” Two themes dominate—the sacrifice of the
Republic’s citizen-soldier and the union, stability, and prosperity with which the nation hoped to emerge from the
Civil War. Built just four years after the end of the war, this
monument is much more realistic in its vision of battle than
the nostalgic memorials that were built in the 1880s and
1890s, when the blood and guts of the war had faded. The
four life-size soldiers, supposedly cast from the bronze of
captured Confederate cannons, represent the Union Army.
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
296
➢
The soldiers originally held objects (an ax, rifle, rammer,
and sword) that are now missing. In 1991, the casts of the
four battle scenes depicted in relief on the sides of the central monument, which had been stolen, were refabricated
and replaced.
Walk around the monument to the New York Volunteers
and look for a low, white gravestone whose only inscription is “Grandmother.” It is near granite cemetery marker
18495.
This is the grave of Elizabeth Tilton (1834–1897). Elizabeth had been married to Theodore Tilton and was a
schoolteacher for the Reverend Henry Ward Beecher of
Plymouth Church in Brooklyn Heights. She and Beecher
had an affair that was exposed by Victoria Woodhull. (See
our Brooklyn Heights and Bridge tour in chapter 5 for the
complete story). Theodore sued Beecher for “alienation of
affection” and the story became national news.
Beecher was able to claim victory with a hung jury. But
what happened to the Tilton family after the “trial of the
century”? The family was torn apart. Theodore left the
United States in 1883 and spent his life in Paris. Elizabeth
was ostracized by everyone but her daughter and a few religious friends. She died alone and blind in 1897. Her
marker simply reads “Grandmother” in an attempt to keep
tourists from invading Elizabeth’s final resting place.
Beecher remained with his wife and is buried in a prominent tomb elsewhere in Green-Wood.
Continue along Battle Path to Minerva and the Altar to
Liberty.
Minerva and the Altar to Liberty was sculpted by F. Wellington Ruxell and unveiled in 1920. In Greek mythology,
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 297
➢
➢
Minerva (also known as Pallas Athena), whose temple is
the Parthenon, sprang fully formed from Zeus’s head, clad
in armor. She was the goddess of battle and protector of
civilized life, as well as the inventor of the bridle and the
person who first tamed horses for the use of humans. She
was also the one who carried Zeus’s thunderbolt for him.
Minerva was unveiled on August 27, 1920, the 144th anniversary of the Battle of Long Island, which was fought
on this spot in late August 1776.
This battle was the first for the Continental army after
the Declaration of Independence some seven weeks prior.
During the engagement, two thousand American troops
under Brigadier General William Alexander, called Lord
Stirling by his troops, battled Major General James Grant’s
British force that was three times larger. Much of the fighting occurred across the ridge where you are now standing—hence the name Battle Hill. It is said that atop this hill
a group of American riflemen were surrounded, shot, and
buried where they fell.
An 1840s view of Green-Wood and New York Harbor from Battle Hill. Note the
long line of carriages taking the Tour on a beautiful afternoon. This image is
drawn from about where Minerva currently stands. Illustration from Rural
Cemeteries: Green-Wood, Illustrated, by James Smillie, New York, 1847.
The Greek revival tomb directly behind Minerva is that
of Charles M. Higgins (1854–1929). A Park Slope, Brooklyn, businessman, he was the inventor of India ink. It was
Higgins’s ambition to build a memorial to the first battle for
American freedom. He led the movement to erect the
statue of Minerva. As you look down the hill, note that this
is the highest natural point in Brooklyn, 216 feet above sea
level. If you stand directly in front of Minerva, you will
also see that her left hand is raised in salute to the Statue of
Liberty, standing due west in New York harbor.
As you are walking along Liberty Path, with the Higgins mausoleum to your left, note among the two evergreen
shrubs to your right, the unassuming graves of Leonard
Bernstein (1918–1990), his wife, and his sister. Born in
Lawrence, Massachusetts, Bernstein was conductor of the
New York City Symphony Orchestra from 1945 to 1948
and was with the New York Philharmonic from 1957 until
being named conductor laureate in 1969. He was the first
conductor successfully to use television as a tool for music
education. Bernstein was also a prolific composer; his bestknown piece is the 1957 musical West Side Story.
Bernstein’s grave is usually piled with small stones. It is
a Jewish tradition to leave a stone when visiting to honor
the person who is buried, both to pay homage and to record
your presence. Not only are stones all around us and easy
to find, but they are related to the ground and last longer
than flowers.
Continue along Liberty Path about thirty feet, and directly behind Higgins, hidden in a grove of trees, is the
Edwin C. Litchfield plot. Litchfield (1815–1885) was a
prominent Brooklyn lawyer and businessman. Along with
his brother, Electus, he developed Brooklyn’s street railways and the Gowanus Canal and acquired a significant
tract of land from the Cortelyou estate, which the Litchfields developed into Park Slope. Litchfield also played a
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 299
prominent role in the creation of Prospect Park. In 1892,
after his death, the family estate—Grace Hill—was converted into the Parks Department building within the park.
It has been renamed Litchfield Villa to honor its benefactor. The rumor is that his grave is turned away from Park
Slope to protest the taking of his family home by the Parks
Department.
Liberty Path comes to an end at Hemlock Avenue. Turn
right on Hemlock and continue about one block to the intersection of Battle and Hemlock Avenues.
On the far right corner stands the imposing Howe family
grave site. It is overseen by the bust of the family patriarch,
Elias Howe Jr.
Elias Howe Jr. (1819–1867) was born in Spencer, Massachusetts, to a large and impoverished family. Like many in
the early nineteenth century, Howe went to work at an
early age—six—and never received a formal education.
He married at twenty-one and supported his family as a
mechanic and part-time inventor. In 1846 he patented the
first sewing machine. Although it was grossly inefficient
and inconsistent, his machine sewed 250 stitches a minute,
which was five times faster than could be sewn by a skilled
hand. The introduction of Howe’s sewing machine was
met with great resistance from sewers and tailors who
feared the loss of their jobs. Manufacturers were also reluctant to invest large sums of capital to mechanize when
cheap human labor was in abundance.
Realizing that America was not ready for his machine,
he sought a patent and then went to England to market his
invention. Two years later he returned to America penniless. On his return, he discovered that his invention had
been stolen. After five years of litigation he won his patent
suit, gaining protection for the lockstitch that was formed
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
300
➢
by his eye-pointed needle and mechanical shuttle. Thereafter, Howe received a royalty on every sewing machine
made in America. His annual income rose from $300 a year
to $200,000 a year, or over $5 million today.
Directly behind Howe is buried the family dog, Fannie,
who died in 1881. Carved on the marble marker is the following poem:
Only a dog you say sir critic
Only a dog, but as truth I prize
The truest love I have won in living
Lay in the deeps of her limpid eyes.
Frosts of winter nor heat of summer
Could make her fail if my footsteps led
And the memory holds in its treasure casket
The name of my darling who lieth dead.
Take a brief detour along Battle Avenue to the small Lake
Path. On the near right corner is the tombstone of
William Kingsley.
William Kingsley (1833–1885), a Brooklyn contractor, was
one of the earliest proponents of building a bridge between
Brooklyn and Manhattan. In 1865, at age thirty-two, he employed engineer and fellow Brooklynite Colonel Julius
Walker Adams to draw up a design, with cost estimates for
materials and labor. Adams estimated that the Brooklyn
Bridge could have been built for approximately $5 million.
The Kingsley bridge was never built. In the end, the Roebling bridge cost $15 million.
Kingsley was active in Brooklyn politics and was a
leader of the Democratic machine. His contracting company worked on several important public-works projects,
including Prospect Park and the Hempstead Reservoir, but
the Brooklyn Bridge project made him almost a million
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 301
➢
dollars alone, perhaps thanks to his association with Manhattan “Boss” William M. Tweed.
When the Tweed ring was broken in 1873, it became
known that Kingsley, a major stockholder in the Brooklyn
Bridge Company and general superintendent of the building project, was being paid 15 percent of the total construction expenses—over $170,000 per year. According to
the Bridge Company’s records, this payment was made at
Tweed’s suggestion. Following the removal of Tweed,
Kingsley’s annual salary was renegotiated to a flat $10,000
a year. Without the salary change, Kingsley would have
garnered roughly $1.75 million by the time the bridge was
finished in 1883.
Kingsley’s grave marker was cut from a granite stone
taken from the Brooklyn Bridge itself. The bridge trustees
placed it here to commemorate his role in making the Great
Bridge a reality.
Return to the grave of Elias Howe Jr. and Hemlock Avenue. Turn left onto Hemlock. Continue along for a while.
Turn left onto Mulberry. Just after you pass the merge
with Mulberry, keep an eye open for the grave of Andrew
R. Culver on the right.
The Culver grave’s decorated marker is set a few yards
back from the road. Done in white marble, it depicts the
shattered trunk of a tree with the trappings of youth—a
stack of books, a uniform and rifle, as well as a rope and
ship’s anchor. While we know little of his life, the grave
reads that he died in 1871, at the age of seventeen years.
The marble grave marker is an excellent example of
how tombstones describe a life. The dominant feature of
the Culver grave is a strong tree trunk that has been shattered, a symbol of a young life abruptly and prematurely
ended. The books and a globe are images of his life as a stu-
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
302
➢
dent. To the left is a Union Army uniform and rifle; perhaps young Andrew had ambitions of being a soldier.
tombstone symbolism
The grave markers in Green-Wood Cemetery contain many examples of funerary art. Many of the markers tell a graphic story
about both the life and death of those interred. They illustrate
Christian ideas of ascension to heaven, resurrection, and holy salvation. Here are a few symbols of which to make note:
“An intertwined alpha and omega—the first and last letters of
the Greek alphabet. Taken from the book of Revelation (22:13),
‘the first and the last, the beginning and the end.’
Fugit Hora—‘the hours are fleeting’ is a poetic translation;
‘time flies’ is another.”
Animal symbols are quite common:
Unidentifiable birds—the soul in flight back to God
Dove—the Holy Ghost
Eagle—either a messenger from the heavens or military service
Butterfly—the Christian metamorphosis with resurrection
Lamb—purity, innocence, and meekness; the most common
nineteenth-century symbol for children’s graves.
Objects and shapes are also used as well. These can be carved in
the stone or stand free as part of the grave marker. It is also common for a combination of symbols to be used.
Anchor—early Christian symbol of salvation and hope, also of
death at sea
Broken column or tree trunk—a young life shortened by death
Orb—resurrection
Drapery over urn or column—sorrow or mourning
Angel—the messenger between God and man
Walk along past Atlantic Avenue, where Mulberry will
feed directly into Green-Bough. Continue downhill along
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 303
➢
Green-Bough Avenue to the intersection with Fern Avenue. On the near right corner is the lavish white tomb of
Charlotte Canda.
Charlotte Canda (1828–1845) was the daughter of Charles
Canda, an officer in Napoleon’s army who emigrated to
America in the early nineteenth century and established a
girls’ finishing school in Manhattan. Charlotte was his only
daughter. On a stormy and rainy night, February 3, 1845, a
party was given to celebrate Charlotte’s seventeenth birthday. As the party ended, Charlotte and her father escorted
one of her friends home in the family carriage. At the
friend’s home on Waverly Place, Manhattan, not wanting a
lady to walk alone after dark, Charles escorted the friend to
the door. When he returned, the carriage was gone. The
horse had bolted, crossed Broadway, and thrown Charlotte
from the carriage, where she struck her head. Just as her father arrived at the scene, she died.
The Canda family were Catholic, and Charlotte was initially interred in the old St. Patrick’s Cathedral cemetery
on Mott Street in Manhattan.
This lavish monument was essentially designed by
Charlotte herself. She had been drawing a memorial for her
recently deceased aunt. Her father found the sketch, embellished it with roses, flowers, birds, and wreaths, many in
the repetitive number of seventeen, Charlotte’s age. The
monument also stands seventeen feet high and seventeen
feet deep. Similar to the Culver memorial, this monument
incorporates many of Charlotte’s favorite items, such as
books, musical instruments, drawing implements, and her
parrot. Charlotte appears in the gown she wore on the night
of her death. A star above her symbolizes immortal life.
Take note of the butterfly with wings extended, symbolizing her liberated spirit.
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
304
The Canda monument is estimated to have cost (in 1845)
between $15,000 and $45,000—about $450,000 to $1.3 million today. In the 1850s, Charlotte’s grave was the most
popular one in the cemetery, attracting thousands yearly.
Charlotte was disinterred from St. Patrick’s and buried
here in 1848. Because the Candas were Catholics, the monument is on ground consecrated by the church. Although
Green-Wood Cemetery is a nonsectarian site, each plot is
individually owned and, as such, can be consecrated as holy
Charlotte Canda—“The French Lady.” Canda died in a carriage accident at age
seventeen. This lavish monument was adapted from a design by her own hand.
This was one of the most popular visitation sites of the cemetery. Photo from
Green-Wood Illustrated, 1891.
ground. To the right of her grave, but just outside the consecrated ground, stands a monument with the coat of arms
of Charles Albert Jarret de la Marie—a French nobleman
who was Charlotte’s fiancé. A year after her death, he committed suicide in the Canda residence. He could not be
buried on consecrated ground but lies as close as the church
would allow.
nineteenth-century cemetery tourism
Shortly after Green-Wood Cemetery opened, a local newspaper
reported that visitors “began to be attracted from the city in considerable numbers daily.” The press predicted that Green-Wood
was destined to “become a popular and elegant place of resort,
where some of the wild and lovely features of nature might be retained near the city.”
At first people came by carriage, but by the 1860s, access was
available by public horsecar from downtown Brooklyn or the Fulton
ferries. At the same time, the cemetery began selling picture postcards and stereo cards for those who wanted souvenirs. In fact, the
images in this chapter are from these picture postcards. In 1872,
in A Description of the New York Central Park, art critic Clarence
Cook remarked that rural cemeteries had become
“famous over the whole country and thousands of people visited
them annually. They were among the chief attractions of the
cities to which they belonged. No stranger visited these cities
for pleasure or observation who was not taken there, nor was it
long before the smaller cities, and even towns and villages
began to set aside land and to lay it out for the double purpose
of burying ground and pleasure ground. . . . These cemeteries
were all the rage. . . . The truth is, people were glad to get fresh
air, and a sight of grass, and trees, and flowers, with now and
then a pretty piece of sculpture . . . without considering too
deeply whether it might not be better to have it all without the
graves and the funeral processions.”
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
306
These cemeteries were not just final resting places but America’s
first urban parks.
After the development of the public park and the dissemination
of the pastoral landscape without graves, the recreational popularity of the “rural” cemetery began to wane in the last quarter of
the nineteenth century. Frederick Law Olmsted, a critic of the idea
of rural cemeteries becoming the “constant resort of mere pleasure seekers, travelers, promenaders and loungers” at first refused
to design one—although he recanted later in life and designed
Mountain View Cemetery in California.
Public parks were not the only reason for a decline in cemetery
tourism. The immense number of casualties from the Civil War
through World War I destroyed much of the sentimentalism and
melancholy that had permeated the Victorian era. Equally important was the creation of museums to display art and sculpture,
which made visiting cemeteries less desirable. Furthermore,
cemeteries themselves began to forbid the common practice of
picnicking and other activities that were associated more with
leisure than with burial.
Continue downhill along Green-Bough Avenue until it
ends at Central Avenue. Directly in front of you are three
small children’s graves. The children are slightly behind
and to the left of the Simonson family obelisk.
These are the graves of Little Georgie, Emily Louise, and
Baby John. They are fine examples of Victorian children’s
markers. All of the children are depicted as though they are
sleeping—the rest of the innocent. During the Victorian
era, Americans began to move away from the Puritan ideas
of original sin and instead began to see children as innocents, untouched by the evils and perils of the modernizing
and rapidly changing nineteenth-century world.
Quite often, Victorian children’s monuments contain
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 307
➢
images of lambs, empty rocking chairs, or even toys. During this period, children who were wealthy enough were
meant to enjoy life, as opposed to being considered miniature workers.
Cast your gaze over the children’s graves and up the hill
to the impressive mausoleum of Henry Evelyn Pierrepont.
As noted at the beginning of this walk, Pierrepont (1808–
1888) was the person primarily responsible for Green-
Wood Cemetery. A city planner and businessman and the
second son of Hezekiah B. Pierrepont, he worked to establish ferry connections across and up and down the East
River,inadditiontomanaginghisfamily’sproperties.Heis
regardedasoneof thefirstcityplannersintheUnitedStates
and was active in planning the expansion of Brooklyn after
its 1834 incorporation; one year later, Pierrepont was appointed chair of a commission to lay out the streets of the
new city. He donated the original fence that surrounded the
cemetery and, in 1842, purchased eight plots for himself
and family. His monument, designed by Richard Upjohn,
stands atop one of the few manmade hills in Green-Wood.
When he died, Henry E. Pierrepont was the last survivor of
the original trustees who created the cemetery.
Henry’sfather,Hezekiah(1768–1838),movedtoBrooklyn in 1802 after building his fortune as a merchant adventurer. Upon arrival, he bought some sixty acres in
Brooklyn Heights. He was the first important suburban real
estate developer in America. As early as 1823 he was advertising and selling Brooklyn Heights lots to wealthy Manhattanites. In that year he advertised in the Long Island Star:
Situated directly opposite the southwest part of the city [Manhattan], and being the nearest country retreat, and easiest of access
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
308
➢
from the center of business that now remains unoccupied; the distance not exceeding on an average fifteen to twenty-five minutes
walk, including the passage of the river; the ground elevated and
perfectly healthy at all seasons; views of the water and landscape
both extensive and beautiful; as a place of residence combining all
the advantages of the country with the most of the conveniences
of the city.
Walk toward your right, downhill on Central Avenue.
Keep your eyes to the right and look for the smallish marble monument to the engineers from the monitor Weehawken. The marker has the masonic symbol and a carving
of a steamship on it.
The monitor Weehawken followed in the pioneering
footsteps of the famous armored warship Monitor that
fought the Merrimack to a draw in 1862. The Weehawken
helped blockade the Confederate port of Charleston beginning in January 1863, as part of a flotilla led by the New
Ironsides. In April the ironclads attacked the harbor defenses. At least two thousand shots were fired by the Confederates at the ironclads. The Keokuk sank, and the New
Ironsides actually sat for an hour directly on top of a torpedo containing a ton of powder, which the Confederates
couldn’t detonate due to a broken wire. The flotilla of
monitors stayed around for months, sometimes shipping
out for repairs. In October 1863, the Weehawken ran
aground while attacking Fort Sumter. The New Ironsides,
along with four other monitors, shelled the Confederate
batteries, and the New Ironsides put itself between the Weehawken and the batteries to draw fire while Union tugs
pulled out the Weehawken. Although the Weehawken was
rescued, she sank two months later.
The gravestone reads:
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 309
➢
Sacred to the memory of the officers of the United States Navy
who lost their lives by being drowned on the US Monitor Weehawken to which they were attached when she foundered off
Charleston, SC, December 6, 1863.
The remains were exhumed from the engine room of the wrecked
Monitor where they nobly fell at their post of duty. 1863.
Continue downhill along Central Avenue for a longish
walk. As you emerge from the lush tree cover, just where
Vale Path meets Central Avenue, look up the steep hill toward your left. Try to discern a cluster of very simple
black marble monuments. These unassuming markers
are for the Tiffany family.
The large central stone is the family patriarch Charles
Lewis Tiffany (1812–1902). He is surrounded by his family, including his most famous son, Louis Comfort Tiffany
(1848–1933). The internationally renowned jewelry and
objet d’art company was founded by Charles Tiffany and
his partner John B. Young in 1837. They sold primarily stationery and fancy goods from their shop at 237 Broadway.
With the arrival of the third partner, Jabez Ellis, in 1841,
the firm Tiffany, Young and Ellis began selling European
jewelry and soon after started to manufacture gold and silver jewelry themselves. After thirteen years of partnership,
Charles Tiffany bought out his associates and renamed the
shop Tiffany and Company.
Charles’s son, Louis, was destined to take over and run
his father’s business. Louis’s talents, however, led him toward the artistic side of decorative arts. He studied painting in New York and Paris and traveled the world examining the patterns and designs of artisans’ crafts. Louis’s
great talent appeared in his glass work, and during the
1870s he and his rival John LaFarge (also buried here in
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
310
➢
Green-Wood Cemetery) revolutionized the stained-glass
industry. In 1879, Tiffany opened his own company, Louis
C. Tiffany and Associated Artists, and soon after was
granted a patent for Favrile glass. His firm specialized in
decorating the interiors of the mansions and private clubs
of wealthy Manhattanites. In 1893 he built a factory for his
firm, now renamed Tiffany Studios, in Corona, Queens. It
was here that he and his staff would create thousands of
windows, light fixtures, ceramics, and the many other items
that are now found in museums and private collections
throughout the world. Louis Comfort Tiffany also designed a number of stained-glass windows for vaults in
Green-Wood Cemetery.
Louis was more interested in his art than in status. His
grave simply states his name and his birth and death dates.
Note, however, his two wives. Each calls herself “Wife of
Louis Comfort Tiffany, N.A.” This is a gesture to
Tiffany’s membership in the National Academy of Design.
Also note how his second wife’s grave marker stands a bit
taller than his first wife’s. Perhaps this is from the settling
of the first grave. Perhaps not.
Continue downhill toward the Valley Water (the large lily
pond with the fountain). When you reach the water, proceed toward your left along Valley Avenue. Take note of
the very detailed blue-gray-colored August Jacklitsch
monument. This monument is one of the few white
bronze memorials in Green-Wood Cemetery.
Only one company, the Monumental Bronze Company of
Bridgeport, Connecticut, manufactured “white bronze”
cemetery markers. They are cast in pure zinc and were
made from the mid-1870s roughly to World War I. The
grave markers were sold through a catalog or by a sales
agent who had an office near the cemetery. The white
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 311
➢
bronze could be very similar to a carved marble or granite marker but allowed for greater detail than stone. For
example, in the late 1890s it became very fashionable to
plant the century plant (similar to a yucca) in American
cemeteries. White bronze allowed families to recreate this
plant on a tombstone—something that could not be carved
in stone.
There was one major problem with white bronze monuments. They were mass-produced, with only the nameplates and inscriptions individualized. The tablets were
then bolted onto the monuments. This made for easy removal by vandals, as well as a good place for bootleggers to
hide liquor during Prohibition.
Continue along Valley Avenue to Hillside Path and the
large monument to John Matthews.
The monument for John “Soda Fountain King” Matthews
(1808–1870) is one of our favorites. Crafted by Karl Muller
in a combination of marble and terra-cotta in 1868, it was
celebrated as the “Mortuary Monument of the Year.”
Matthews lies atop his tomb, staring up at various scenes
from his life. The carvings are a combination of animals,
plants, the Four Evangelists, and carvings of his own children’s images. The four gargoyles on each corner serve as
gutters, drawing rainwater off the roof and away from the
tomb. The life-size statue seated above Matthews symbolizes grief and mourning. The center tower atop the
roofline has been lost to decay and time. Be certain to walk
around the Matthews tomb to see how the weather has
aged the southern and western sides and left the rest virtually intact.
John Matthews pioneered a process of using marble
chips mixed with sulphuric acid to create a carbonic acid
gas. This gas, when combined with water, would carbonate
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
312
➢
the beverage. This beverage is essentially what is now
known as seltzer water. By 1870, Matthews was supplying
more than five hundred soda fountains with his beverage.
His slogan was “Youth as it sips its first glass, experiences
sensations which, like the first sensations of love, cannot be
forgotten but are cherished to the last.”
John “Soda Fountain King” Matthews’s monument. Winner of the Mortuary
Monument of the Year award, it was crafted by Karl Muller in 1868. Over time,
the small limestone and marble tower has eroded and been removed. Photo
from Green-Wood Illustrated, 1891.
Turn around and walk back toward the Valley Water. Take
the small footpath, the Water Side Path, to your left. It
will end at Lake Avenue. Proceed to your right along Lake
Avenue to the intersection of Landscape Avenue. Turn
left on Landscape. You are now directly behind the
Chapel of Green-Wood Cemetery. Walk to your right,
around to the front of the chapel.
Green-Wood did not have a chapel until the early twentieth century. When Green-Wood solicited bids, Carrere
& Hastings submitted a plan for a chapel. When it was
rejected, the architectural firm modified its plan, which
became the main branch of the New York Public Library at Forty-second Street and Fifth Avenue. The firm
of Warren & Wetmore, best known for designing Manhattan’s Grand Central Terminal, completed in 1913,
was chosen to build the chapel in 1912. It’s a scaleddown version of Christopher Wren’s Thomas Tower at
Christ Church, Oxford. After many decades closed, the
chapel reopened in April 2000. It is for individual contemplation but can be reserved for services. If there is no
service being held at the time of your visit, please feel
free to enter.
Alongside the chapel is the very large receiving tomb.
Note the elaborate entrance, similar in style to the cemetery’s entrance gate. Capable of holding fifteen hundred
bodies, the tomb dates back to the original days of the
cemetery. Before the advent of modern digging equipment, those who died in winter, when the ground was
frozen, were held here until the spring thaw. The receiving
tomb takes up the better part of the hill. Its vast size is evident from the series of black metal vents.
Upon leaving the chapel, continue along Landscape Avenue toward the Twenty-fifth Street gates.
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY | A Garden Cemetery Revisited
314
➢
➢
In summing up the beauty and serenity of Green-Wood
Cemetery, perhaps the New York Times said it best in 1866:
“It is the ambition of the New Yorker to live on Fifth Avenue, to take his airings in the [Central] Park, and to sleep
with his fathers in Green-Wood.” Returning to where we
began, we can ponder what we learned about those who are
buried here and perhaps understand the shortness and unpredictability of life. Fugit hora.
A Garden Cemetery Revisited | GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY 315
