THE BROOKLYN
BRIDGE
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
Start: Begin at Brooklyn Borough Hall, which sits on a
plaza between Court Street and Adams. To get there, take
the A, C, or F train to the Jay Street Borough Hall stop; or
the 2, 3, 4, or 5 to the Borough Hall stop; or the N or R
train to Court Street (and walk a block to Borough Hall).
this walk takesyou through New York’s first
historic district, a neighborhood with more homes built before the Civil War than any other, and then across the most
beautiful suspension bridge in the world.
We begin at what was the city hall of the City of Brooklyn until 1898 and finish at what has been the City Hall of
New York City since 1812. Confused? Brooklyn and New
York were separate cities until 1898, when they were consolidated into Greater New York—the current five boroughs. In that year, Brooklyn’s 1849 City Hall was renamed Borough Hall, and a cupola was added to make it
appear more like New York’s City Hall. Borough Hall was
originally designed in the spirit of “common-man” Jeffersonian democracy by Brooklyn carpenter and grocer
Gamaliel King.
151
5
➢
The idea of Brooklyn joining New York was contentious at the time, much as the idea of Staten Island seceding from New York City was contentious in the mid-
1990s. Indeed, the consolidation referendum passed by
only a few hundred votes in 1894. Many prominent Brooklyn citizens didn’t want to merge what they saw as corrupt
New York with pristine Brooklyn. After the consolidation
referendum passed, a group of businessmen (including A.
A. Low and Henry Pierrepont—two of the city’s wealthiest landowners) and cultural and religious leaders formed
the League of Loyal Citizens to oppose consolidation.
Their vision of Brooklyn was of a white, prosperous,
Protestant borough that wasn’t teeming with Manhattan’s
immigrants.
League spokesperson St. Clair McKelway, editor of
the Brooklyn Eagle, which sponsored an anticonsolidation song contest—“Up with the Flag of Brooklyn” won
the $300 prize—wrote an editorial against consolidation
in 1894:
Brooklyn is a city of homes and churches. New York is a city of
Tammany Hall and crime government. Rents are twice as cheap in
Brooklyn as in New York and homes are to be bought for a quarter of the money. . . . Government here is by public opinion and
for the public interest. If tied to New York, Brooklyn would be a
Tammany suburb, to be kicked, looted and bossed as such.
Vote against consolidation now and let the speculators wait till
a better time, when New York will offer something like fair terms.
In spite of the League’s opposition, of course, Brooklyn
and New York were joined.
Walk across Court Street and look to the north, past
Brooklyn’s 1891 General Post Office, the Romanesque revival structure with tower.
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
152
➢
The “park” stretching into the distance is Cadman Plaza,
the eastern border of Brooklyn Heights. Brooklyn Heights
was the city’s first historic district, but you wouldn’t know
it from looking at most of the unattractive buildings that
surround Cadman Plaza. It’s hard to see the beauty of the
neighborhood from this vantage point, which is actually
good; if not for historic preservation, all of Brooklyn
Heights might look like the Cadman Plaza high-rises.
historic preservation
Before the 1965 historic district law that preserved Brooklyn
Heights’s character, property owners and the city could and did
destroy homes at will. In 1953 in Brooklyn Heights, construction
for Robert Moses’s Brooklyn-Queens Expressway razed parts of
Columbia Heights, Middagh Street, and Poplar Street. Other losses
over the years include the beautiful Brooklyn Savings Bank at
Pierrepont and Clinton; the Church of the Restoration on Monroe;
and many private homes on Henry, Monroe, Clinton, and Clark.
Looking up Montague Street in Brooklyn Heights in 1890, from near the
water’s edge toward what is today the Promenade over the cantilevered
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway. The pedestrians are walking toward the ferry
that would take them to Manhattan. Illustration courtesy of the New-York
Historical Society.
Cadman Plaza destroyed much of the eastern Heights, including
the building in which Walt Whitman set the type for the first edition of the greatest book of poetry ever written in the United
States—Leaves of Grass.
In the face of all the destruction, a group of neighborhood residents got together and formed the Community Conservation and
Improvement Council (CCIC, pronounced “kick”) in 1958. CCIC
joined with the Brooklyn Heights Association in 1959 and proposed a historic zoning designation for the neighborhood, like that
which had been granted to Boston’s Beacon Hill. In January 1965
the U.S. Department of the Interior declared the Heights a historic
district, and in April 1965 the New York City Landmarks Preservation Law passed. Brooklyn Heights was the first such neighborhood in New York, predating Greenwich Village.
Once a neighborhood is landmarked, its buildings can almost
never be torn down or altered externally. The reason the Heights
continues to look as it does is that a band of citizens fought to
make it so.
Walk to the first street south of (or behind) Borough Hall,
which is Joralemon Street. Walk one block west on Joralemon to Clinton Street. Make a right and walk two
blocks to Montague Street.
Spencer Memorial Church (1853) is on the southeast corner
of Remsen and Clinton. Although built as the First Presbyterian Church of Brooklyn, its first minister was Ichabod
Spencer; hence the name. Since Brooklyn Heights was selfconsciously developed as an idyllic suburban enclave for
wealthy New Yorkers and its promoters emphasized its
“respectable” character, they saw to it that churches were
erected wherever possible. Brooklyn was sometimes called
the “borough of churches,” as much for its proliferation of
steeples as for the supposed bigotry of its earlier Protestant
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
154
➢
“American” residents to newcomers. The church is now a
group of co-op apartments.
Montague Street is the major shopping street in the
Heights. During the late nineteenth century, Montague was
also called “Bank Row” because of the number of banks
here. The street also had a cable car running along its center beginning in 1887; this became an electrified trolley
from 1909 to 1924. True Brooklyn trivia lovers know that
the Brooklyn Dodgers baseball team was named after borough residents who had to dodge trolleys like this one
while crossing streets.
In addition to banks, Montague was the original site of
three of Brooklyn’s greatest cultural institutions, all now
demolished but rebuilt elsewhere in the borough. The 1864
Mercantile Library was on the north side of the block. It
eventually merged with the Brooklyn Public Library,
which moved to Grand Army Plaza in 1941. To the south
was the 1872 Brooklyn Art Association, a forerunner to the
Brooklyn Museum, which is now on Eastern Parkway just
down from the Brooklyn Library. Finally, the Brooklyn
Academy of Music had its opening night in 1861 on this
block but now exists to the east, in the neighborhood of
Fort Greene.
On the northwest corner of Montague and Clinton is the
1847 Church of St. Ann and the Holy Trinity. Go inside, if
it is open, to look at the stained-glass windows by William
Jay Bolton. Supposedly, Bolton left America for England
after finishing these windows, never to do stained-glass
again. Many years later one of his elderly surviving daughters, nearing the end of her life, discovered her father’s past
and journeyed to Brooklyn Heights to see the work. Seeing
the windows inspired her to live another ten years.
Go one block further north on Clinton to Pierrepont
Street.
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 155
➢
The 1880 Brooklyn Historical Society is on the southwest
corner. The architect is George Post, who also designed the
New York Stock Exchange Building. The society began in
1863 as the Long Island Historical Society and today
houses one of the most extensive regional collections in the
country. On the building’s facade are busts of Christopher
Columbus and Benjamin Franklin, and flanking the entranceway are heads of an Indian and a Viking. On the east
side are numerous other heads and an inscription from Cicero translated as “History, the Witness of Time.”
Make a left on Pierrepont and walk west toward the
Promenade.
At the northeast corner of Pierrepont and Monroe is the
Church of the Savior (1844), now the First Unitarian
Church, which has beautiful 1890 Tiffany windows. Continue on the south side of the street past 102 Pierrepont
Street, former home of both Arthur Miller and Norman
Mailer. Here, after World War II, Miller wrote All My Sons
and Mailer wrote The Naked and the Dead. Between the
First World War and the 1950s, Brooklyn Heights attracted
a fair number of authors and artists who were looking for
cheap rents. Many New Yorkers think of this as a high
point for Brooklyn artistic life, but Heights residents often
saw it as a sign of decline!
Continue walking along Pierrepont toward the Promenade but stop at Columbia Heights before proceeding
down past the playground. To your right is Columbia
Heights and to your left is Montague Terrace.
Brooklyn Heights has examples of most major architectural styles present in America in the nineteenth century.
To your right (north), the modern brown townhouse at 222
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
156
➢
➢
Columbia Heights was built to fit in with the others following landmark laws. Judge for yourself. Next door, at 218
and 220 Columbia Heights, are two examples of the Renaissance revival style, an opulent, Italianate design. The
three townhouses at 21, 23, and 25 Pierrepont that you just
passed on the right are also in this style. Note the continuous balcony-like balustrade that ties them together.
To your left, past Montague Street, is 5 Montague Terrace, where Thomas Wolfe lived from 1933 to 1934 and
where he finished Of Time and the River. A friend described his place:
The chief piece of furniture was an old table, work worn and ancient but still sturdy. It was marked by many cigarette burns and
its surface was dented like a shelf after a hard battle. . . . At the
right, as one entered, and opposite the windows, was one alcove
containing a gas range and another with an electric refrigerator
which bumped and hummed as refrigerators did then. Tom
claimed that this sound stimulated him by its rhythm. On the old
table and on this refrigerator he did most of his writing.
Immediately to your left is a playground and to the left
of it are two of the three original mansions designed by
Richard Upjohn in 1857. Farthest south, at 3 Pierrepont
Place, is the former home of Abiel Abbott Low, a merchant
who got rich trading with China and moved to the Heights
in the mid–nineteenth century. His son Seth Low was the
only person to be mayor of both Brooklyn (in 1884) and
New York City (1901). He later became president of Columbia University. The next closest mansion, at No. 2, was
the home of Alfred Tredway White, a wealthy merchant
and philanthropist whose charitable motto was “Philanthropy plus 5 percent.” White funded model tenements for
the poor in Brooklyn. 
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 157
The playground adjacent to 2 Montague Terrace is all
that remains of the third of Upjohn’s mansions. It was demolished in 1946 but was the home of Henry Pierrepont,
whose family owned much of the surrounding land early in
the nineteenth century.
Now walk straight ahead to the Promenade. As you
stand and look out over the harbor to downtown Manhattan, you have a modern version of the view that merchants
like A. A. Low had 150 years ago, when they wanted to look
upon their business on South Street in New York. From
here you can also see why the neighborhood is called the
Heights. Many of the streets that end at the Promenade
today once sloped down from the heights to the shoreline. 
From here, in 1776, George Washington evacuated
Long Island (Brooklyn), fleeing with his troops across to
Manhattan under cover of fog and then northward to
Harlem and out of New York, which was occupied by the
British for the entire course of the Revolutionary War.
Finally, you have been listening to the roar of traffic.
The Promenade is a cantilevered walkway over on the
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway (BQE), which Robert Moses had built through the community in 1953. The building
of the BQE and the destruction it wrought on much of the
neighborhood were a primary cause for Heights residents
to come together to protect their homes.
Double back along Pierrepont two blocks to Willow Street
and make a left, walking north. Continue walking along
Willow Street then left on Pineapple Street.
There are examples of most of the architectural styles in
the Heights along Willow Street.
The three Federal-style townhouses set back from the
street at 155, 157, and 159 Willow, to your right, are some of
the earliest in the Heights and were built in the 1820s. Note
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
158
➢
the arched dormered windows on top of two of the houses.
At some point the owner of the house nearest Pierrepont
Street extended the third floor upward and did away with
the dormers. A plaque on the middle house says that it hid
an underground storage space that was used to hide runaway slaves as they escaped northward to Canada from the
South. You can see the glass brick that is the roof of this
space if you look down at the sidewalk near the stairs of 157
Willow. Whether this spot was actually used as such is a
matter of debate.
The carriage house at 151 Willow is an 1880 addition to
the block, although it appears older. The stars on the front
of the building actually cover iron tie-rods that go through
the building and support the walls. Note the name posted
on the tree inside the wrought-iron fence between 155 Willow and the carriage house: it’s a redwood.
Continuing along, note the Gothic revival townhouses
on your left, built in the 1830s and 1840s. The giveaway architectural signs are the large blocks that make up the outer
walls and the Tudor arched windows. Further along on
your right is 109 Willow, a Colonial revival building with
exposed outside shutters.
Across the street is 108–112 Willow, a Queen Anne–
style building constructed in the 1880s and mixing elements
from across architectural history—terra-cotta, shingles,
bay windows, gables, and a small tower. It is a bizarre style
that somehow works.
Whenyoureachthebuildingat 101 Willow,atthesoutheast corner of Clark, you are at an excellent 1838 Greek revival home. Note the Greek Ionic portico over the front
door and high basement. The current owner of this house
actually had bricks from the back of the home moved to the
front, where they would make it look appropriately aged.
Look to your right (east) down Clark to the St. George
Hotel, which takes up most of the block between Hicks and
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 159
Henry. The St. George Hotel defined residence-hotel elegance in the latter half of the nineteenth century and in the
early twentieth century. It was built in stages from 1885 to
1929 and had between twenty-six hundred and twentyeight hundred rooms, making it the largest hotel in the
United States for many years. That honor now goes to the
five-thousand-plus-room Venetian in Las Vegas. Many
New Yorkers had coming-out parties, weddings, and anniversaries in the hotel’s giant ballroom. It was a favored
hangout of the Brooklyn Dodgers. Today the St. George
has been divided into apartments. Its saltwater swimming
pool with its mirrored ceiling is gone, and in its place are
racquetball courts.
The St. George was also the site of the largest fire ever
in Brooklyn. Early Sunday morning, August 27, 1995, a
man using a blowtorch to remove copper pipes to sell for
scrap started a fire in the 51 Clark Street part of the hotel.
The fire spread to several attached buildings and grew to
eighteen alarms, bringing five hundred firefighters to the
neighborhood.
Continue further north to the northeast corner of Willow and Clark, past the 1928 Leverich Towers Hotel, another grand Heights hotel (whose towers can best be seen
when you are further away). It’s now a lovingly restored
Jehovah’s Witness residence hall.
Continue left on Pineapple and walk back to Columbia
Heights. The prison-like structure on the southeast corner
of Pineapple and Columbia Heights is a Jehovah’s Witness
dormitory and library. The AIA Guide calls it an “early and
sensitive design under new Landmarks Law.” Others see it
as an unsuccessful attempt to incorporate the three brick
housefronts next door and reproduce their bay-window
motif on its own facade.
Brooklyn Heights is the world headquarters of the Jehovah’s Witnesses, a church that over the years has bought
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
160
and renovated many of the Heights’s buildings and also
torn down many of the others. It’s important to note that
when the Jehovah’s Witnesses bought many buildings in
the neighborhood, it was not the desirable and unaffordable place to live that it is now.
Double back to Willow Street and walk north to the corner of Orange and Willow Streets.
Why is there a Cranberry, an Orange, and a Pineapple
Street in Brooklyn Heights? The myth is that Mabel Middagh Hicks, a descendant of two wealthy Brooklyn families, was upset at all the family names on the streets, so she
put up her own, more colorful ones. The Board of Aldermen eventually let them remain. Is it true? We don’t know.
Another great old Heights story, this one not true, concerns Mabel’s relatives, the Hicks brothers—“Milk” and
“Spitter” Hicks. The Hicks family did have a farm here, and
they likely sold produce in Manhattan. Supposedly, the word
hick to describe a country bumpkin comes from phrase
“Here come the Hicks” uttered when Hicks family traveled
to Manhattan to sell vegetables. It’s a great story, but “Hick”
is a seventeenth-century British abbreviation for “Richard.”
Turn left and walk one block west on Orange to the corner of Columbia Heights.
The twelve-story building on the northeast corner is the
Margaret Apartments, formerly the 1889 Hotel Margaret
(97 ColumbiaHeights).TheJehovah’sWitnesseswererenovating it when it burned down in 1980. The Landmarks
Preservation Law often requires height restrictions on new
construction,buttheWitnessesmadeasuccessfulargument
forrebuildingthestructuretoitsformerheightbecausethat
wastheheightof thebuildingwhentheybeganrenovations.
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 161
➢
➢
Betty Smith wrote A Tree Grows in Brooklyn here in 1943,
andH.G.WellsoftenstayedherewhenvisitingNewYork.
The cookie-cutter brick building on the southeast corner (107 Columbia Heights) was finished in 1959, before
historic preservation laws went into effect. Note how it
overwhelms its neighbors. The building at 124 Columbia
Heights, on the river side of the street, sits atop what was
110 Columbia Heights. Washington Roebling, the chief engineer on the Brooklyn Bridge (more on him later), lived in
this house for a few years after having a nervous breakdown (or suffering a severe case of the bends, depending
on whom you ask) and watched his bridge go up through a
telescope for months at a time.
The writer Hart Crane rented what he was convinced
was Roebling’s room in the building from 1924 to 1929. He
wrote of the bridge: “And up at the right the Brooklyn
Bridge, the most superb piece of construction in the modern world, I’m sure, with strings of light crossing it like
glowing worms as the Ls and surface cars pass each other
coming and going.”
Return to Orange Street and walk two and a half blocks
east (just past Hicks Street) until you come to the large,
Italianate 1849 Plymouth Church of the Pilgrims, designed by Joseph Wells. 
Across the grass courtyard is a statue of the Reverend
Henry Ward Beecher. Preacher Beecher was the subject of
the “trial of the century” of the 1800s.
“trial of the century”
There is a “trial of the century” at least once a decade—think of
Sacco and Vanzetti, the Lindbergh-baby kidnapping, Julius and
Ethel Rosenberg, Charles Manson, O. J. Simpson, and so on.
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
162
➢
Henry Ward Beecher’s 1874 trial for “alienation of affection”—
he had an affair with a married parishioner—captured the attention
of the city in the post–Civil War decade. Beecher’s fame at the time
was exceeded only by that of his sister Harriet Beecher Stowe, author of Uncle Tom’s Cabin, which outsold all books except the
Bible in 1850s.
Henry Beecher was America’s leading abolitionist and spoke
widely, using Christianity to condemn slavery. He was so popular
that extra ferries, called “Beecher’s Boats,” were run on Sundays
to bring attendees from Manhattan to hear him preach. By 1859,
Beecher was making thousands yearly as a minister. Both Abraham Lincoln and Mark Twain came to hear this brilliant man speak.
It is hard to impress on the modern reader the national stature of
a preacher like Henry Ward Beecher in the nineteenth century—
think Billy Graham, Jesse Jackson, and Norman Vincent Peale all
rolled into one.
So it was quite a surprise when this man who advocated high
moral standards in others was accused of having sex with a woman
other than his wife. Beecher managed to hush up his affair with
parishioner Elizabeth Tilton until it was brought into the open by
Victoria Woodhull and her sister Tennessee Claflin, both noted
equal rights advocates, spiritualists, investors, and feminists.
Woodhull had the radical idea that a woman’s sexual needs are
equal to a man’s and that love (sex) should not be controlled by
anyone but the parties involved. She called it “free love,” noting, “I
have an inalienable, constitutional and natural right to love whom
I may, to love as long or as short a period as I can, to change that
love every day if I please.”
Woodhull and Claflin’s Weekly newspaper declared Beecher a
closet “free lover” and urged him to come out into the open. The
twentieth-century equivalent would be the posters pasted up in
New York that “outed” supposedly straight men and women as
being gays and lesbians. In her argument, Woodhull cleverly drew
a link between her struggle for “social freedom” and Beecher’s for
freedom from slavery:
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 163
“I propose . . . to ventilate one of the most stupendous scandals
which has ever existed in any community. . . . I intend that this
article shall burst like a bombshell into the ranks of this moralistic social camp.
I am engaged in officering, and in some sense conducting, a
social revolution on the marriage question. This institution . . .
has outlived its days of usefulness, and the most intelligent and
really virtuous of our citizens have outgrown and are systematically unfaithful to it. It is obvious the human animal demands
free love. . . . 
The immense physical potency of Henry Ward Beecher is
one of the greatest and noble endowments of this great and
representative man. His only crime is not to openly admit his
having frequently indulged in the practice of free love.”
Woodhull, Claflin, and their publisher were almost immediately
jailed for obscenity after publishing the charges. Other newspapers reprinted their article, but no one else was arrested. Woodhull’s plight became a cause célèbre, and Beecher’s six-monthlong civil trial, brought by Elizabeth’s husband, Theodore Tilton,
became a fascinating entrée into sex, infidelity, and free love in
Victorian America. The trial ended with a hung jury, and two inquiries by the church exonerated Beecher, although historical evidence has long since shown that he was clearly “guilty.”
The last word should go to a contemporary paper, which wrote:
“The trial was a fine illustration of the power of money and the
tricks that can be played with the law.” Indeed.
Continue east on Orange to Henry, then left one block
north to Cranberry. 
About where Cranberry used to meet Fulton Street (now
Cadman Plaza West) was the greatest landmark of all in
Brooklyn Heights, now gone. Here Walt Whitman set the
first edition of Leaves of Grass.
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
164
➢
On Cranberry behind Plymouth Church is the site of
one of Walt Whitman’s many homes in New York. As
Whitman remembered it: “From 1824–28 our family lived
in Brooklyn in Front, Cranberry, and Johnson Streets. In
the latter my father built a nice house for a home, and afterwards another in Tillary St. We occupied them one after
the other, but they were mortgaged, and we lost them.”
And we have lost them all too, including Whitman’s
printer’s, another building in which he edited the Brooklyn
Daily Eagle, and more.
We have come in an arc from Borough Hall through the
Heights, returning to the northern end of Cadman Plaza.
As you look up and around you, take stock of the neighborhood you have walked through and note how different
Cadman Plaza is. The low townhouses and some of the
other buildings are named for Whitman, but he wouldn’t
know them.
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 165
Harper’s illustration showing the 1874 trial of preacher Henry Ward Beecher
for “alienation of affection”—adultery. Beecher’s courtroom drama was “the
trial of the century” for his decade and involved everyone from Victoria Woodhull to Susan B. Anthony. Illustration from Frank Leslie’s, April 17, 1875, in John
Grafton, New York in the Nineteenth Century (New York: Dover), 1977.
brooklyn writers
Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes, how curious you are to me!
On the ferry-boats the hundreds and hundreds that cross, returning home, are more curious to me than you suppose,
And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence are more
to me, and more in my meditations, than you might suppose.
—walt whitman, “Crossing Brooklyn Ferry”
At three o’clock in the morning when the rest of the city is silent
and dark, you can come suddenly on a little area as vivacious as a
country fair. It is Sands Street, the place where sailors spend their
evenings when they come here to port. At any hour of the night
some excitement is going on in Sands Street. The sunburned
sailors swagger up and down sidewalks with their girls. The bars
are crowded and there are dancing music, and straight liquor at
cheap prices.
—carson mccullers, “Brooklyn Is My Neighborhood”
On a summer’s evening a stroll across the bridge, with cool winds
singing through the steel shrouds, with stars moving about above
and ships below, can be intoxicating, particularly if you are headed
toward the roasting-pork, sweet-and-sour aromas of Chinatown.
—truman capote, “A House on the Heights”
Continue north on Henry Street to Middagh Street. Cross
Henry and walk on the sidewalk across from Middagh
Street and follow it as it curves through the park, until
you are walking under the car approach to the Brooklyn
Bridge. Take the staircase on your left up to the walkway
at the center of the Brooklyn Bridge. 
When you come out on what bridge designer John Augustus Roebling called the “elevated pleasure walk,” stop and
look out at the bridge.
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
166
➢
Remember as you walk across to stay to the side of the path
that is marked for pedestrians. The other side is for bicyclists,
who will run you down if you stray onto “their” side.
The bridge is pregnant with aesthetic symbolism.
You’re looking at the most ancient material—stone—
girded with what was in its time the most modern—steel.
A suspension bridge brings together the two great forces
in engineering, tension and compression. The steel cables
are under nothing but tension as they strain to hold up
the bridge. The granite towers are under nothing but
compression as they strain to support the massive steel
cables.
What exactly is a suspension bridge? Simply, it is one in
which the roadway is hung, suspended—from cables. The
cables take the load of the roadbed and transmit it to the
towers and then to the ground. Anchorages underground
on the Brooklyn and Manhattan shorelines hold down the
ends of the four cables, each one composed of thousands of
The granite and steel of the archetypal suspension bridge—the Brooklyn
Bridge—with the panorama of Manhattan behind it. Photo courtesy of the New-
York Historical Society.
individual strands. The cables pass over massive towers
and hold up the deck, which is hung by yet more steel cables called “suspenders.” Even more diagonal cables, called
“stays,” hold the bridge rigid.
The Brooklyn Bridge is 1,595 feet long from tower to
tower. It was the longest in the world from 1883 until the
George Washington Bridge was completed between Manhattan and New Jersey in 1931. Today, the Brooklyn Bridge
is a piker: it doesn’t even make the top twenty suspension
bridges in the world.
Suspension bridges made of rope, vine, leather, and
wood have been around for thousands of years. But it wasn’t until the early 1800s that wrought iron could be produced cheaply enough to make it a suitable substitute for
wood, stone, and cast iron, thus making the modern suspension bridge possible. Even then, the iron was first made
into a chain and lifted up all at once, a feat that was limited
by the weight of the chain. It was the idea of “spinning” a
cable one strand at a time, making the cables in place, that
made possible the suspension bridges we have today.
Begin walking across the bridge, and remember to stay
in the pedestrian path. After a few hundred feet, pause to
think about the anchorages hidden beneath you.
Inside these massive stone structures, the cables are
connected to a series of eyebars attached to metal plates
that sit beneath tons of cement and rock. The lower ends
of the eyebars are attached to the plates and the upper
ends are attached to the cables. The sheer weight of the
material on top (including your body right now) holds
down the cables and resists their pull, just as if you were
to stand on a string while a cat tried to pull it out from
under your foot.
Stop when the walkway turns from cement to wood and
consider the men who designed the Brooklyn Bridge—
John Roebling and his son Washington Roebling.
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
168
timeline
April 1867:
New York Bridge Company chartered by state
legislature.
June 1869:
Surveying begins.
June 1869:
John Roebling dies.
October 1869–
March 1870:
Brooklyn caisson built.
May 1870:
Brooklyn caisson towed into place and men
begin working inside.
June 1870:
First stone laid on Brooklyn caisson.
March 1871:
Brooklyn tower foundation complete.
September 1871:
New York caisson towed into place.
July 1872:
New York tower foundation complete.
February 1873:
Brooklyn anchorage started.
May 1875:
New York anchorage started.
June 1875:
Brooklyn tower finished.
June 1876:
Cable making started. 
July 1876:
New York tower finished and New York anchorage finished.
August 25, 1876:
E. F. Farrington’s ride across cable in boatswain’s chair.
October 1878:
Cable making finished.
December 1881:
Structure for bridge floor finished.
May 24, 1883:
Bridge opened.
John Augustus Roebling (1806–1869) grew up in Germany and finished his degree in engineering at the Royal
Polytechnic Institute in Berlin in 1826. His senior thesis
was on suspension bridges. While in Berlin studying engineering, Roebling also studied with G. W. F. Hegel.
Whether he ever understood Hegel’s Phenomenology of
Mind we’ll never know, but Roebling did understand
Hegel’s dictum that America “was the land of desire for
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 169
all those who are weary of the historical lumber room of
old Europe.”
Like many young men of his generation, Roebling left
Germany and came to the United States where, as he later
said, “the numerous hindrances, restrictions, and obstacles
which are set up by timid governments and hosts of functionaries against every endeavor in Germany are not to be
found.” He moved to a western Pennsylvania community
called Saxonburg and started farming. But Roebling soon
tired of life in the fields and began working on engineering
projects for the state.
Roebling got the idea for wire rope—the thin strands of
metal that could be compressed into cables—while on an
engineering job. He noted that the threeto nine-inch-thick
hemp ropes used to tow canal boats up inclined railways
were expensive and dangerous. Roebling believed that rope
made of metal would be stronger and cheaper. He was
right. He returned to his farm and soon had most of the
townsfolk working for him, making wire rope. In 1848 he
moved his whole family to Trenton and founded a wirerope company that existed as John A. Roebling’s Sons until
it was sold in 1953. It finally closed in 1973.
Roebling started his bridge-building career with an 1844
suspension-bridge aqueduct in Pittsburgh. He went on to
build other aqueducts and even suspension-bridge canals!
One canal still stands as a single-lane auto bridge near Port
Jervis, New York. He even built a railroad bridge across
Niagara Falls. Roebling was certainly the most famous
bridge builder in the United States when the New York
Bridge Company chose him as chief engineer for the
Brooklyn Bridge project in 1867.
Roebling, unfortunately, was a firm believer in the curative properties of water. He was surveying land for the anchorages on a dock near the Brooklyn shore on June 28,
1869, when his foot was crushed against a piling by a dock-
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
170
ing ferry. He treated himself by pouring cold water over
the wound and died a month later from tetanus. That left
his son Washington Roebling, thirty-two, to take over.
Washington Roebling (1837–1926) had a civil engineering degree from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy,
New York. After graduating, he served in the Union Army
with both artillery and cavalry units, fighting at Gettysburg, Chancellorsville, and other battlegrounds. He also
built four suspension bridges, all of which were destroyed
by the Confederate Army.
Walk onto the bridge to the point where the walkway intersects the descending cable on your right. Reach out
and touch the cable. Hold onto the suspenders (the
twisted cables hanging vertically from the main cable).
You are actually helping to hold up the roadbed when you
do this, and you can tell your friends you held up the
Brooklyn Bridge. Seriously.
An 1882 inspection of the truss work. Engineers and officials are standing
on the nearly completed bridge roadway, viewing the steel truss work that
surrounded the cable-car system. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical
Society.
➢
Inside the galvanized iron wrapping of the cable from
which the suspender hangs are exactly 5,434 wires squeezed
together into a single 15¾ inch cable. They’re not twisted
like the suspenders but are perfectly straight. The thousands of strands are divided into nineteen bunches of 286
wires each. That’s 14,370 miles of wire, weighing almost 7
million pounds.
Walk to the Brooklyn tower and look at the plaques illustrating the bridge-building process.
From August 1876 to October 1878, after the towers were
completed, Roebling’s workers spun the cables back and
forth across the river. The first strand came across on August 11, 1876. Two weeks later, Master Mechanic E. F. Farrington made the first crossing of the East River by the
great bridge. He did it sitting in a boatswain’s chair—nothing more than a flat board with a rope loop holding it to a
pulley wheel. It took him twenty-two minutes to go from
the Brooklyn to the New York side.
The Brooklyn Bridge is the first bridge that used steel
cables rather than iron ones. The process began on the
Brooklyn side. Huge drums of cable were brought to the
bridge. One end of wire was attached to a traveling wheel.
Using steam power, the strand was then pulled out of the
drum and sent across the river. When the wheel reached the
other side, the wire loop was pulled off and the wheel sent
back empty to repeat the journey. After the 143 d trip (making 286 strands), the wire was cut and the final end spliced
to the first, making a single, continuous length of cable.
Under ideal conditions—a rarity—the cables traveled
at five and a half feet a second, meaning a pair of wires
could theoretically be laid in place in half an hour. But
wind, ice, snow, and breakdowns slowed the process. Ten
wires a day in each cable was considered good work, and
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
172
➢
the entire cable spinning, excluding the wrapping of the cables in the galvanized iron you touched, took eighteen
months.
Look up at the height of the tower. For many months
the cables could be reached by a footbridge running from
anchorage to anchorage and open to anyone who asked the
chief engineer for permission to walk across. Imagine a
process like that in today’s lawsuit-ridden America! “You
want to climb on the girders? Go ahead, it’s your life.”
Pedestrian access to the footbridge was eventually halted,
not over liability but because pedestrians paralyzed by fear
had to be rescued by workmen. This was clearly an unproductive use of workers’ time.
Read the anachronistic plaque to Emily Warren Roebling on the Manhattan-facing side of the Brooklyn tower.
Emily Roebling (1843–1903) was Washington’s tireless gobetween for communicating instructions to E. F. Farrington and others on the bridge. When Roebling became too
ill in 1872 to continue personally supervising the work,
Emily became his private secretary. He dictated specifica-
Illustration of wooden walkways that allowed access to the beginning of the cables and the almost-completed towers on the Brooklyn Bridge. Any visitor
could go to the office of the chief engineer and request a pass to go onto the
walkway. Imagine that in today’s litigious society. Illustration from Frank
Leslie’s, June 16, 1877, in John Grafton, New York in the Nineteenth Century
(New York: Dover), 1977.
tions to her and she communicated information to assistant
engineers. By 1879, she had spent seven years absorbed
with the bridge.
brooklyn bridge statistics
Span: 1,595 ft.
Total bridge length: 3,455 ft.
Total bridge length plus approaches: 5,989 ft.
Height at mid-span: 135 ft.
Width: 85 ft.
Grade: 3.25 percent
Caissons: 168 x 102 ft. (Brooklyn); 172 x 102 ft. (New York)
Depth of base below high water: 44.5 ft. (Brooklyn); 78.5 ft. (New
York)
Tower height above high-water mark: 276 ft.
Height of arches above roadway: 117 ft.
Anchorages: 129 x 119 ft. at base.
Cables
Number: 4
Length of each: 3,578.5 ft.
Number of wires in each: 5,434
Total length of wire in each: 3,515 miles
Weight of each: 870 tons
Number of vertical suspenders: 1,520 
Number of diagonal stays: 400
Cost of land: $3.8 million
Construction: $11.7 million
Total: $15.5 million
Now that you’ve been standing on the tower for a few minutes, consider this: the Brooklyn tower rests on bedrock,
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
174
but the Manhattan tower rests only on “hard pan” or “hard
pack,” closely packed rock and soil. Washington Roebling
made the decision to stop digging beneath the high-water
mark at 78.5 feet. But more on that when you reach the
Manhattan tower.
Continue walking across the bridge until you reach what
is about the midpoint, which is 135 feet above the highwater mark by order of the War Department, which had to
ensure that ships made at the Brooklyn Navy Yard upriver
could pass beneath.
A bridge is a constant invitation to the reckless. The first
person to jump from the bridge was Robert Odlum, a
Washington, D.C., swimming instructor. On May 19, 1885,
he leaped, hoping to survive. Unfortunately, he didn’t.
The most famous jumper of all was Steve Brodie, who
on July 16, 1886, at age twenty-seven took bets that he
could jump and live. He did—or at least he said he jumped.
Witnesses claimed he was successful, and Brodie took his
$200 winnings and opened a saloon on the Bowery. He had
an oil painting of himself jumping painted on a wall and sat
beneath it for years, telling his story to all comers. (See the
“Immigrant New York” tour in chapter 2 for more about
Brodie’s saloon.)
Remember that the bridge was built before automobiles
clogged our streets. It was used by horse carts, pedestrians,
and a cable railway that ran on the two inside lanes. A steam
engine on the Brooklyn side powered the cable car on its
five-minute/five-cent trip. From 1 to 5 a.m. the steam
power was shut off and locomotives did the work. The
cable car was gradually electrified but didn’t stop running
until 1944. Later, an electric trolley line was laid on the
middle lanes, leaving only the outside lane to horses.
Continue on to the Manhattan tower. Enjoy the brass
plaques with more construction information.
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 175
➢
The Manhattan tower is not standing on bedrock. How it
got here is another story. Excavating and creating the foundations for the towers was the most innovative, difficult,
and uncertain part of building the bridge. The problem was
how to get a foundation onto an area 100 by 170 feet, 44.5
feet beneath the water on the Brooklyn side and 75 feet beneath it on the Manhattan side. The solution was caissons—essentially, huge bottomless wooden boxes, fifteen
feet thick at the top and nine feet at the sides decreasing to
less than a foot. The Brooklyn caisson was 168 by 102 feet
and the Manhattan one was 172 by 102 feet. The caissons
were built in shipyards north of the bridge site, launched
like giant barges, and floated to the foundation site. Once
there, they were anchored in place with pilings.
Compressed air was pumped into the caisson, keeping
water out—except for a foot or so at the bottom. Shafts
driven through the roof allowed things in and out. Dirt and
rocks went out via a water shaft; an iron tube filled with
water allowed access from riverbed to surface and con-
Cross section of the caisson and the beginning of one of the towers for the
Brooklyn Bridge. The illustration clearly shows the men working on the
riverbed inside the caisson, air locks and entry tubes, and clamshell excavators. Illustration courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.
tained a giant clamshell-shaped dredging claw. Men entered and left via an airshaft.
As the men dug and dynamited down inside the caisson,
masonry was laid across it on top, sinking it further and further into the earth. The caissons were lit by sperm
whale–oil candles, and the temperature inside was eighty
degrees and humid. When the workers reached bedrock on
the Brooklyn side and hardpan on the Manhattan side, they
were pulled out and the caissons filled with concrete.
building the bridge
“Inside the caisson everything wore an unreal, weird appearance. There was a confused sensation in the head. . . . The pulse
was at first accelerated, then sometimes fell below the normal
rate. The voices sounded faint unnatural, and it became a great
effort to speak. What with the flaming lights, the deep shadows, the confusing noise of the hammers, drills and chains, the
half-naked forms flitting about, with here and there a Sisyphus
rolling his stone, one might, if of a poetic temperament, get a
realizing sense of Dante’s inferno.”
—master mechanic e. f. farrington
“In a bare shed where we got ready, the men told me no one
could do the work for long without getting the “bends.”. . .
When we went into the “air-lock” and they turned on one
airlock after another of compressed air, the men put their
hands to their ears and I soon imitated them for the pain
was acute. . . .
When the air was fully compressed, the door of the airlock
opened at a touch and we all went down to work with pick and
shovel on the gravelly bottom. . . . The six of us were working
naked to the waist in a small iron chamber with a temperature
of about 80 degrees Fahrenheit: in five minutes the sweat was
pouring from us, and all the while we were standing in icy water
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 177
that was only kept from rising by the terrific pressure. No wonder the headaches were blinding. The men didn’t work for more
than ten minutes at a time, but I plugged on steadily, resolved
to prove myself and get constant employment.”
—frank harris, author of My Life and Loves
As a sixteen-year-old boy, Harris allegedly worked in the caisson
but quit after a few weeks. Some historians believe he never actually worked in them.
Continue on, leaving the bridge and crossing Centre
Street, until you find yourself standing between the giant
Municipal Building to your right and the tiny City Hall (the
southern building in City Hall Park, not the northern one,
which is the Tweed Courthouse) to your left.
Take one final look at the bridge. When the bridge opened
on May 24, 1883, it was the biggest celebration since the
opening of the Erie Canal at the beginning of the century.
Tickets for seven thousand guests were issued; fifty thousand more attended; and the celebration began with an
hour of fireworks and bands on steamers beneath the
bridge. President Chester Arthur and the mayors of both
Brooklyn and New York attended and Emily Roebling led
them across. It was a glorious day for New York.
One week later, on Memorial Day, twelve pedestrians
were trampled to death on a narrow stairway like the one
you climbed at the Brooklyn end. The crowd thought the
bridge was falling and panicked running to get off. They
were wrong, but it was a tragic end to a masterful building
process.
If you can get close to City Hall when you read this, it
means that New York City has relaxed restrictions on people getting near the government. Finished in 1811, the
THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE | A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall
178
➢
building is only the third city hall that New York has ever
had. Construction costs came in under the $250,000 that
was budgeted. Originally, most of the building was marble
with the north face and the basement covered in lessexpensive brownstone. But between 1954 and 1956, the top
four inches of the entire facade was stripped off and replaced with Alabama veined limestone. At the same time,
the basement was redone with red granite. All the columns,
capitals, balustrades and trim were replaced with newly
carved limestone. Thus, the entire facade is a replica of the
original.
From here you can walk north and east to our “Immigrant New York” walk (chapter 2) or down Broadway to
the U.S. Custom House for our Lower Manhattan walk
(chapter 1).
A Walk from Brooklyn Heights to City Hall | THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE 179
