THE OTHER
BOROUGHS
A Driving Tour
Note: This driving tour is designed for travelers in private
vehicles (bicycles where allowed, motorcycles, or automobiles) and cannot be duplicated by bus and should not be attempted by bus. Many of the streets on this tour are residential, and it would be staggeringly inconsiderate to bring
larger vehicles onto them. This tour abides by all traffic
laws and regulations; please do the same. Furthermore,
please respect all private-property rights for residences and
institutions.
If you’ve been walking the other tours in our book, you
are probably wondering what the many square miles not
covered in them look like. You’ll have to wait for a walking-tour guide to the rest of the city, but in the meantime,
we offer our “The Other Boroughs: A Driving Tour.”
It’s certainly possible to drive this tour from start to finish in one day, but it will take you the good part of a day to
do so, and that means starting early in the morning and not
getting out to look around along the way. We assume that
many folk will want to stop and walk around periodically.
Keeping that in mind, it would probably take the heartiest
and most patient traveler to drive the entire tour for the first
317
10
time in one day. You’re the best judge of how you like to do
things. We’ve done the drive many times, but if you’re
doing it for the first time, you’ll probably want to break it
up into manageable chunks. For example, you can do any
one borough individually or do two at a clip.
It is also important to remember that you’ll be driving
on all types of roads, from highways to tiny residential
streets, and in all types of neighborhoods, from wealthy to
poor. So be prepared for the phenomenal diversity of New
York, bring everything you need for a long car trip, and
get going.
STATEN ISLAND
Our “Other Boroughs Driving Tour” begins on the southernmost point of Manhattan—South Ferry. It is here you
board the Staten Island Ferry for a refreshing twenty-fiveminute, 6.2-mile journey to explore New York City beyond Manhattan. There is a $3 charge to take your vehicle
onto the ferry. (It is free for pedestrians.) Car ferries run
about every thirty minutes on weekdays and every hour on
the half hour on weekends and holidays, but check the
schedule because it is subject to change.
While crossing the harbor, you are allowed to leave
your vehicle in the hold and step out onto the ferry’s deck,
which we recommend. You will pass a number of significant landmarks in the harbor. Immediately to your left will
be Governors Island. This is the 176-acre former U.S.
Army and then Coast Guard base that was closed in 1996.
Almost half (eighty-five acres) of the island is a National
Historic Landmark, and there are five individual landmarked structures as well. At this time the future of the island is unclear, but everything from casinos to universities
has been proposed. The three-story fort protecting the is-
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
318
land on this side is Castle Williams, built 1807–11. It is one
of three forts on Governors Island.
Further into the harbor, to your right, are Ellis Island and
the Statue of Liberty.
Ellis Island first opened as New York’s immigration reception center in 1892. The main building, which is now a museum, opened in 1900. Between first opening and 1924,
some 16 million immigrants entered America through this
building. One interesting note about the island itself: Ellis
Island began as a 3.3-acre sandbar. To accommodate the
buildings and increased demand for space, landfill was
added to grow the island to its current 27.5 acres.
The Statue of Liberty, one of the best-known landmarks in the world, was a gift from France, dedicated on
Staten Island Ferry, Lower Manhattan as seen in the mid-1990s. Ferries have
run between Manhattan and Staten Island since the 1630s. The contemporary
Staten Island Ferry has been operated by the City of New York since 1905. The
ferries carry sixty-five thousand passengers a day and twenty million a year.
The seven-ferry fleet makes the 6.2 mile crossing some thirty-four thousand
times a year. Courtesy of NYC & Company—The Convention and Visitors Bureau.
➢
October 28, 1886. Designed by sculptor Frédéric-Auguste
Bartholdi, its copper “skin” is supported by a metal structure built by Gustave Eiffel. The stone base was designed
by American architect Richard Morris Hunt.
Both Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty can be
reached by taking the Statue of Liberty Ferry (paid admission) from Battery Park, Manhattan.
Ferries between the harbor’s islands began running as
early as 1713, when sailing vessels were used to cross the
harbor. The first steamer-ferry service between Staten Island and Manhattan was started by Daniel Tompkins when
he launched the Nautilus in 1817. Regular ferry service has
continued ever since. In 1905, municipal ferries began replacing the private companies.
STATEN ISLAND
Exit ferry terminal and drive straight one block to Richmond Terrace.
We begin in one of the oldest and most historic parts of
Staten Island. It was on the hills ahead of and above us that
the British built a series of earthen redoubts to defend the
island from invasion during the American Revolution. The
area remained mostly rural until the 1830s, when Manhattanites began using it as a country retreat.
Today, St. George is the most populous part of Staten
Island (seven thousand residents in 1990) and is the center
of the borough’s government.
Turn right on Richmond Terrace. As you turn, immediately to your left is Staten Island Borough Hall, at 2–10
Richmond Terrace.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
320
➢
➢
Built by architects Carrere & Hastings between 1904 and
1906, this is the main government building for the borough
of Staten Island. It is designed to be immediately noticed
by those arriving by ferry from Manhattan and stands as a
symbol of Staten Island’s equal membership in greater
New York. This building is a New York City Landmark.
Directly adjacent to Borough Hall stands the Richmond
County Courthouse, at 12–24 Richmond Terrace. The
columned courthouse adjacent to Borough Hall was also
built by Carrere & Hastings, but a decade later. These two
buildings were meant to be part of a larger, but never built,
civic center.
Carrere & Hastings was one of the city’s more prominent early twentieth-century design firms. It built numerous structures throughout the city. But one must wonder if
the fact that John Carrere was a Staten Island resident
helped land this plum contract.
As you approach the intersection with Wall Street, look
up the hill to your left and note the Staten Island Institute
of Arts and Letters, just above the police station. The institute is a research center and museum dedicated to the heritage and history of Staten Island and its people.
It is impossible to discern the exact place where one
neighborhood becomes another but you are now driving
through the Village of New Brighton. When it was incorporated in 1866, it brought together a series of smaller
areas known as Goosepatch, Vinegar Hill, and Tuxedo.
Take note of the street names. Many of them serve as reminders of the old Staten Island and have Dutch or early
American names. Some prominent examples include Hamilton, Westervelt, and Van Tuyl.
Just after the police station turn left on Hamilton Street.
After two blocks, turn right on St. Marks Place.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 321
➢
It was here, along St. Marks Place, that a series of elegant
hotels were built in the mid-nineteenth century. They offered a respite from the overcrowded city, with fresh sea air
and a pastoral view across the Kill van Kull into rural New
Jersey. That view has since been replaced by the shipyards
and refineries of Bayonne just across the water.
As you travel along St. Marks Place, note Curtis High
School to your left, at 105 Hamilton Avenue at St. Marks
Place.
Curtis High School sits on a diagonal on the corner of
Hamilton Avenue and St. Marks Place. Built in 1904 in the
collegiate Gothic style, it is the first public high school on
Staten Island and the first municipal building built after the
1898 Consolidation of Greater New York. It’s named for
George William Curtis, a nineteenth-century writer and
editor who had a country estate on the island. Curtis was an
early advocate of women’s suffrage and was a strong supporter of professional civil service as a cure for political
corruption. Locally, he is known for sheltering Horace
Greeley from pro-Confederate Staten Islanders during and
before the Civil War. Curtis wrote for Harper’s magazine
and The Nation. He also published Putnam’s Monthly with
his friend and fellow Staten Islander Frederick Law Olmsted. Curtis High School is also a New York City landmark.
St. Marks Place runs through the heart of the St.
George/New Brighton Historic District.
While driving along St. Marks Place, make note of Nos.
125, 119, and 103, three great examples of 1890s Queen
Anne revival houses.
Standing in the midst of the landmark district is St. Peter’s
Roman Catholic Church and Rectory, the oldest Catholic
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
322
➢
➢
parish on the island. The neo-Romanesque church was
built in 1900.
At the end of St. Marks Place, turn right on Westervelt
Avenue.
As you drive on Westervelt Avenue, note the lovely colonial revival home at No. 65.
At the end of Westervelt Avenue, turn left on Richmond
Terrace and drive three blocks to Franklin.
Turn left on Franklin and drive two blocks to Fillmore.
Turn right on Fillmore, then turn right on Lafayette
Street, to head back to Richmond Terrace.
When you reach the intersection of Fillmore and Lafayette, note New Brighton Village Hall, at 66 Lafayette
Street on the southwest corner of Fillmore Street. This
boarded-up Second Empire–style brick building was New
Brighton’s former village hall. Built in 1871 by James Whitford, it has been vacant since 1968. Despite its dilapidated
condition, it is a clear symbol of the wealth of this  nineteenth-century village.
Turn left on Richmond Terrace.
You are approaching the Tysen-Neville House—806 Richmond Terrace. Approximately two and a half blocks past
Lafayette Street, look toward the left and take careful note
of the small white building with the porch. Built around
1770 by sea captain John Neville, it is one of the few eighteenth-century buildings left on this part of Staten Island.
• • •
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 323
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
As you continue along Richmond Terrace, you will pass
the iron fence and Greek revival buildings of Sailors Snug
Harbor. Sailors Snug Harbor was created in 1801 with a bequest from shipping merchant Robert R. Randall as an institution for the care of “aged, decrepit, and worn-out
sailors.” Snug Harbor purchased this land in 1831 and built
a campus of buildings for the care of retired seamen. By
1900 it housed over a thousand people. But as the number
of American sailors diminished, so did the institution. In
1975 it relocated to North Carolina, and one year later the
complex was turned into the Sailors Snug Harbor Cultural
Center.
The most significant building is the 1831 Greek revival
Administration Building. Easily seen from Richmond Terrace, with its Ionic portico, it is the oldest surviving work
by architect Minard Lefever.
Turn left on Snug Harbor Road and make an immediate
left into Sailors Snug Harbor.
The Sailors Snug Harbor Cultural Center is a great place to
drive and/or walk around. It houses a music hall, art galleries, classrooms, the Staten Island Children’s Museum,
and the newly created Chinese Scholars Garden.
Depart Snug Harbor the way you came and turn left on
Snug Harbor Road.
Turn left on Kissel Avenue.
Turn right on Henderson Avenue (Kissel ends at Henderson). After approximately two blocks, turn left on Davis
Avenue (second traffic light).
Davis ends at Forest Avenue. Turn right on Forest Avenue.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
324
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
After one block, turn left on Pelton Avenue.
At the intersection with the fourth stop sign and the
“dead-end” sign, turn right on Whitewood Avenue.
Continue on Whitewood until it crosses Bement Avenue
and becomes Tyler Avenue.
Drive past the Julia Gardiner Tyler House—27 Tyler Street,
on your right.
This wonderful house, with its columns and green trim, has
been lovingly restored. Built about 1836 for Eliza Racey,
this Greek revival manor became the home for Julia Gardiner Tyler, the widow of President John Tyler. It had been
purchased for Julia by her parents in 1862.
At the end of Tyler Avenue, turn left on Clove Road.
Drive past the John King Vanderbilt House—1197 Clove
Road.
Keep your eyes open to the left for this one. Built in 1836,
this graffiti-covered wreck was once a fine example of
Greek revival architecture. Its original owner was the
cousin of “Commodore” Cornelius Vanderbilt (1794–
1887), who was born on Staten Island. At an early age, Cornelius Vanderbilt began operating a ferry between here and
Manhattan. From there he built a shipping empire, and he
had become a millionaire by 1846. His statue stands in front
of Manhattan’s Grand Central Terminal, the Manhattan
terminus for his New York Central Railroad.
Turn right on Victory Boulevard (at the Getty gas station)
for a fairly long drive, and then turn left on Manor Road
(at fourth stoplight and Mobil gas station).
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 325
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Victory Boulevard was created in 1817 as part of Staten Island resident and U.S. vice president Daniel Tompkins’s
Richmond Turnpike Company.
The intersection of Manor Road and Victory Boulevard
is the heart of Castleton Corners, a small neighborhood
that was colonial governor Thomas Dongan’s land grant.
Dongan was the first Catholic governor of the English
colony, serving from 1682 to 1688. During his time as governor, he supported the “Charter of Liberties and Privileges,” which proposed public elections, limited taxation,
and Christian religious freedom.
After passing five traffic lights, at the flashing yellow
light on Manor Road, take the right fork onto Brielle
Avenue.
Be careful, Brielle forks again. Take left fork to stay on
Brielle.
Drive past the New York City Farm Colony—Sea View
Hospital and Home Historic District. Brielle Avenue runs
straight through the center of the district. As you are
driving, note the older run-down buildings on your right
that are fenced off and partially obscured by trees. The
Farm Colony was a fancy name for a poorhouse. Established in 1902, the able-bodied poor from throughout the
city were sent here to work. The colony had a series of
fields where the poor were taught to farm. In the late
1980s, there were some discussions about the city developing these buildings into viable housing, but nothing
came of it.
As you come around the bend on Brielle Avenue, on the
left you will see, surrounded by a chain-link fence, the
Seaview Hospital. Founded in 1905, this was the largest tuberculosis hospital in the world. Most of the buildings are
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
326
➢
➢
currently vacant, but it is still a functioning hospital, and
the grounds are open to the public on a case-by-case basis.
Brielle Avenue ends at Rockland Avenue.
Turn left on Rockland Avenue.
Turn right at the first light onto Meisner Avenue.
As you turn onto Meisner Avenue, you are entering the
neighborhood known as Egbertville, a residential area
named for the eighteenth-century farming landowners, the
Egberts.
Drive past 190 Meisner Avenue.
Watch on your left for this unique private residence, built
around 1850. Note the small, all-glass monitor atop the
roof. Such spaces were designed for watching the comings
and goings of ships from the commanding heights over
Lower New York Bay.
A few blocks after 190 Meisner, turn right on London Road.
As it crosses Edinboro, go straight onto Rigby Street.
Turn left onto Manor Court as Rigby dead-ends, after one
short block.
Drive past the William and Catherine Cass House at 48
Manor Court. This is New York City’s only home designed
by Frank Lloyd Wright, and a city landmark. Wright designed it in 1956 for the Madison, Wisconsin, builder Marshall Erdman. The prefabricated parts were shipped from
Wisconsin and assembled here in 1958–59 by Wright’s associate Morton Delson.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 327
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
You will have to turn around, as Manor Court is a deadend street.
Returning to Edinboro, turn right on Edinboro.
Drive past the landmarked Staten Island Lighthouse. The
brick and limestone lighthouse was build in 1912 and
houses a 350,000-candle-power light that guides ships into
New York Bay. There is a better view of the lighthouse a
bit further along in our tour, so don’t despair about the partial view.
Continue on Edinboro and make a right at the first stop
sign onto Terrace Court.
Terrace Court becomes Lighthouse Avenue.
As you curve around Terrace Court, look carefully left at
the fantastic view of the Lower Harbor and the ocean from
Lighthouse Hill, which will give you a sense of why Lighthouse Hill is considered one of the most exclusive neighborhoods on Staten Island.
Drive slowly along Lighthouse Avenue; otherwise you
will miss the Jacques Marchais Museum of Tibetan Art at
338 Lighthouse. Look for a garage with green door, on
your left. The museum is open to the public from November to April and houses the most extensive privately owned
collection of Tibetan art outside Tibet.
As you begin to descend downhill, look up to the right
at the lighthouse.
At the end of Lighthouse Avenue, turn right on Richmond
Road. Drive approximately two blocks and turn right on
St. Patrick’s Place.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
328
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
As you drive a short distance on St. Patrick’s Place, you’ll
see the namesake of the street, the landmarked Saint
Patrick’s Church, at No. 45. Built in the early 1860s, this is
an excellent example of Romanesque revival design.
St. Patrick’s Place ends at Clarke Avenue.
The entrance to Historic Richmond Town is about one
hundred yards to your right on Clarke Avenue.
Located near the center of Staten Island, Historic Richmond Town is a great place to stop and walk around. This
twenty-five-acre site contains twenty-seven historic buildings from throughout the island. The oldest extant schoolhouse in the nation is here, built in 1696. The “newest” of
the structures dates from the mid-nineteenth century. Historic Richmond Town has a visitor center and offers
guided tours and interpretive programming throughout
the year.
After a visit to Historic Richmond Town, exit the parking
lot and turn left on Clarke Avenue. At end of Clarke Avenue (approximately nine blocks), turn left on Amboy
Road.
Follow Amboy for four traffic lights to where it intersects
with and becomes Richmond Road. Continue on Richmond to the Moravian Cemetery.
About a block after you merge onto Richmond Road,
keep a lookout for No. 2475. Located to your left and up
on a hill, this 1850s Italianate villa is the former home of
Gustave A. Mayer, the man who invented the Nabisco
sugar wafer.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 329
➢
➢
➢
➢
MORAVIAN CEMETERY
The entrance to the Moravian Cemetery is on Richmond
Road, opposite Otis Avenue. This cemetery contains a
“who’s who” of Staten Island. Most of it is open to the public, and the older sections offer scenic views. Toward the
back of the cemetery sit fourteen acres of the Vanderbilt
family. The cemetery grounds were designed by Frederick
Law Olmsted, and the large, seventy-two-crypt, Vanderbilt mausoleum, which holds the “commodore” and his
family, by Richard Morris Hunt.
Continue on Richmond Road, keeping the cemetery on
your left, to the intersection of Richmond Road and Todt
Hill Road. Turn left on Todt Hill Road (follow the cemetery
fence up Todt Hill Road).
After one block, turn right on Flagg Place.
The harbor view is to your right, while the splendid
Flagg Estate is set off the road at No. 209. Now owned
by the Scalabrini Fathers of St. Charles, this sweeping
residence was the country home of Ernest Flagg, one of
America’s most prominent architects. Flagg also purchased a sizable tract of land on which he experimented
with designing affordable middle-class housing. Called
“The Cottages,” these smaller stone and wood homes
were part of his belief in home ownership for all people.
The easiest cottage to view from Flagg Place is Wallcot,
which stands at No. 285.
Note how we are climbing as we drive these roads. At
410 feet above sea level, Todt Hill is the highest point on the
United States Atlantic Coast south of Maine. Todt Hill is
one of the most affluent neighborhoods on Staten Island.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
330
➢
➢
At the end of Flagg Place, turn left onto Richmond Road.
Follow Richmond Road until it becomes Narrows Road.
Continue on Narrows Road as it parallels the expressway.
Be careful not to get onto Route 278, and do not follow
signs for the Verrazano Narrows Bridge.
As Richmond Road comes to an end, take the right fork
onto Bay Street.
Take a left on Lily Pond.
Follow the signs for “Bay Street—Fort Wadsworth.” After
1.8 miles, you will come to the entrance to Fort Wadsworth.
Historic Richmond Town. A one hundred-acre park, Historic Richmond Town
represents three hundred years of Staten Island history. It contains twentyseven historic buildings from throughout the island. Courtesy of NYC & Company—The Convention and Visitors Bureau.
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Go into Fort Wadsworth.
There have been fortifications on this site since 1663, and it
was one of the last British positions to surrender after the
American Revolution. The present fort was built in 1847
and was dedicated to Brigadier General James Wadsworth
in 1865, following his death at the Civil War’s Battle of the
Wilderness. Since the early 1990s this installation has been
part of the Gateway National Recreation Area.
Within Fort Wadsworth, follow signs to the National
Park Service Visitors Center and be certain to view the scenic overlook on Tompkins Road. The National Park Service has a short film on the history of New York’s fortifications and offers daily guided tours of the site.
After viewing the fort, exit the grounds and continue
straight on Bay Street, 0.5 miles to Hylan Boulevard.
Turn right on Hylan Boulevard and follow it to the end.
Drive to Alice Austen House, overlooking the Verrazano
Narrows. Photographer Alice Austen’s (1866–1952) work
primarily focused on daily life in the late nineteenth century. This house, purchased in 1844 by her grandfather,
was Austen’s primary residence and is now a museum dedicated to her work.
Make a U-turn from the Austen House and drive Hylan
Boulevard back to Bay Street.
Turn right on Bay Street and drive four blocks to Chestnut Avenue.
Turn left on Chestnut.
Chestnut ends at Tompkins Avenue.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
332
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Turn left on Tompkins Avenue.
Directly in front of you, at the intersection of Tompkins
and Chestnut, is the Garibaldi-Meucci Museum and historic home. Built around 1845, this was the home to Italian
American inventor Antonio Meucci, who invented an
early telephone. Guiseppe Garibaldi, the Italian liberator,
lived here from 1851 to 1853 while in exile in America. The
museum is maintained by the Sons of Italy and is open to
the public.
Continue along Tompkins until you reach Hylan Boulevard.
Turn right onto Hylan. Hylan Boulevard will cross over the
expressway. Enter expressway (following signs for 278
East–Brooklyn).
Cross Verrazano Narrows Bridge to Brooklyn.
When the Verrazano Narrows Bridge was completed in
1964, as designed by Swiss engineer Othmar Ammann, it
was the world’s longest suspension bridge, measuring
4,260 feet between towers. It is not the longest anymore but
is still beautiful. Many Italian Americans living in Bay
Ridge near the Brooklyn approach to the bridge did not
want their homes destroyed for its approaches, and naming
it after Giovanni da Verrazano, who sailed into New York
Harbor in 1524, certainly wasn’t enough to alleviate their
concerns. It took Robert Moses many years to beat back all
the opposition to the bridge, but he eventually got his way,
and eight thousand Brooklynites lost their homes and quite
a number more moved across the bridge to Staten Island.
The Staten Island side of the bridge is the starting point for
the New York Marathon every November. Including the
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 333
➢
➢
➢
➢
approaches, the bridge is 13,700 feet long; it is 228 feet
above the water; each tower is 693 feet tall; and it costs $7
to go across—although the toll is collected only when traveling from Brooklyn to Staten Island, so you get a free ride.
BROOKLYN
Brooklyn is New York’s most populous borough, but not
its largest; that credit goes to Queens. Brooklyn was a separate city until it was united with New York City in 1898,
but it still remains a place apart. The home of Coney Island, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Prospect Park, and Green-
Wood Cemetery, the borough sits on the western end of
Long Island and looks across the East River at Manhattan
and across the Narrows at Staten Island. It shares a land
border with Queens.
After driving around many of the open spaces in Staten
Island, Brooklyn comes as a shock. It is a collection of
neighborhoods mostly made up of modest-sized apartment
buildings and attached rowhouses, although some spectacular free standing houses crop up. Brooklyn also has two
beautiful parkways—roads lined with trees—designed by
Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, who designed
Central Park and Prospect Park.
Your drive through Brooklyn will take you along the
waterfront, to old amusement parks, to one of the oldest
cemeteries in the city, past what may be New York’s most
beautiful houses, and through neighborhoods of stunning
ethnic variety.
Exit the Verrazano Narrows Bridge to the Belt Parkway
East, which is also called the Shore Parkway on some
maps. Signs will point toward JFK International Airport.
As you exit the bridge, note Fort Hamilton, sister to Fort
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
334
➢
Wadsworth, on your left. The neighborhoods behind the
fort are Bay Ridge and Dyker Heights.
Drive 2.9 miles and exit the Belt Parkway at Cropsey
Avenue (exit 6).
At the end of the exit ramp, turn right onto Cropsey
Avenue.
Continue on Cropsey for a few blocks, staying in the
middle lane and following the signs that say “Amusement Parks.”
As it crosses Neptune Avenue, Cropsey becomes West
Seventeenth Street.
In front of you is the tall steel Parachute Tower built for
the 1939 World’s Fair and brought to Coney Island
shortly afterward. Visitors used to be able to sit on a small
seat and float by parachute and guide wire from the top to
the ground.
Seventeenth Street ends at Surf Avenue.
There is the new baseball field for the Brooklyn Cyclones,
an “A” minor league team, at this intersection.
Turn left on Surf Avenue and drive three blocks to Stillwell Avenue.
Nathan’s has been serving hot dogs on the corner of Stillwell since 1916.
Turn right on Stillwell, park, and get out for a look at the
two-and-a-half-mile Coney Island boardwalk.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 335
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Coney Island is named for an Anglicized version of the
Dutch word for rabbit; the animals were abundant here in
the 1600s. It’s been a vacation spot for New Yorkers from
at least the mid-nineteenth century. Eventually, three of the
most spectacular amusement parks in the nation were built
here—Steeplechase Park, Luna Park, and Dreamland.
They are all closed now. In their place stands Astroland,
opened in 1954. Stop by for a ride or carny game.
If you go up on the boardwalk, you’ll see a large pier to
the right from which residents and visitors fish and go crabbing. From about where you’re standing, the Polar Bear
Club goes swimming every weekend during the winter.
The New Year’s Day swim brings out news cameras,
tourists, and one-time swimmers from across the city.
Get back in your car and make a right on Surf Avenue.
Note the flea markets in the stalls to your left. Most are run
by recent Russian immigrants. At West Tenth Street, on
your right, you’ll pass the Cyclone, a landmark 1927
wooden roller-coaster on the site of the first roller-coaster
in the world (which was built in 1884). Also on your right,
at West Eighth Street, you’ll pass the New York Aquarium,
moved here from Battery Park in Manhattan by Parks
Commissioner Robert Moses out of anger at those who
stopped his project to build a bridge from Battery Park to
Brooklyn.
Continue on Surf Avenue. As it begins to curve away from
the water, pay attention and take the right fork that is
marked with a very small sign for Brighton Beach Avenue. At the light at the elevated subway (the El), turn
right onto Brighton Beach Avenue. Driving under the El is
a unique experience that can be indulged in only a few
cities, most notably New York and Chicago.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
336
➢
➢
BrightonBeachisthebest-knownRussianneighborhoodin
the city, with about 150,000 Russians living here. The ethnicity of the neighborhood is apparent as you drive along
under the El. Note stores and restaurants such as M & I International (249 Brighton Beach Avenue), Primorski (282
Brighton Beach Avenue), and Café Arbat (306 Brighton
Beach Avenue). Brighton Beach developed along with
Coney Island, helped by the presence of Brighton Beach
Racetrack, which brought in visitors from 1879 to 1907.
Turn left on Coney Island Avenue as the El curves.
Coney Island. The Mermaid Parade takes place every June in Coney Island.
Each year it passes the original Nathan’s hot-dog stand. Opened in 1916 by
Nathan Handwerker, the Coney Island stand is a Brooklyn treasure. Courtesy of
NYC & Company—The Convention and Visitors Bureau.
➢
At the corner is Mrs. Stahl’s (1001 Coney Island Avenue),
famous for its knishes. Note the bungalow communities to
your right. The neighborhood was really a summer residence at first, but over the years the bungalows were converted to year-round homes. Further off to the right are the
neighborhoods of Sheepshead Bay, from which you can
leave on daily fishing trips, and Manhattan Beach, an expensive seaside community and home to Kingsborough
Community College.
Continue on Coney Island Avenue, crossing over the
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, and then take a left at the
first light you come to, Avenue Z.
Continue two lights to Ocean Parkway and turn right into
the center of the road (not onto the service road).
Drive to Avenue V and make a left.
Avenue V turns into Gravesend Neck Road in a few
blocks.
Just after you pass under the El (F train) at McDonald Avenue, pull over.
The intersection of Gravesend Neck Road and McDonald
Avenue was the town center of Gravesend, the only non-
Dutch town of the original six settlements that made up
Brooklyn in the seventeenth century. The original town
stretched across much of the area you’ve just driven across
and beyond. Gravesend was founded in 1643 by Lady Deborah Moody, an Anabaptist who fled religious intolerance
in Massachusetts to New York. Here she became the first
woman to vote at a town meeting. Depending on whom
you ask, Gravesend comes either from the Dutch grafes
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
338
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
ande, translated as both “end of the grove” and “count’s
beach,” or from the British town of Gravesend.
The 1.6-acre Gravesend Cemetery (it stretches well
back from the road) on your left has been here since the
1660s, though all the earlier gravestones are gone so Lady
Moody’s grave site is unknown. Next to it is the Van
Sicklen Cemetery, named for a prominent neighborhood
family.
Across from the cemetery is the Hicks-Platt House (27
Gravesend Neck Road), also called the Lady Moody House
because a clever real estate developer in 1890 said she had
lived here, although she never did. The original house was
finished in 1645 but has been changed quite a bit. On the
corner, just past the Hicks-Platt Houses, is P.S. 95. The first
school building here went up in 1888, but this one dates
from 1915.
Turn left on Van Sicklen Street and drive one block.
Turn left on Village Road South and drive another block.
Turn left on McDonald Avenue and drive two blocks.
Turn right on Avenue U, return to Ocean Parkway, and
make a left.
Note your mileage, because you’ll be staying on Ocean
Parkway for 3.2 miles.
Ocean Parkway, finished in 1876, before the automobile,
stretches six miles from Coney Island to Prospect Park.
Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, who designed
Central Park in Manhattan and Prospect Park in Brooklyn, believed strongly in creating a series of scenic parkways throughout the city, and this is one of them. Ocean
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 339
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Parkway originally had a central drive, greenery-filled
malls (hence “parkway”), a bridle trail, and pedestrian
walkways. The bridle trails are now service roads, but the
beauty of the parkway remains.
As you drive along, note the large, elegant houses built
earlier in the twentieth century, and those built later that attempt to blend in. Note how deep the lots are. After
Gravesend, you will be driving through the neighborhoods
of Midwood and then Kensington. Large Orthodox and
Hasidic communities live along Ocean Parkway, which is
lined with synagogues and religious schools. Note the
Sephardic Community Center at the corner of Avenue S
and Washington Cemetery at Avenue K.
Drive Ocean Parkway for the 3.2 miles to Beverly Road
(the first light after Avenue C) and turn right.
Drive three blocks to Coney Island Avenue and turn left.
Drive another three blocks to Albemarle and turn right.
Continue between the small stone pillars with plaques
that say “PPS” and mark the entrance to Prospect Park
South.
This small historic district is home to large single-family
houses that run a gamut of styles, from Tudor to Queen
Anne to neo-Japanese, and sit incongruously hidden just
off one of Brooklyn’s busiest commercial streets. The
neighborhood was created by developer Dean Alvord, who
bought forty acres here in 1899. To create the neighborhood he wanted, Alvord required houses to be set back
thirty-nine feet from the sidewalk, with eight feet left between street and sidewalk for greenery. Most of the houses
were finished by 1905.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
340
➢
➢
➢
➢
Drive slowly along Albemarle for five blocks, admiring
the homes.
Our favorites are the classical revival home, with a balcony
behind a colonnade, at 1305 Albemarle; the Queen Anne at
No. 1423; the Queen Anne/colonial revival hermaphrodite
at No. 1440; and the large mansion at No. 1510, which originally had a conservatory and a stable.
Albemarle curves left, turning into Buckingham.
Take the right fork as you drive up Buckingham.
Some of the most beautiful homes along here include the
porticoed one at 104 Buckingham, the shingle-style at No.
115, and the partially Japanese-style home at No. 131.
Leave the beauty of Prospect Park South when you intersect with the commercial strip at Church Avenue.
Turn right on Church and drive two blocks.
Note how incredibly busy this commercial strip is, only
seconds from the Buckingham and Albemarle mansions.
Turn right on East Eighteenth Street.
Drive two blocks to Albemarle.
Turn left at Albemarle and drive four blocks.
Turn left onto Flatbush Avenue.
You are driving through Flatbush (from the Dutch vlackebos, “wooded plain”), although Flatbush is itself a collec-
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 341
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
tion of smaller neighborhoods, among them Ditmars Park
and Prospect-Lefferts Gardens. Half a block down Snyder
Street—the second street you pass on your right—at No.
35 is Flatbush Town Hall, built in 1875 before the town was
incorporated into New York City. Unfortunately, you cannot see it clearly from Flatbush Avenue.
Drive another block and Erasmus Hall High School is
on your right. Famous graduates include Barbra Streisand,
Neil Diamond, Barry Manilow, and Bobby Fischer. If you
look through the gate at the center of the block, the original, wooden 1786 Erasmus Hall is visible inside the quad.
Erasmus was the first secondary school chartered by New
York State, although it was set up by the Flatbush Reformed Dutch Church diagonally across the street from the
high school. The present church building, finished in 1798,
is the third one on this site. Also look at the parish house,
set back from the street.
Continue on Flatbush Avenue through the shopping district until the avenue forks at Lincoln Street. Stay on
Flatbush.
Drive along, keeping Prospect Park to your left.
Inside the park to your left, you will see the Lefferts Homestead, a copy of a Dutch home design, finished in 1783 and
moved to its current spot in 1918. The present house was
built by the Lefferts family with parts left from their earlier
house, which was burned during the Revolutionary War.
PROSPECT PARK
The 526-acre Prospect Park was designed by Calvert Vaux
and Frederick Law Olmsted in 1866–1873, as soon as they
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
342
➢
➢
were finished with Central Park in Manhattan. Like Central
Park, it encompasses different landscapes, including the
Long Meadow, a long and hilly stretch of grass; a wooded
ravine; a lake; several arches; and a number of buildings.
Also like Central Park, the city first backed a mediocre design by Egbert Viele but abandoned it in favor of Vaux and
Olmsted’s. The park is as beautiful as Central Park, if not
more so thanks to the very high hills that crop up in several
places. Olmsted and Vaux had hoped that Prospect Park
would be linked to Central Park by a series of parkways.
Unfortunately, this never happened, but they did convince
the city to build wide, tree-lined roads, such as Ocean
Parkway and Eastern Parkway, leading to Prospect Park.
Continue on Flatbush Avenue to Grand Army Plaza.
(You’ll see the giant arch at its center.) Turn right at the
Brooklyn Public Library onto Eastern Parkway.
Mark your mileage; your next turn is in 1.7 miles.
The entrance to the park, immediately to your left and facing the giant Soldiers’ and Sailors’ monument, was designed by Stanford White. It’s a combination of columns,
bronze urns, and two twelve-sided pavilions. In front of
you, at Grand Army Plaza, is the Soldiers’ and Sailors’
Memorial Arch, which sits on a plaza designed by Olmsted
and Vaux to mimic the Parisian plaza that holds the Arc de
Triomphe.
To your right as you follow Eastern Parkway are the
Brooklyn Public Library, the Brooklyn Botanic Garden,
and the Brooklyn Museum. The library was founded in
1897, although it was not completed in this spot until 1941.
The botanic garden opened in 1912. The museum, designed by Stanford White, was begun in 1897 and has an
excellent Egyptian art collection. All three sites remind us
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 343
➢
➢
that Brooklyn was, until 1898, a separate city and not part
of New York City.
Continue on Eastern Parkway. To your left is the neighborhood of Bedford-Stuyvesant, and to your right is
Crown Heights. Crown Heights is a neighborhood of West
Indian immigrants, with a small population of Lubavitcher
Hasidim. The neighborhood takes its name either from
Crow Hill (a tall hill that had lots of crows on it) or because
bigoted whites called the original African and African
American settlers crows. Others say that “crows” were inmates at a nearby prison.
Continue four long blocks to Bedford Avenue. Look to
your right down Bedford and you’ll see a huge 1908 armory. A few blocks further you can make out a public housing project built on the site of Ebbets Field, home of the
Brooklyn Dodgers.
Just before Nostrand Avenue, look to your right to see
the Philadelphia Sabbath Cathedral (520 Eastern Parkway). At the corner of Kingston Avenue is 770 Eastern
Parkway, synagogue for the Lubavitcher Hasidim and former home to Lubavitcher Rebbe Menachem Schneerson.
After driving the 1.7 miles, turn left on Buffalo (first street
after Rochester Street).
You’re now in the center of Bedford-Stuyvesant, the largest black neighborhood in New York and former home to
baseball great Jackie Robinson, boxer Floyd Paterson, and
musician Eubie Blake.
Drive seven blocks and turn left when Buffalo Street ends
at Bergen Street.
On your left are the Weeksville Houses, which sit back
from Bergen along what was Hunterfly Road. These four
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
344
➢
➢
houses (now the Society for the Preservation of Weeksville
and Bedford-Stuyvesant) are all that remain of the architecture of two mid-nineteenth century African American
communities. Thirty years before the Civil War, William
Thomas founded Carrville and James Weeks built a community that became Weeksville. Both Weeksville and Carrville had their own schools, churches, and an orphanage.
The beautiful Eastern Parkway and streets built off it destroyed Carrville and Weeksville in the same way that the
Cross Bronx Expressway destroyed Bronx communities in
the twentieth century.
Turn left on Berger and drive one block and turn right on
Rochester Avenue.
Continue five blocks to Atlantic Avenue and turn right.
As you drive along Atlantic Avenue, note that it is decidedly not a parkway like Ocean Parkway or Eastern
Parkway.
Continue along Atlantic up a ramp that goes over some
railroad tracks. (Eastern Parkway intersects on the right.)
As you come off the ramp, look to your right at the abandoned but still interesting Twenty-sixth Ward Bank at the
corner of Georgia Avenue.
Get in the left lane and turn left at the second light after
the ramp, which is called both Granville Payne Avenue
and Pennsylvania Avenue.
Drive two blocks and enter the Jackie Robinson Parkway
(formerly the Interboro Parkway), which you will follow
into the Borough of Queens.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 345
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Take the Interboro (Jackie Robinson) Parkway to Van
Wyck Expressway (exit 7)—4.9 miles
As you drive along the Interboro Parkway between Brooklyn and Queens, it appears that most of the route is lined by
a giant cemetery. This observation would not be far from
the truth; there are actually eighteen different cemeteries
along the Interboro. From this angle, it is impossible to tell
where one ends and the next begins. They hold a combined
twenty thousand veterans of American wars and untold
numbers of others.
The largest of the cemeteries is Cypress Hill. Buried
here is Jackie Robinson, the first African American baseball
player to break the color line in Major League Baseball on
April 9, 1947, while playing for the Brooklyn Dodgers.
Two years later he was named the Most Valuable Player in
the National League. The Interboro was renamed for
Jackie Robinson in the late 1990s.
Adjacent to Cypress Hills is Machpelah Cemetery. This
is the resting place of the great magician Harry Houdini. In
neighboring cemeteries are the graves of Yiddish writer
Sholom Aleichem, actor Edward G. Robinson, gangster
and World Series fixer Arnold Rothstein, and jurist Benjamin Cardozo.
Take the Van Wyck to Northern Boulevard East (exit 13)—
3.3 miles
As you exit the Van Wyck, be certain to take the left fork
for Northern Boulevard East.
As you exit the Van Wyck, look toward your left for a
nice view of the old World’s Fair Grounds and Shea
Stadium.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
346
➢
➢
➢
The Van Wyck Expressway is named for Mayor Robert
Van Wyck, the first mayor of consolidated New York in
1898. His is an interesting name for a major roadway; Van
Wyck is perhaps best known for being accused of accepting a $500,000“gift” from a political supporter. Although
he was cleared of wrongdoing by Governor Teddy Roosevelt in 1900, the gift became a reelection issue that cost
Van Wyck his job.
QUEENS
We begin our Queens drive in one of the most historically
significant neighborhoods in America (and we don’t say
this lightly). Flushing was established in 1645 under the
auspices of Dutch governor William Kieft. The eighteen
original freeholders were assured by Kieft of the right to
religious freedom. With this promise, Flushing became one
of the cornerstones of religious liberty in colonial America. Flushing also has a long history of ethnic diversity and
tolerance. When it was first established, it was a predominantly English community within a Dutch colony. It was a
haven for free blacks in the early nineteenth century and
today may host more immigrants from different countries
than any place in New York City.
Almost immediately as you drive off the elevated roadway along Northern Boulevard, you will pass (on your
left) Chin Fook Funeral Home, on the corner of Prince
Street.
On this site stood the Prince House and Nursery, established in 1737 as the first tree nursery in America. The
newly inaugurated president, George Washington, visited
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 347
➢
the nursery and the town of Flushing in 1789. Prince
House was destroyed in the 1950s.
Up until the 1964 World’s Fair, Flushing retained some
of its small-town features, a moderate population density,
limited high-rise buildings, and a limited commercial district. However, after the fair and the ensuing attention, as
well as the great influx of Chinese and Korean immigrants
in the early 1980s, Flushing became a true urban center.
As you pass the intersection of Main Street, note the
small traffic island to your left. Officially known as Daniel
Carter Beard Memorial Square, it is named for the Flushing
native who was one of the founders of the Boy Scouts. The
square also contains a number of other memorial markers.
The flagpole commemorates the Spanish-American War.
Until recently, an elm tree there recalled Washington’s
1789 visit. Finally, a bit beyond the flagpole is the monument for those from Flushing who died to preserve the
Union during the Civil War.
Behind the small park, also to your left, stands the old
Flushing Town Hall, now the Flushing Council on Culture
and the Arts. Built in 1862 in the early Romanesque style,
this was the center of town “business” before the 1898
Consolidation of Greater New York It is interesting to
note that Queens is the only borough that retains its pre-
Consolidation town names. In fact, when writing letters to
people in Queens, you write, for example, “Flushing, New
York,” not “Queens, New York.”
Look to your right at the Friends Meeting House—South
Side of Northern Boulevard, opposite Linden Place
Built in 1694, this is the oldest house of worship in New
York City. It stands in the traditional Quaker spirit of worship, without decoration or art, to allow undistracted wor-
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
348
➢
ship. During the Revolutionary War it was converted into
a prison and hospital by the British.
If you can find a place to park, you might want to step
inside. The second story is supported by massive forty-foot
hand-cut oak beams, and the original handmade ironwork
is still in use. The Meeting House is on the National Register of Historic Places, and visitors are welcome.
The castlelike building adjacent to the Meeting House is
the former National Guard Armory. Built in 1905, it is designed to appear imposing and defendable. It is now used
by the police department’s Queens North Task Force and
is a temporary shelter for homeless women.
As you cross Union Street, look left across Northern
Boulevard. You will see the collegiate Gothic Flushing
High School, built in 1912–15 by C. B. J. Snyder. This
building may look familiar; Snyder also built Curtis High
School on Staten Island as well as Erasmus High School in
Brooklyn. Flushing High School was chartered in 1875,
making it the oldest free public high school in the city.
Turn right on Bowne Street.
John Bowne House, at 37–01 Bowne Street (after first light
on left), was built in the colonial saltbox style in 1661 by
John Bowne, a native of England who migrated to Flushing by way of Boston, Massachusetts, in the 1650s. After
converting to the Quaker faith, Bowne found Boston an intolerant place to worship and came here with a small group
of his coreligionists in 1657. New Amsterdam Governor
Peter Stuyvesant quickly disregarded his predecessor governor Kieft and declared the Dutch Reformed Church the
only acceptable religious order. In response, thirty townspeople signed the “Flushing Remonstrance,” a document
protesting Stuyvesant’s actions. It reads in part:
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 349
➢
You have been pleased to send up unto us a certain prohibition or
command that we should not receive or entertain any of those
people called Quakers. . . . We cannot condemn them in this case,
neither can we stretch our hands against them, to punish, banish
or persecute them. . . . [We] shall be glad to see anything of God
in any of them, desiring to doe unto all men as wee desire all men
should doe unto us, which is the law of both Church and State.
Styuvesant responded by sending troops to arrest and
fine all those who signed the Remonstrance. The Quakers
continued to gather in secret, and when John Bowne finished building his home in 1661, he invited the Quakers to
meet in his kitchen. Governor Stuyvesant heard about
these illegal meetings and, in 1662, arrested Bowne and
sentenced him to prison and banishment. After seven
months in jail, Bowne traveled to the Netherlands and argued before the Dutch West India Company for religious
tolerance. They agreed with his principles, set him free,
and rebuked Stuyvesant with a letter that strongly supported the principle of religious tolerance. On his return to
Flushing, Bowne again invited the Quakers to meet at his
home. They continued to do so until they built the Meeting
House we saw on Northern Boulevard.
This community resistance to state authority over religious worship is regarded by many historians to be the
foundation of the First Amendment to the Constitution of
the United States—freedom of religion.
Nine generations of the Bowne family lived in this
house, the last one moving out in 1945. At that time, the
Bowne Historical Society assumed responsibility for the
site. It is now called “A National Shrine to Religious Freedom” and is open to the public a few days a week.
Turn right on Roosevelt Avenue. After three blocks turn
left on Prince, then make a quick left on Fortieth Road. As
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
350
➢
Fortieth Road ends after one short block, turn right on
Main Street.
THE HEART OF ASIAN FLUSHING
As you turn onto Main Street, you enter the newest layer of
this historically heterogeneous community. Main Street is
the heart of Asian Flushing. This is a fantastic pan-Asian
commercial district that reflects the diversity not only of
the neighborhood but of Asian New York in general.
According to the census of 2000, nearly one in every ten
New Yorkers described himor herself as Asian. This
number is a significant increase from one in fourteen just
ten years earlier. Here in Queens, one in every six residents
is Asian. Chinese remain the largest Asian group in New
York, with Filipinos and Koreans as the next largest in population. Other Asians represented along Main Street include Taiwanese, Thais, Vietnamese, Cambodians, Laotians, Malaysians, and Indonesians.
If you can find a parking space, this is a great area to get
out and walk around, exploring the shops and restaurants.
Coming up on your right, after you pass Sixty-third Avenue, is Mount Hebron Cemetery. On your left is the
Queens College campus of the City University of New
York system and CUNY Law School. The CUNY system
was created in 1926 in an effort to create a municipal college system in New York City. Comprised of twenty
schools and colleges, it is the largest urban education organization in the United States, with more than 180,000
students.
Continue along Main Street, crossing the Long Island Expressway (Route 495).
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 351
➢
Turn right on Jewel Avenue (also known as Harry Van Arsdale, Jr., Road) through Flushing Meadows Park.
Harry Van Arsdale Jr. (1905–1986) was a significant labor
leader in New York City. In 1959 he was instrumental in the
creation of the New York Central Labor Council of the
AFL-CIO. At the peak of his power, his union had some
nine hundred thousand members. He was also involved in
the unionization of municipal employees, hospital workers,
and taxi drivers.
As you drive this stretch of Jewel Avenue, note how this
major thoroughfare is significantly different from Ocean
Parkway or Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn. In Brooklyn,
the nineteenth-century pre-automobile parkway combined
utilitarian purpose with a strong sense of aesthetic sensibility. These roads, built primarily in the twentieth century
and after the arrival of the car, were constructed with only
utility in mind.
As you pass through Flushing Meadows–Corona Park
you are, once again, given a great view of the old 1964
World’s Fair Unisphere to the right.
Jewel Avenue becomes Sixty-ninth Road after the park.
Turn left on 108th Street.
As 108th Street crosses Queens Boulevard, it becomes
Continental Avenue.
Follow Continental under the Long Island Railroad (LIRR)
tracks into Forest Hills Station Square.
Turn left at Station Square onto Terrace Greenway North.
Take the left fork around the small town park.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
352
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
As you pass under the train tracks, you enter Forest Hills
Gardens. This 142-acre community was planned by Frederick Law Olmsted Jr. (son of the Olmsted of Central Park
fame) in the style of an English Tudor village. Construction began around 1910, but with two world wars and the financial crash of 1929, the majority of the houses weren’t
built until the 1940s and 1950s. Olmsted, with his colleague
Grosvenor Atterbury, designed the railroad station, the
greens, and nearby houses. Forest Hills Gardens was originally envisioned by Margaret Olivia Slocum Sage, wife of
financier/philanthropist Russell Sage and founder of the
Russell Sage Foundation.
There is an interesting historical debate surrounding
the apartment houses in this community. They were not
part of the original plan but form a significant part of the
housing stock. Of 1,600 housing units within the Gardens,
650 are in the eleven apartment buildings. One school argues that the apartment houses were built to block the
noise of the railroad and the “outside” world. The other
claims that Margaret Sage envisioned Forest Hills Gardens
as a mixed-income community and not just estate homes
for the wealthy.
As we slowly meander through the tree-lined streets,
you can see how this is a picture-perfect model of an
urban garden community. While there is significant variety among the houses, the overall style is uniform.
The gently curved streets not only break with the monotony of the grid plan but also help prevent excessive
speed.
After approximately six blocks and three stop signs, turn
right on Rockrose Place.
After two blocks, when Rockrose ends, turn right onto
Terrace Greenway South.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 353
➢
➢
As you return to the small town park, take the left fork.
This will bring you back to Station Square and Continental Avenue.
Crossing Continental Avenue, continue back the way you
came on 108th Street.
Drive on 108th Street into Corona (1.6 miles).
As you drive along 108th Street and pass under the Long Island Expressway, you enter the neighborhood of Corona.
The original settlement of this area coincided with the arrival of the Long Island Railroad in 1847. The neighborhood was best known for its racetrack and the Tiffany glass
factories in the late nineteenth century. A population explosion occurred after the 1917 development of mass transit. The neighborhood was largely Jewish and Italian up
through the mid-1940s, when Puerto Ricans and, later, Dominicans began arriving.
The intersection of 108th Street and Corona Avenue is
a perfect example of the ethnic diversity here today. If you
park and walk around, you will see the long-term Italian
shops and even a bocce ball court in the small park. Be certain to go to the Lemon Ice King of Corona, right on the
corner of Fifty-second Avenue—the best ices in the city!
At the same time, numerous shops represent the more contemporary immigrant communities—Colombian, Filipino, Ecuadorian, and Pakistani, just to name a few.
Turn right on Fifty-second Avenue.
Fifty-second Avenue ends at Flushing Meadows–Corona
Park. Directly in front of you is the Terrace on Park
restaurant.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
354
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Turn left on 111th Street.
If you wish to visit the park, follow signs for the Hall of
Science. Feel free to park your car here to walk around.
(Note: This is also good place to park and walk back to
108th Street for an ice.)
Directly in front of you is Flushing Meadows–Corona
Park. While automobiles are not allowed in the park, it’s a
good place to walk around. In this part of the park you can
find the United States Tennis Association (USTA) National Tennis Center, the Queens Museum of Art, the 1964
World’s Fair Unisphere, and the New York Hall of Science. At 1,255 acres, this is the second largest park in the
city. To the north is Shea Stadium, built in 1964 and home
to the New York Mets.
Flushing Meadows–Corona Park, Queens. At 255 acres, Flushing Meadows–
Corona Park is the second largest park in New York City. Temporary home to
the United Nations from 1946 to 1950, the park also hosted two World’s Fairs—
1939 and 1964. The Unisphere was the centerpiece to the 1964 fair. Courtesy of
NYC & Company–The Convention and Visitors Bureau.
➢
Turn left on Forty-seventh Avenue and return to 108th
Street.
Turn right on 108th Street and continue to Thirty-seventh Avenue.
Turn left on Thirty-seventh Avenue.
After about thirty feet turn right onto a short, unmarked
street. As this ends, turn right, and then, after one very
short block, turn right onto 107th Street. (Driving this
combination of residential streets can be a bit confusing.
Watch carefully for 107th Street.)
Shortly after turning onto 107th Street, keep your eyes
open for the modern red-brick house and garage on your
left. This is the Louis Armstrong House, located at 34–56
107th Street. This National Historic Landmark was the
home of jazz great Louis Armstrong for twenty-nine years,
from 1942 until his death in 1971.
Born in the Storyville neighborhood of New Orleans,
Armstrong was surrounded by the ragtime and blues music
that would influence the rest of his life. His musical career
got started in the marching band of the Colored Waifs
Home, to which he had been sent in 1912. His professional
career got a boost when jazz man King Oliver made Armstrong second cornetist in 1922. This brought Armstrong
to Chicago. He came to New York as a trumpeter and
joined Fats Waller and Edith Wilson’s Broadway revue Hot
Chocolate in 1929. Armstrong performed in numerous
shows and films until his return to the stage in 1947. Some
of his greatest hits include “Blueberry Hill” (1949), “Mack
the Knife” (1955), and “Hello Dolly” (1962).
Continue on 107th Street to Thirty-fourth Avenue.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
356
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Turn left onto Thirty-fourth Avenue and into the Jackson
Heights Historic District (which starts at Eighty-eighth
Street and ends at Seventy-eighth Street and goes from
Roosevelt Avenue to Thirty-fourth Avenue).
By now it should be apparent that Queens is physically and
structurally different from the other boroughs. While
Staten Island retains a colonial and early nineteenth-century feel, and while Brooklyn was developed in the latter
half of the nineteenth century, Queens is decidedly of the
twentieth century, with small towns like Flushing being established much earlier.
While driving along Thirty-fourth Avenue, you will
enter the Jackson Heights Historic District when you cross
Eighty-eighth Street. This area was farmland in the early
twentieth century. Just prior to the Queensboro Bridge
opening in 1909, this district had been ripe for speculative
building. A group of investors called the Queensboro Realty Company bought up 350 acres and, over the next two
decades, built this neighborhood.
What makes Jackson Heights such an innovation is
the way in which the blocks were developed. Along the
avenues, builders created fiveand six-story cooperative
apartment houses with large rear gardens. These gardens provided private outdoor space and generous light
into the apartments. On the side streets they built
smaller single-family attached houses. This combination of garden apartments and individual houses was
revolutionary.
In the 1920s the Queensboro Realty Company tolerated the suburban practice of “red-lining,” an exclusionary policy directed against unwanted buyers—here meaning Jews, Catholics, and African Americans—that prevented people from receiving mortgages and home loans.
Today, Jackson Heights is a thriving ethnically diverse
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 357
➢
community. In the early 1990s it was home to the largest
Argentinean community in New York City.
Be certain to drive slowly along Thirty-fourth Avenue.
Take special note of the apartment houses between Eightyfirst and Eightieth Streets, which are especially appealing.
Turn right onto Seventy-ninth Street and drive to the
Grand Central Parkway (GCP).
As you cross Twenty-fifth Avenue (just before GCP), note
what appears to be a park on your right. This is actually the
beginning of the La Guardia Airport approach. You might
want to stop the car and watch jets come overhead. The airport strobe lights are lined up through the park.
Be careful crossing the parkway’s service road.
After crossing over the Grand Central Parkway, turn left
onto Astoria Boulevard.
From Astoria Boulevard, take the second left onto the
Parkway—the sign will read “Triboro Bridge.”
The Triboro is actually three interconnected steel bridges
that connect the Bronx, Manhattan, and Queens. Designers
Othmar Ammann and Aymar Embury II, had the misfortune to begin construction on October 25, 1929, the same
day the stock market collapsed. Work was then halted until
1933. The bridge finally opened in July 1936.
As you drive across the bridge, follow the signs toward
the Bronx.
Directly beneath you is what appears to be one large fourhundred-plus-acre island. It is actually two separate islands
connected by landfill.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
358
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
The first is Wards Island, named for its the post–American Revolution owners, Jasper and Bartholomew Ward.
The city acquired the 255-acre island in the 1800s and used
it for a potter’s field, a hospital, and a mental institution
called the City Asylum. Now called the Manhattan Psychiatric Center, the City Asylum is still based on the island.
Wards Island is also the training ground for the New York
City Fire Department. It’s greatest claim to fame perhaps
came in 1937, when one of the largest sewage treatment
plants in the world was built here. (It’s now closed.)
The second part is the 195-acre Randalls Island, named
for the early nineteenth-century owner, Jonathan Randal
(or perhaps Randell). The City of New York bought it in
1830 and has used it for numerous purposes. It has been a
potter’s field, an almshouse, and a reform school. It is now
home to a twenty-five-thousand-seat sport arena and a golf
driving range.
Paralleling the Triboro Bridge to the right is the New
York Connecting Railroad Bridge, known to most New
Yorkers as the Hell Gate Bridge. When this bridge was
completed in 1917, it was the longest steel-arch bridge in
the world. The bridge is two and a half miles in length and
holds four sets of rail lines. The steel arch is a tremendous
1,017 feet. It was built for the Pennsylvania Railroad by
Gustav Lindenthal (who also designed the Williamsburg
and Queensboro Bridges) to provide direct train access between Manhattan, Queens, the Bronx, and points north.
THE BRONX
The Bronx is New York’s northernmost borough and the
only one wholly on the mainland of the United States. The
borough is named for Jonas Bronck, an early settler. Parts
of the western Bronx were annexed by New York in 1875,
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 359
and the eastern parts joined the city at the 1898 Consolidation. The Bronx was the destination for millions of people
moving out of Manhattan tenements in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, who then moved on to the suburbs in
the 1960s and 1970s. Over 20 percent of the Bronx is made
up of parks, which may surprise other city residents who
rarely visit. The borough is also home to large neighborhoods of very expensive private homes and some of the
most grinding poverty in the city.
From the Triboro Bridge, follow signs for 87 North (Major
Deegan Expressway).
The road forks after the toll; the Deegan is the left fork.
After a quarter mile, take exit 2 (Willis Avenue).
Exit onto East 135th Street in the South Bronx.
The designation “South Bronx” actually includes a collection of neighborhoods, including Mott Haven, Melrose, Morrisania, and others. Technically, you are in
Mott Haven right now. In the nineteenth century, Jordan
Mott built an ironworks here. His business was joined by
piano factories and a collection of German, Irish, and
Italian residents. Large industry was gone by the 1940s,
and the neighborhood today largely is home to Puerto
Ricans and African Americans, living in a collection of
privately owned rowhouses, public housing, and apartment buildings.
Continue along 135th Street to the second light, Alexander Avenue.
Turn right on Alexander Avenue.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
360
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
You’re in a Bronx historic district and will pass a number of
important buildings on Alexander Avenue. On your right,
between 137th and 138th Streets, is St. Jerome’s Roman
Catholic Church (1898). At the corner of 138th Street, on
your left, is the Fortieth Precinct (1924). Although you are
in the South Bronx, this precinct is not “Fort Apache”—
that was the Forty-first Precinct, to the northeast along
Simpson Avenue, south of 167th Street.
Note the well-preserved rowhouses along Alexander
between 139th and 141st Streets. The New York Public Library (1905) is on the left corner of 140th Street. On the
right, at 141st Street, is the 1902 Tercera Iglesia Bautista
(originally called the Alexander Avenue Baptist Church).
Finally, on your left, note the large plaque for the East Side
Settlement House between 141st and 142 d Streets. As in
Manhattan’s Lower East Side, settlement houses offer services and classes for immigrants and others in the Bronx.
Yankee Stadium. One of the oldest and most famous ballparks in America, Yankee Stadium opened on April 18, 1923. Nicknamed “the House That Ruth Built,”
the stadium offers tours of the grounds that include the Yankees locker room
and the monument park to past heroes, including Lou Gehrig, Babe Ruth, and
Miller Huggins. Courtesy NYC & Company—The Convention and Visitors Bureau.
Before turning left on 142 d Street, think about this: a
few blocks to your right, along 142 d, was the stone-carving
studio of the Piccirilli brothers, who carved Daniel Chester
French’s design for the Abraham Lincoln statue that sits inside the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.
Turn left on 142 d Street.
Make your first right onto Third Avenue and drive four
lights. Turn left on Courtland and drive a few blocks until
you reach 149th Street. Turn left on 149th Street.
The Hub, to your right, is one of the Bronx’s main shopping areas. We’ve steered you just west of the Hub because
the intersection of five streets that makes it hublike also
makes for traffic jams. The Hub was the site of the first
Alexander’s Department Store and has housed theaters,
burlesque houses, trolleys, and retail shops. It continues to
be a shopping hub.
As you drive along East 149th Street, note the well-done
ochre-colored brick Lincoln Hospital (1976), on your left
at Morris Avenue, and the Eugenio Maria de Hostos Community College, called simply “Hostos” by New Yorkers
and begun in 1968, at the corner of the Grand Concourse
on your left.
Turn right on the Grand Concourse, which stretches four
and a half miles from the South Bronx northward and is
180 feet wide at its broadest.
The concourse was completed south to 161st Street between 1902 and 1909 and extended farther south in the
1930s. Especially in the 1920s and 1930s, the concourse became home to some of the Bronx’s most elegant apartment
buildings. Only the service roads were used for cars in the
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
362
➢
➢
➢
beginning, with the larger center stretch for horses and carriages. Now, of course, everything is a car lane.
Turn right onto the concourse from 149th Street at the
plain 1937 Bronx General Post Office on your right, with
excellent Ben Shahn murals in its lobby. Driving north on
the concourse, at 153rd Street, on your right you pass an octagonal smokestack that was part of the Morgan Steam
Laundry and then Cardinal Hayes High School (1941).
Continue slowly. To your left is Franz Sigel Park, named
for a German-born general who rallied many German
Americans to the Union cause during the Civil War.
Turn left at 158th Street. The building on your right is the
1934 Bronx County Building.
As soon as you make the turn, straight ahead you’ll see
Yankee Stadium, the “House That Ruth Built,” rising up
ahead. Jacob Ruppert, a brewer, had the stadium built for
his team in 1923, and opening day was April 18. It was redone in 1976. Over the years, famous Yankees have included Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Joe DiMaggio, Mickey
Mantle, Roger Maris, and Reggie Jackson.
Continue three blocks right up to the stadium and turn
right on River Avenue.
This street is lined with sporting-goods stores. Most prominent are the series of baseball-related shops owned by
“Stan.” The stadium is open for tours year-round, daily at
noon; go to the press entrance for admission.
Continue one block under the El (#4 train) and turn right
on East 161st Street. Drive three blocks back to the Grand
Concourse. Turn left onto the service road—not the main,
center lanes—along the concourse.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 363
➢
➢
➢
Now you’ll begin to pass many of the famous buildings for
which the concourse is known. Art Deco and Art Moderne
buildings, often six stories, went up in the 1930s, and mixed
in liberally are much taller and squatter 1920s apartment
buildings.
Begin on your right, immediately across from the Bronx
County Building, with the building known only as 888
Grand Concourse (1937)—not the best example of the
decade but one to start with. On the north side of 161st
Street is the former Concourse Plaza Hotel (900 Grand
Concourse), which in its time was a Bronx social center,
much as the St. George Hotel was in Brooklyn. Continuing
north, you pass Joyce Kilmer Park at East 164th, on your
left, named for the poet and author of “Trees.” The park’s
Lorelei Fountain (1899) is dedicated to German poet Heinrich Heine.
The 1961 Bronx Museum of the Arts (1040 Grand Concourse) at 165th Street is built in the former Young Israel
Synagogue, with a beautiful 1988 extension; note the red
banner and low glass gazebo. The museum takes jurors on
lunch break from nearby courthouses for free lunch and
tours. On your left is the overgrown Andrew Freedman
Home (1924), a former home for the aged. On your right is
the Bronx County Housing Court.
Note the mural to the left of the lobby entrance of 1150
Grand Concourse. Across the concourse, to your left at
169th Street, is the former Temple Adath Israel (1927),
now a Seventh-Day Adventist temple. Note the brilliant
green glass brick around the lobby door of 1500 Grand
Concourse (between 172 d Street and Rockwood), built in
1935. The Bronx Lebanon Hospital Center at 173 d Street
(1942, expanded in 1991) is one of the borough’s largest
hospitals. The colossal-looking, though only thirteenstory, building on your left is the 1923 Lewis Morris Apartments (1749 Grand Concourse).
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
364
At the intersection of Grand Concourse, Eastburn, and
175th Street is the Pilgrim United Church of Christ, which
looks much older than it is. The church was actually built
in 1910, in a mix of Georgian and Turkish style.
Drive slowly, because at the intersection of East Tremont and Grand Concourse, on your right, is the 1914
Mount Hope Court Apartments (1882 Grand Concourse),
also known as the Bronx Flatiron Building. Park safely on
your right and look behind you: Mount Hope Court looks
like Manhattan’s Flatiron Building when you look back at
it. The “point” of the iron is what you’re seeing as you look
south, back the way you came. Across the street, at 181st
Street, is the wild-looking Art Moderne zigzag facade of
2121 Grand Concourse.
Slow down as you come to Burnside Avenue, for the
Masonic Temple on your right.
Here you want to exit from the service road to the central
lanes of Grand Concourse. Get in your left lane and turn
left at 181st Street.
Drive to the top of the hill to University Avenue/Martin
Luther King, Jr., Boulevard. Cross over University Avenue
and continue on Hall of Fame Terrace. Note the new
houses on your left. As the hill crests, slow down and turn
left into Bronx Community College.
Bronx Community College (BCC) was begun in 1894 as
the uptown campus of Greenwich Village’s New York
University (NYU). In 1973, NYU sold the grounds to the
city, which turned the buildings into BCC.
Tell the guard at the gate that you want to have a look
at the Hall of Fame Terrace, which is open to the public.
The visitors’ parking lot is to the immediate right after
you go through the gate. Park there and walk through
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 365
➢
➢
the iron gate at the north end of the parking lot and onto
the terrace. The Hall of Fame (and much of the campus)
was designed by McKim, Mead and White. It’s a semicircular arcade with bronze busts of educators, lawyers, scientists, and others and gives visitors a great view westward. Although it isn’t apparent from where you stand,
the Hall of Fame was designed to hide the giant foundation walls of some of the buildings Stanford White designed for the campus.
Exit BCC and turn left on Hall of Fame Terrace, continuing
the way you were going before turning in. Make your first
right onto Sedgwick Avenue and follow it to the bottom of
the hill.
Turn right on Fordham Road and drive to the Grand
Concourse. If you were to continue another mile, you
would come to Fordham University, the Bronx Zoo, and
the New York Botanical Garden. But turn left on the
Grand Concourse again and continue north to Kingsbridge.
On the corner is Poe Cottage, built in 1816. American author Edgar Allan Poe moved here in 1846, hoping the thencountry air would cure his wife’s tuberculosis. She died
soon after they moved, but Poe stayed on until just before
he died in 1849. He wrote “Ulalume” and “The Bells” here.
The cottage was actually originally across the street but
was moved to its current location in 1913.
Turn left on Kingsbridge Avenue.
In three blocks, on your right, you will come to the giant,
castlelike Kingsbridge Armory (1912), which some claim
to be the largest in the world.
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
366
➢
➢
➢
Four blocks further on, turn right on Sedgewick Avenue
again.
You are in Kingsbridge Heights, named for the first bridge
to connect the Bronx and Manhattan. King’s Bridge, built
in 1693, took people over the Spuyten Duyvil Creek just to
the west.
Continuing northward, Sedgewick runs along the west
border of Jerome Park Reservoir. The reservoir, filled in
1905, is named for Leonard Jerome, Winston Churchill’s
grandfather, who had a racetrack also named after him
nearby. Jerome sponsored the American Jockey Club in an
attempt to raise the image of horse racing in the United
States to something closer to the aristocratic status it held
in England. Thankfully, the American democratic spirit allowed him to succeed only partially.
Sedgwick Avenue runs into Van Cortlandt Avenue West at
a light. Make a 270-degree left turn onto Van Cortlandt
Avenue West and drive a few blocks until you come to a
light. Continue straight, and the road becomes Van Cortlandt Park South.
Drive a few blocks and turn right on Review Place, which
immediately curves into Broadway. In a few blocks you
come to the last stop on the #1 train, Van Cortlandt Park.
Make your first left turn after 242 d Street (this is Manhattan College Parkway, but the sign is almost impossible
to see; instead you will see a sign that says “Manhattan
College.”)
Drive one hundred feet and turn right on Post Road, and
go up the steep hill.
At the top of the hill, turn left at West 246th Street.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 367
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
Follow West 246th as it curves through Fieldston, one of
the most exclusive neighborhoods in the Bronx.
Fieldston is filled with 1920s English-style homes and
houses three very expensive private schools: Fieldston, run
by the Ethical Culture Society, Riverdale Country, and
Horace Mann.
Continue on 246th Street, admiring the houses, until you
come to the Henry Hudson Parkway. Turn right on the
service road that parallels the highway, but don’t get on
the highway itself. Drive to West 252 d Street.
Turn left here (see the sign for “Wave Hill”), cross over
the highway, but once there, ignore the sign telling you to
turn left for Wave Hill. Instead, continue straight on 252 d
Street.
You’re now in Riverdale, perhaps even more exclusive than
Fieldston because of its views of the Hudson River. Be
careful on the roads here: they are narrow, winding, and
potholed—intentionally, some would argue, to keep out
visitors.
Drive about five blocks until the road ends at Independence Avenue. Turn left and you will be following Wave
Hill, on your right, a nonprofit, city-owned park.
Drive very slowly; the entrance is on your right. It costs $4
to get in except for Tuesday and Saturday morning before
noon, when it’s free, but it is well worth it. The grounds are
beautiful, and it has an excellent herb garden and small
greenhouse.
Wave Hill House, on the grounds, was a country home
built in 1843 and over the years has been home to Teddy
THE OTHER BOROUGHS | A Driving Tour
368
➢
➢
➢
Roosevelt (summers of 1870 and 1871), Mark Twain
(1901–3), and Arturo Toscanini (1942–45). Bashford Dean,
zoologist and curator of arms and armor for the Metropolitan Museum, lived in Glyndor House, another building on
the grounds.
Exit Wave Hill and turn right on Independence Avenue
with Wave Hill on your right. Turn right on Ploughman’s
Road and drive one block to Palisade Avenue. Turn left on
Palisade and drive along with mansions on your left and
Riverdale Park and the Hudson River on your right. Continue until you turn left on West 232 d St. Be careful—
the sign is not apparent, and it will sneak up on you. Go
to your first light and take the right at the sign for
9 A/Henry Hudson Parkway West. Take the Henry Hudson
back into Manhattan, crossing over the Harlem River and
driving through Inwood Park. Continue south on the
Henry Hudson Parkway to Midtown Manhattan.
A Driving Tour | THE OTHER BOROUGHS 369
➢
