HISTORIC HARLEM
African American Capital of the
Twentieth Century
Start: The corner of 135th Street and Lenox Avenue, at
the 2/3 subway stop.
“there is somuch to see in Harlem,” said the poet
Langston Hughes. Some seventy years later, this still rings
true. Bounded by the Harlem River, 110th Street, St.
Nicholas Avenue, and Fifth Avenue, Harlem is home to
some of the most beautiful architecture, interesting topography, and diverse history in the city. This tour could easily look at Harlem as an Italian, Jewish, elite Protestant, or
Latino community. But Harlem is best known as the
African American capital city. Concentrating on Central
Harlem, this tour serves as an introduction to the African
American history and culture of this neighborhood.
In 1658, a group of Dutch farmers settled in an area of
northern Manhattan whose landscape reminded them of
the Holland town of Haarlem. Their new settlement,
which they christened “Nieuw Haarlem,” was a distant
nine miles away from New York City, which was then clustered around the southern tip of Manhattan Island. During
the eighteeth century, elite New Yorkers began to establish
country estates and working farms in Harlem. (The name
249
8
➢

was Anglicized after Dutch rule ceded to British in 1664.)
One such estate was owned by Alexander Hamilton, who
gave his name to the neighborhood Hamilton Heights,
which was once his land. His home, Hamilton Grange, still
stands as a monument to this area’s colonial past.
Eventually, the gentlemen farmers overworked the land,
and during the antebellum period Harlem became home to
poor farmers and Irish squatters. But the late nineteenth
century would again see Harlem emerge as an elite enclave,
as advances in transportation, including the extension of
elevated railroads, prompted real estate developers to look
toward the unimproved lands of northern Manhattan.
Charming brownstones were constructed for wealthy
white Protestants and German Jews from downtown.
Harlem became a genteel suburb, a haven from the overcrowded city.
The extension of the subway line up Lenox Avenue in
1904 encouraged another wave of speculative building in
Harlem, especially above 130th Street. This boom included
many apartment buildings. Some new immigrants, upwardly mobile Jews and Italians, did take advantage of the
housing opportunities in Harlem; in fact, vestiges of a
thriving Italian community are still evident today in East
Harlem. But real estate developers overspeculated and
overbuilt. They simply could not fill their properties.
The depressed real estate market coincided with a
major influx of African Americans to New York City.
Southern blacks, fleeing racial violence and seeking economic opportunity, began migrating en masse to northern cities in the beginning of the twentieth century. At
the same time, African Americans were being squeezed
out of their neighborhoods on the west side of Midtown
Manhattan. For years, white real estate developers, pressured by white Harlemites, had refused to rent or sell to
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
250

blacks. But empty buildings and the urging of black entrepreneurs eventually convinced them to change their
policies. In the first decade of the twentieth century, the
Harlem housing market was opened to blacks. When
their efforts to stem the tide of black in-migration failed,
most white Harlemites moved out.
By the 1920s, Harlem, especially above 125th Street, was
the undisputed capital of Afro-America, home to its political institutions and cultural life. During that decade,
Harlem’s nightlife became legendary, as did a tremendous
outpouring of African American arts and letters, known as
the Harlem Renaissance. The Great Depression of the
1930s, however, brought hard times to Harlem, including
high unemployment and a race riot in 1935. During the subsequent decades, many middle-class blacks moved out of
the neighborhood. Harlem’s economy was further sapped
during the postwar period, as local and federal government
policies diverted money from the area. The neighborhood
began a steady decline that it only recently has started to
reverse. In 1920, black leader James Weldon Johnson
wrote: “Will Harlem become merely a famous ghetto, or
will it be a center of intellectual, cultural, and economic
forces exerting an influence throughout the world—especially upon Negroe [sic] peoples?” Harlem has been all
these things. A walk through the neighborhood shows its
diverse and exciting history.
A note on street names: after the civil rights movement
of the 1960s, the names of many of Harlem’s streets were
changed to honor prominent African Americans. Eighth
Avenue became Frederick Douglass Boulevard; Seventh
Avenue was renamed Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard; and Sixth Avenue, originally named Lenox Avenue,
became Malcolm X Boulevard, while 125th Street was renamed after Martin Luther King, Jr.
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 251

We begin our tour on the northwest corner of 135th
Street and Lenox Avenue. Walk west toward Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard.
Notice the row of tenement houses (Nos. 107–145) on
the north side of the street. Although these apartments
were constructed in 1905 to house middle-class and ambitious working-class whites, the real estate depression of
the early twentieth century meant that many apartments
remained vacant. The owner refused to rent to African
Americans, who were beginning to occupy buildings east
of Lenox Avenue.
When St. Philip’s Episcopal Church, a black congregation from the Tenderloin, decided to move to Harlem in
1911, it purchased these tenements. The Reverend Hutchens Bishop, the pastor of St. Philip’s, recognized that his
parishioners would have difficulty in the restricted housing
market of Harlem. Bishop, a light-skinned man, managed
to purchase this real estate because the developers who sold
it to him thought he was white. As a result of this transaction, the color line west of Lenox Avenue was broken,
paving the way for the development of Black Harlem.
St. Philip’s, located at 210–216 West 134th Street, is still
a prominent congregation and major real estate owner in
Harlem. In recent years, St. Philip’s has raised more than
$30 million to construct and renovate low-income housing
in the neighborhood.
Walk west to the southwest corner of 135th Street and
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard, an intersection that
served as the institutional hub of Harlem during the
1920s and 1930s.
In the 1920s and 1930s, within a stone’s throw one could
find the headquarters of the NAACP (National Associa-
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
252
➢
➢

tion for the Advancement of Colored People), the National
Urban League, and the Universal Negro Improvement Association, all sites we will see later in the tour. Also close
by were the offices of the major black newspapers—the
conservative Amsterdam News and the more militant New
York Age—the New York Public Library, and the YMCA
(Young Men’s Christian Association). By 1920, Harlem
had become New York’s primary African American neighborhood, and most black political and social institutions
had moved here by that decade.
The YMCA is located at 181 West 135th Street. Founded
in 1851 to provide moral and spiritual guidance to young
male migrants from rural areas, the YMCA’s membership
and outreach efforts were restricted to white men until
1867. A “colored men’s branch” of the Y opened on West
Fifty-third Street in 1900, to serve the needs of migrants
from the South. It moved to this location in 1919. So great
Speculative building at 25–53 West 133rd Street. These three-story brownstones, built around 1877, were part of the great Harlem land rush that foresaw
the connection of Harlem to Lower Manhattan via the newly developed elevated rail lines. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

were the demands on the services of this YMCA that an
annex was built across the street in 1932.
This particular branch of the Y also served as a hotel for
black visitors to New York City who were denied access to
the segregated hotels elsewhere. Among its guests were
Ralph Ellison, Langston Hughes, and James Baldwin. During the Harlem Renaissance, the literati met here to exchange ideas. The YMCA’s Little Theater program started
the careers of actors such as Sidney Poitier, Eartha Kitt,
Cicely Tyson, and Danny Glover. Other patrons of the Y
who would go on to prominence include Jackie Robinson,
Richard Wright, Paul Robeson, Jesse Owens, Bill “Bojangles” Robinson, and Willie Mays.
Although the building is empty now, at 2294½ Adam
Clayton Powell, Jr. Boulevard, on the southwest corner of
135th Street, was Ed Small’s Paradise, one of Harlem’s
most popular jazz clubs and restaurants from the 1920s to
the 1940s. Those who could afford the prices at the
“Hottest Spot in Harlem” would be treated to music, elaborate floor shows, and singing waiters. The small dance
floor at Small’s Paradise got so crowded that each patron
was said to have a dime’s worth of floor space for dancing.
A young Malcolm Little, after losing his job as a waiter
here, began a downward spiral into criminality that eventually landed him in jail. There he converted to Islam and
changed his name to Malcolm X. In the 1960s, basketball
star Wilt Chamberlain reopened the restaurant as Big
Wilt’s Small’s Paradise.
Cross Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard to the northwest corner and continue west on 135th Street one block.
As you walk west, and just after you cross 135th Street, notice the Big Apple plaque on the side of 2300 Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard. Beginning in the 1930s, this
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
254
➢

building housed the Big Apple Restaurant and Jazz Club.
In recognition of its status as a center of jazz, musicians
dubbed New York the “Big Apple.” The phrase stuck as a
moniker for the city as well as for this club, although research has also turned up references to the city as the Big
Apple in horse-racing columns two decades earlier.
To your left, across the street, you will see what was 220
West 135th Street, the former home of Florence Mills, one
of the most popular singers and dancers of the 1920s. An
international star, Mills performed on Broadway as well as
in productions abroad. Hoping that her success would
make “people think better of other colored folk,” Mills
passed over an offer to perform in the Ziegfield Follies in
order to participate in an all-black revue. Mills was a true
pioneer, paving the way for other black women entertainers such as Josephine Baker. She died of appendicitis in
1927, at the age of thirty-one. Her funeral was the largest
in Harlem’s history: more than 5,000 mourners filled
Harlem’s Mother Zion AME Church for her funeral service
and more than 150,000 followed the funeral cortege
through the streets of Harlem. At the cemetery, a low-flying plane released a flock of blackbirds as a final goodbye.
Right next door is 224 West 135th Street, the former
headquarters of the NAACP, now Flo’s Beauty Salon. The
interracial NAACP, formed in 1909, has historically
fought, through judicial and legislative channels, for voting
rights, integration, and equal educational and economic
opportunity for African Americans. The Crisis, the monthly
publication of the NAACP, had a circulation of more than
one hundred thousand by 1920. Edited by civil rights leader
W. E. B. Du Bois from 1909 to 1934, The Crisis was one of
many important periodicals produced in Harlem in the
early twentieth century.
The NAACP’s Legal Defense and Education Fund, established in 1939, would go on to try the landmark Brown
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 255

vs. Board of Education case of 1954. Legal Director Thurgood Marshall’s argument before the Supreme Court led to
nationwide school integration and sparked the legal phase
of the civil rights movement. In 1965, Marshall became the
first African American justice to be appointed to the United
States Supreme Court.
Florence Mills (1895–1927), one of the most popular singers and dancers of the
1920s, best known for her role in Blackbirds at the Alhambra Theatre and later
in Paris and London. She died suddenly in the fall of 1927 of appendicitis. Her
funeral was one of the most spectacular in Harlem’s history, with more than
five thousand in attendance and one hundred thousand lining the streets.
Photo courtesy of the Schomberg Center for Research in Black Culture, New
York Public Library.

Turn right on Frederick Douglass Boulevard and walk one
block. Turn right on 136th Street, walking back to Adam
Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard, on the north side of the
street.
Unfortunately, one of the most important building sites on
this block, 267 West 136th Street, is now a parking lot. During the 1920s, this was a boarding house occupied entirely
by members of the vanguard wing of the Harlem Renaissance. Zora Neale Hurston, Langston Hughes, painters
Bruce Nugent and Aaron Douglas, and novelist Wallace
Thurman—the de facto leader of this radical group—all
called “267 House” their home. Far more interested in exploring bohemian themes in his work than African American ones, Thurman resisted the notion that African American artists had to represent their race in their art. He
mocked the Harlem Renaissance leaders who believed that
civil rights would be gained through African American cultural production. Thurman and Hurston called these types
“the Niggerati.” While none of the niggerati lived at 267
House, the radical residents of the house self-deprecatingly called their boarding home “Niggerati Manor.”
harlem renaissance
The 1920s was a golden age for Harlem. By then the preeminent African American community, Harlem provided entertainments unrivaled elsewhere. Harlem was arguably the center of
black political life as well. Some of the most important black newspapers and periodicals were produced here, and the most prominent African American leaders in the country worked and lived in
Harlem. All these factors contributed to making Harlem ripe for
the explosion of African American art and literature known as the
Harlem Renaissance.
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 257
➢

The Harlem Renaissance was not a spontaneous burst of artistic expression. In many ways it was a political movement. Black intellectuals such as W. E. B. Du Bois, Charles Johnson, and Alain
Locke promoted the notion that African Americans could gain
equality and respect through arts and letters. They believed that
when they saw the cultural contribution of African Americans,
white Americans would naturally see blacks as their equals. The
stakes were particularly high in the 1920s, a nadir in American
race relations. Lynching was epidemic; economic and educational
opportunities remained closed to African Americans; and the summer of 1919 saw so many bloody race riots across the country that
it became known as the “Red Summer.” Although these incidents
were called riots, they were essentially sanctioned and generally
unprovoked violence by whites against blacks.
Part of the reason for the volume of literary and artistic output
during the Harlem Renaissance was the sponsorship available.
Civil rights organizations joined black and white philanthropists in
encouraging and funding artistic endeavors. The Crisis and Opportunity, the magazines of the NAACP and Urban League, sponsored literary contests; black leaders such as Alain Locke and
Jesse Fauset sought wealthy patrons; the YMCA and the New York
Public Library served as gathering places for writers and artists;
and relaxation and intellectual stimulation could be found at the
parties and salons of A’Lelia Walker Robinson.
Some of the central writers of the Harlem Renaissance included Langston Hughes, Claude MacKay, Zora Neale Hurston,
Nella Larsen, Countee Cullen (the only native New Yorker in the
bunch), and Wallace Thurman, the leader of the movement’s
avant-garde wing. Important visual artists were involved as well,
including sculptor Augusta Savage, photographer James Van-
DerZee, and painters Bruce Nugent and Aaron Douglas (who created many of the book jackets of the period). Yet, while the writers and artists were black, the publishers and patrons were almost
entirely white. This dichotomy led many to argue that the Harlem
Renaissance did not produce a “true” black form of expression;
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
258

rather, it catered to a white audience and a “white” view of black
aesthetic forms.
This was not the only point of debate in the Harlem Renaissance. Far from a monolithic movement, the Renaissance fostered
great discussion over the role and responsibility of the black artist
and produced a wide diversity of artistic and literary expression.
While Cullen and MacKay explored African American themes
through traditional European literary forms, Hughes and Hurston
referenced black folk expressions in their work. Meanwhile, Thurman and Nugent, both homosexual, explored bohemian themes in
their art and ignored issues of race as much as they could. Alain
Locke strongly disagreed with them, believing that black artists
should create a uniquely black art, drawing on African models
rather than European ones. Du Bois held that African Americans
had a responsibility to be propagandists for their race, but he eschewed “folk” forms. In terms of music, for example, Du Bois believed that African Americans should record classical works but
that jazz music, reliant on Southern black folk expressions, was
not elevated enough to lift up the race. Debates of this sort did not
end with the Harlem Renaissance. The question of black artists’
responsibility—to their race or solely to themselves and their art—
still troubles black artists and entertainers today.
While African American artists and writers have continued to
produce works of excellence, the patronage and sponsorship behind the Renaissance dried up during the economic depression of
the 1930s. But the Harlem Renaissance produced some of the
most respected and enduring American art and literature of the
twentieth century.
Continue east on 136th Street.
For a brief period in the 1930s, 239 West 136th Street was
the headquarters of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car
Porters (BSCP). At the time, virtually all railroad porters
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 259
➢

were black men, for whom these jobs were high-status positions leading to a middle-class lifestyle. The BSCP, led by
A. Philip Randolph, was the nation’s first African American labor union. Its most significant and prolonged campaign was its struggle (won finally in 1937) to gain official
recognition from the Pullman Company.
Cross to the north side of 136th Street and continue walking east.
At 204 West 136th is the Manhattan branch of the National
Urban League (although the sign on the building may be
hard to see and lies on a newer concrete annex). Founded in
1911, the league has sponsored community improvement
programs and civil rights initiatives. During the Harlem
Renaissance, the Urban League’s publication, Opportunity:
A Journal of Negro Life featured the works of writers such
as Zora Neale Hurston, along with other issues of interest
to African Americans.
Walk north along Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard
and turn left onto 138th Street.
The area bounded by 138th and 139th Streets and Adam
Clayton Powell, Jr., and Frederick Douglass Boulevards
comprises the St. Nicholas Historic District. Originally
known as the King Model Houses, these brownstones and
apartment buildings were the project of real estate developer David H. King. In 1890, King bought this large plot of
land from the Equitable Life Assurance Company and
commissioned three prominent architectural firms to design affordable, attractive homes for white middle-class
New Yorkers. The resulting blocks are some of the loveliest residential streets in the city. The alleys between and behind the buildings are a rarity in New York. Garbage and
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
260
➢
➢

delivery vehicles are diverted to the alleys, leaving the
streets relatively free of congestion, noise, and dirt.
Due to the economic depression of the 1890s, King was
able to sell only nine units of the 146 rowhouses and three
apartment buildings. In 1895, Equitable foreclosed on the
mortgage and took over the buildings. In the 1920s, after
restricting them to whites for years, Equitable began to sell
the buildings to African Americans. While some black professionals purchased homes on these blocks, most of the
owners were members of the black working class, including laundresses, railroad porters, hairdressers, domestic
servants, and elevator operators. They converted most of
the homes into rooming houses. During this period, these
streets became known as “Strivers’ Row,” reflecting the
ambition of those who managed to reside here. As you
walk west on 138th Street, notice the signs on the gateposts
asking you to “Walk Your Horses.”
Continue west on 138th Street to Frederick Douglass
Boulevard. Walk north, stopping at the southeast corner
of 139th Street.
You are standing at the eastern edge of the neighborhood
known as Sugar Hill. If Strivers’ Row was for those who
were working hard to make it, Sugar Hill was for those who
had succeeded. The exquisite rowhouses and apartment
buildings of this area were originally occupied by white
professionals, but as the boundaries of Black Harlem
pushed outward, whites fled and wealthy blacks moved in.
“Sugar,” slang for money, was found in abundance in this
neighborhood, giving it its nickname in the 1920s. Wealthy
denizens included Lena Horne, black socialite A’Lelia
Walker Robinson, and NAACP officers W. E. B. Du Bois,
Walter White, Thurgood Marshall, and Roy Wilkins. In
the 1980s, the rap band the Sugarhill Gang made their
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 261
➢

neighborhood a household name when they released “Rapper’s Delight,” the first rap song to cross over to the pop
charts. Sugar Hill is part of the neighborhood known as
Hamilton Heights, which was once the country estate of
Alexander Hamilton.
Looking west and up the hill from the corner, you will
notice the impressive Gothic building with the white trim.
This is Shepard Hall, the main building of the City College
of New York (CCNY), one of the nineteen colleges that
make up the City University of New York system. Established in 1847 as the Free Academy, CCNY has historically
provided educational opportunities for immigrant workers
and their children. In the period after World War I, CCNY
gained a reputation for academic excellence and for a time
was known as the “People’s Harvard.” City College has
graduated eight Nobel laureates, more than any other public college in the United States. Its famous alumni include
Upton Sinclair, Felix Frankfurter, Ira Gershwin, A. Philip
Randolph, Jonas Salk, Ed Koch, and Colin Powell.
When CCNY moved to this location in 1902, the city
was in the process of building the subway system. The
Manhattan schist that they excavated, the bedrock of Manhattan Island, was used to construct Shepard Hall and other
CCNY buildings.
Continue walking east on the north side of 139th Street,
looking at the darker brown buildings.
This side of the street was designed by Stanford White,
perhaps the best-known architect of the late nineteenth
century. (See our Four Squares walk in chapter 4 for
White’s interesting life and famous murder.)
Take a right on Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard and
walk south to 138th Street.
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
262
➢
➢

On the southeast corner (formerly 2341–2359 Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard) of the intersection is the original Renaissance Theater, Ballroom, and Casino, known locally as “the Renny.” From the 1920s to the 1950s, the
Renny was one of the most popular nightclubs in Harlem.
It was also the home of the Rennies, the nation’s first allblack professional basketball team, founded in 1923. Like
most sports, professional basketball was segregated in the
early part of the twentieth century. The Rennies were
known during the 1930s as the best team in the world.
When they stopped playing in 1940, they had an astounding record of 2,558 wins and only 592 losses.
Continue walking east, on the south side of 138th Street,
one block to Lenox Avenue.
You will pass Abyssinian Baptist Church (136–142 West
138th Street), one of the oldest and largest Protestant
churches in the United States. In 1808 a group of free
blacks protesting segregated seating in the First Baptist
Church of New York City formed Abyssinian with a group
of Ethiopian merchants. Their first church was on presentday Worth Street in Lower Manhattan. Eventually they
moved to Waverly Place in Greenwich Village and then to
West Fortieth Street. The Reverend Adam Clayton Powell
Sr., who became pastor of Abyssinian in 1908, raised
money to move the church to this location in 1920.
By 1937, when Powell turned the pulpit over to his son
Adam Clayton Powell Jr., the congregation had a membership of seven thousand, making it the largest Protestant
congregation in the country. Powell Sr. was active in civil
rights activities as well as spiritual guidance. His son continued in this tradition, serving as pastor of Abyssinian as
well as becoming the first African American congressman,
representing Harlem in the U.S. House of Representatives
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 263
➢

from 1944 to 1970. His successors, Samuel DeWitt Proctor
and Calvin O. Butts III, the current pastor of Abyssinian,
have also involved themselves and their church in political
activism and community service. Abyssinian continues to
be one of the most influential American churches, serving
thousands of members and alumni and taking an active role
in Harlem’s development through its business arm, the
Abyssinian Development Corporation (ADC). One of the
ADC’s many properties is the Renaissance Ballroom,
which it plans to renovate and reopen as a reception hall.
black manhattan
Before there was an English presence in New York, there was
an African one. Dutch settlers brought African slaves to New Amsterdam as early as 1644. Both the free-black and slave populations grew. As late as 1760 the city was home to the highest number of blacks in any urban area and had the highest or secondhighest ratio of slave to free in all the colonies. People of African
descent comprised at least 15 percent of the city’s population before the Revolutionary War.
While slaves lived with their masters, free blacks lived in small
enclaves on the outskirts of town. As the center of population
moved up Manhattan Island, African Americans were pushed out
of their neighborhoods and forced to the periphery, where one
“Little Africa” after another was formed. Certain streets in these
districts were predominantly African American, but blacks in
these neighborhoods were surrounded by nonblack neighbors,
mainly working-class immigrant families.
Interracial violence was frequent and tended to accelerate
African American movement throughout the city, from the Wall
Street area, to Greenwich Village, to the neighborhood in the West
Thirties known as the Tenderloin and the San Juan Hill neighborhood in the West Fifties. A race riot in the Tenderloin in 1900 was
one factor among many that led African Americans to look for new
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
264

housing options. El and subway construction as well as the building of Penn Station, completed in 1911, also pushed many blacks
out of their homes in the Tenderloin. Added to this was a significant increase in the black population of New York City in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
The mechanization of agriculture led to massive unemployment for Southern blacks. Seeking economic opportunity in the
North and fleeing antiblack violence in the South, African Americans began the trek northward. Joining the Southern migrants,
particularly during the 1920s, were forty thousand black immigrants from the West Indies. The black population of New York
City, about 60,000 in 1900, had jumped to over 320,000 by 1930.
Meanwhile, the speculative real estate boom of the early twentieth century led to many an empty apartment building in Harlem.
Harlem real estate developers had intended to construct a white
middle-class residential community. But white middle-class tenants
failed to materialize. At first, landlords and real estate developers
banded together with white Harlemites to block African Americans
from moving into Harlem. But the landlords’ greed eventually
trumped their racism. Not only did they want to fill their empty
units, but they recognized that they could get well above market
value if they opened their buildings to African Americans. Because
their housing opportunities were limited in New York, blacks were
often forced to pay higher rents than whites. African Americans
moved into Harlem, and whites immediately began to move out. By
1920, 70 percent of New York City’s blacks lived in Harlem.
While landlords charged exorbitant rents to African Americans,
generally 10 percent above market value, blacks enjoyed far better
housing in Harlem than ever before. African Americans took in
lodgers, lived with extended family and friends, and had monthly
parties to pay the rent. Along with the black real estate agents
who managed white-owned buildings and the black churches who
bought tenements to house their parishioners, African American
Harlemites would create the largest urban black community in the
United States.
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 265

In the 1920s, 120 West 138th Street was the site of Liberty
Hall, the Harlem headquarters of Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA). Garvey
was a flamboyant, charismatic, and extremely popular figure who arrived in New York from Jamaica in 1917. Important for many reasons, Garvey also reminds us of the
central and assertive role played by West Indian immigrants in Harlem life. Initially influenced by the self-help
doctrines and racial accommodationist stance of Booker T.
Washington, Garvey became a proponent of black pride
and pan-Africanism. The UNIA, an international organization, had a huge national membership, appealing, unlike
other civil rights organizations, to the Southern migrants
and Caribbean immigrants who made up the black working
class. The Harlem branch of the UNIA, the country’s
largest, had more than forty thousand members.
Garvey’s political activities and stance made him enemies among other black leaders, including A. Philip Randolph, James Weldon Johnson, and W. E. B. Du Bois. Du
Bois particularly took issue with Garvey’s image and separatist stance. But in the end, Garvey was defeated by the
white power structure. Arrested on trumped-up charges of
mail fraud in 1923, Garvey was convicted in 1927. His subsequent deportation to Jamaica effectively ended his activities in the United States. But Garvey left a strong legacy
behind and would eventually prove a major influence on
the black nationalist movements of the 1960s and 1970s.
Lenox Avenue was the site of all the major parades
through Harlem in the early decades of the twentieth century, including the frequent and colorful pageants orchestrated by the UNIA. In July 1917, W. E. B. Du Bois, James
Weldon Johnson, and other NAACP officers led ten thousand people down Lenox Avenue in a solemn protest
march. Three weeks before, in East St. Louis, Illinois,
nearly two hundred African Americans had died and six
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
266

thousand were burned out of their homes in the worst race
riot in American history. The Harlem protesters walked in
silence, bearing signs proclaiming “Thou Shalt Not Kill”
and “Mr. President, Why Not Make America Safe for
Democracy?”
The hypocrisy on the part of the federal government—
fighting a war abroad in the name of liberty and freedom
while refusing to address civil rights at home—led many
African Americans to question whether they should participate in World War I. The black leadership was unsure as
well. President Woodrow Wilson appealed to them to encourage African Americans to support the war, promising
attention to civil rights issues in exchange. In the end, black
Americans did fight in the war. Indeed, the 369th Regiment, an all-black unit from Harlem, became the most
highly decorated American unit and the only one awarded
Silent Protest parade on Fifth Avenue, July 28, 1917, in response to the East St.
Louis race riot. In front row are James Weldon Johnson (far right), W. E. B. Du
Bois (second from right), Rev. Hutchens Chew Bishop, rector of St. Philip’s
Episcopal Church (Harlem), and realtor John E. Nail. Photo courtesy of the
Schomberg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library.

the French croix de guerre. The 369th, known as the
“Harlem Hellfighters,” returned home triumphantly in
February 1919 to a parade through Manhattan. When they
crossed 110th Street and turned onto Lenox Avenue, the
parade became a party as they were greeted by friends,
family, and great cheers in Harlem.
The federal government reneged on its promise to address civil rights issues, but black participation in World
War I did contribute to a more assertive, more militant
stance among African Americans. Black soldiers found that
they had received better treatment abroad than they did at
home, and many refused to adhere any longer to the “waitand-see” attitude promoted by nineteenth-century black
leader Booker T. Washington. The “New Negro,” scholar
Alain Locke noted in his 1925 essay of that name, would
take a much more immediatist stance. The ramifications of
this position would be seen in the artistic outpouring of the
1920s and in the protest movements of the subsequent
decades.
Walk south on Lenox Avenue three blocks toward 135th
Street. At 136th Street, take a slight detour west to the
Countee Cullen Branch of the New York Public Library at
104 West 136th. (Look for the library flag hanging from
the building on the south side of the street.) 
The library stands on the site of the former home of
Madame C. J. Walker, the richest self-made woman in early
twentieth-century America. Born in the South, Walker
made her fortune developing and selling hair straighteners,
skin lighteners, and other beauty products for African
American women. In 1916, already a wealthy woman, she
moved to New York and built a home, beauty salon, and
school here. Walker was also involved in politics and civil
rights activism. She led a delegation of women to see Pres-
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
268
➢

ident Woodrow Wilson to protest segregation in the military and gave significant sums of money to charities and
civil rights organizations.
Her daughter A’Lelia Walker Robinson was known for
her lavish lifestyle and elaborate parties. She hosted salons
for literary figures of the Harlem Renaissance and fetes for
diverse guests. Perhaps her most legendary party was when
A’Lelia Walker Robinson (1866–1931) was the daughter of Madame C. J. Walker,
who became the wealthiest self-made woman in early twentieth-century
America through her beauty parlor products business. Robinson was known
for her lavish lifestyle and elaborate parties and regularly hosted salons for literary figures of the Harlem Renaissance. In 1927 she converted one floor of her
home into the “Dark Tower,” a coffee house where artists were quickly outnumbered by wealthy and prominent New Yorkers. Photo courtesy of the
Schomberg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library.

she served African Americans caviar and champagne while
whites, seated at a separate table, received chit’lins and
bathtub gin. In 1927 she converted one floor of this home
into the “Dark Tower,” a coffeehouse where artists could
gather around inexpensive refreshments and exchange
ideas. But the bohemian types for whom the place was originally intended could barely fit in the room, so full was it of
wealthy and prominent New Yorkers, and the prices were
well out of reach for any but the latter.
Despite the failure of the Dark Tower, Robinson was
central to the cultural life of Harlem. Langston Hughes
claimed that, more than any other event, her death in 1931
marked the end of the Harlem Renaissance.
Walk back to Lenox Avenue and continue south to 135th
Street.
On the northwest corner of 135th and Lenox, you will find
the New York Public Library’s Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, the premier research library for
black history and culture. Arturo Schomburg, a Puerto
Rican black, spent his life amassing a huge collection of
books, pamphlets, manuscripts, and visual materials pertaining to the African and African American past. He began
this endeavor in response to an elementary school teacher
who claimed blacks had produced nothing worth studying.
Schomburg proved him wrong. When the New York Public Library purchased Schomburg’s collection in 1926, it
consisted of five thousand items. It now has over 5 million.
Schomburg himself played a major role in the Harlem Renaissance, sponsoring readings and literary salons as well
as serving as curator of his collection for the New York
Public Library.
You are standing on an important speakers’ corner for
soapbox orators of the early twentieth century. Legend has
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
270
➢

it that Marcus Garvey, on arriving in Harlem, stole the
soapbox here from A. Philip Randolph. Both men were frequently seen and heard at this corner, which was also the
first view of Harlem for most Southern migrants. From
Penn Station, they took the IRT to 135th and Lenox and exited the subway into another world.
Southern blacks expressed awe at this black city within
the city. If they craved a reminder from home, they could
stop at the stand of Pig Foot Mary, located on the southeast
corner. Born Lillian Harris, Pig Foot Mary sold Southernstyle comfort food, such as pig’s feet and chit’lins. Starting
with $3 and a folding table on the street, Harris eventually
made enough money to become a major real estate investor
and Harlem philanthropist.
Walk west along 135th Street one block. Turn left on Adam
Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard and walk to 125th Street.
This was the stretch for strollers on Sunday afternoons and
the “Great Black Way,” named for the concentration of
theaters and nightclubs along it. The block of 133rd Street
between Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard and Lenox
Avenue was known during the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s as
“Jungle Alley.” Here, downtown whites attracted to
Harlem nightlife could live out their exoticized fantasies of
black culture. Although adventurous and wealthy whites
visited Harlem, there was not a great fostering of intercultural understanding in Harlem’s nightclubs. Many, such as
the Cotton Club and Connie’s Inn (both since demolished), refused service to blacks, including the entertainers
who performed on their stages. But most of the clubs along
Jungle Alley catered to a mixed clientele, and unlike the
Cotton Club and Connie’s, some of the Jungle Alley spots
were owned by black proprietors. Nevertheless, they all
provided a white-inspired view of primitive, exotic Black
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 271
➢

America. Scantily clad women would gyrate on stage to
heavy percussion amid jungle decor. These scenes bore little resemblance to the reality displayed at neighborhood
joints such as Small’s Paradise and the Renny.
Williams Christian Methodist Church, located at 2225
on the east side of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard, is
the former site of the Lafayette Theater. Opened in 1912,
the Lafayette was one of the few integrated theaters in
New York City. While the theater presented the same minstrel-style, all-black revues popular elsewhere, it did provide, in the early twentieth century, one of the few venues
where blacks could perform in serious roles as well. During
the 1930s, this was the Harlem headquarters of the Federal
Theater Project of the New Deal’s Works Progress Administration. Its most notorious production was the
“Voodoo Macbeth.” Directed by Orson Welles and featuring an all-black cast, this rendition integrated African elements into the Shakespeare classic.
Look south toward 125th Street on Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard. The sculpture on the median in the center of the boulevard symbolizes the “Tree of Hope.” The
tree, which sat in front of the Lafayette, was rumored to
have magical powers, bringing employment to out-ofwork actors who rubbed its bark. The old oak did become
a gathering place for actors; casting agents in search of entertainers could find them in droves in front of the
Lafayette, so in a sense the tree fulfilled its magic promises.
The original Tree of Hope was cut down in 1934; this interpretive sculpture was erected in 1972. A piece of the
original remains a fixture on the stage of the Apollo Theater, participants in Wednesday’s amateur nights rub its
bark for luck before going out on stage.
Turn right on 125th Street and walk west toward the
Apollo Theater.
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
272
➢

You are in Harlem’s central commercial district. In the
early twentieth century, black-owned businesses were
found around 135th Street, but on 125th, all the stores were
white-owned. The owners resisted the development of
Harlem as a black neighborhood and most refused to hire
black workers through the 1930s, though their clientele
was almost entirely black. Even today, few of the businesses on 125th Street are owned by African Americans. In
the 1960s, banks and insurance companies “red-lined” the
area, refusing to lend money to individuals and companies
interested in opening a business in Harlem. In light of this
trend, it is not surprising that many community leaders
were pleased at the influx of major corporate interests to
125th Street during the 1990s. Joining the ubiquitous fastfood restaurants in recent years are Pathmark (the first
Lafayette Theater, also known as the “House Beautiful,” was one of the few integrated theaters in New York. As early as 1912, African American theatergoers were allowed to sit in orchestra seats instead of only in the balcony. The
theater seated two thousand and presented such Broadway hits as Madame X
and Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. The photo shows opening night of a production of
Shakespeare’s Macbeth that was arranged and staged by Orson Welles. Photo
courtesy of the Schomberg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York
Public Library.

large supermarket to open in Harlem), Starbucks, Old
Navy, and Harlem USA, a mall and movie multiplex
backed by basketball star Magic Johnson. Some fear the
impact this corporate invasion will have on Harlem, but
many welcome the lower prices, job opportunities, and
confidence in the neighborhood’s future.
The tall white building on the southwest corner of 125th
Street and Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard is the
landmarked Hotel Theresa, now an office building. When
it opened in 1913, the hotel catered to a white-only clientele. In 1937 it was purchased by a black entrepreneur who
overturned these segregationist policies. Posh hotels
downtown refused service to blacks, and the Theresa became known as the “Waldorf of Harlem.” In 1960, Fidel
Castro, visiting the United Nations, stayed here to show his
solidarity with black Americans. The Hotel Theresa also
housed political organizations. A. Philip Randolph’s 1941
March on Washington movement was coordinated here;
this movement successfully pushed President Franklin
Roosevelt to integrate defense industries during World
War II. During the 1960s, after his break from the Nation
of Islam, Malcolm X established the Organization of Afro-
American Unity at the Theresa. On the corner outside the
building, crowds would gather to hear the civil rights
leader give his speeches.
As you continue west on 125th Street, you will pass the old
Blumstein’s Department Store at 230 West 125th Street,
now subdivided into smaller stores at ground level. In the
early twentieth century, Blumstein’s, like most of the stores
on the block, refused to hire black workers in any but the
most lowly positions, despite the fact that its clientele was
almost entirely African American. This position was particularly galling during the Great Depression, when
Harlem’s unemployment rate was substantially higher than
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
274

in the rest of the city. In 1934, Adam Clayton Powell Jr. and
other black leaders targeted Blumstein’s in a boycott and
picketing campaign. Taking as their slogan “Don’t buy
where you can’t work,” the protesters eventually forced the
largest department store in Harlem to hire black clerks. In
time, Blumstein’s would be the first department store to
have a black Santa Claus.
Stop at the Apollo Theater at 253 West 125th Street. The
burlesque house that opened here in 1914 initially refused
admission to blacks. In 1934 the former owners of the
Lafayette Theater bought the Apollo and integrated it. It
has since become the premier showcase of black talent in
the United States. Virtually every black American entertainer of note has performed on its stage. During the 1930s
and 1940s, black Harlemites and white visitors to Harlem
could enjoy performances by dancer Bill “Bojangles”
Robinson; singers Bessie Smith, Billie Holiday, and Ethel
Waters; and revues from cabarets at the Cotton Club and
the Ubangi Club. Famous bandleaders such as Duke
Ellington took the stage of the Apollo backed by chorus
girls in elaborate costumes.
While the music continued throughout the 1960s, including performances by Stevie Wonder and Diana Ross,
the Apollo experienced a decline as big acts began to perform elsewhere. But in recent years, funded in part by the
public Harlem Urban Development Corporation, the
Apollo has been renovated and again claims its place in the
spotlight. Wednesday amateur nights, an Apollo tradition
since the 1930s, have been televised nationally since the
early 1990s. Talents discovered here have included such
greats as Ella Fitzgerald, Sarah Vaughan, and James
Brown. Poor audience reception at amateur night at the
Apollo does not, however, guarantee a failed career. Multiple-Grammy-winner Lauryn Hill was booed off the stage
by the notoriously tough Apollo audience.
African American Capital of the Twentieth Century | HISTORIC HARLEM 275

From here, you can walk two blocks east to the 2/3 station at 125th and Lenox; one block west to the A/B/C/D
station at 125th St. and St. Nicholas Avenue; or walk east to
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Boulevard, take a left, and walk
to 135th Street, where we began the tour.
HISTORIC HARLEM | African American Capital of the Twentieth Century
276

