CENTRAL PARK
New York City’s Largest Work of Art
Start: Columbus Circle at Fifty-ninth Street and Central
Park West, in front of the Maine monument near the exit
for the 1, 9, A, B, C, and D trains.
youareaboutto enter the largest work of art in
New York City, Central Park, a “natural” landscape that
is at the same time a gigantic social institution. I say “natural” because almost everything inside was designed,
planted, landscaped, and laid out by human hands. As
park designer Frederick Law Olmsted said, “Every foot
of the Park’s surface, every tree and bush, as well as
every arch, roadway and walk, has been placed where it
is with a purpose.”
The park is a nineteenth-century space that has entirely different meaning in the new millennium than it did
when it was completed at the end of the Civil War. On
this tour, we’ll consider the park in its various forms—a
natural environment, a recreational place, a commercial
space, and a civic center. Each of these radically different
perspectives provides a unique window through which
we can view what many believe to be New York’s greatest public space.
181
6
➢

the designers: frederick law olmsted and
calvert vaux
The two men most responsible for the park’s design are the
American Frederick Law Olmsted (1822–1903) and the English immigrant Calvert Vaux (1824–1895). Olmsted, who was decidedly
not a park designer before Central Park made him one, was responsible for the park’s landscaping. Vaux (pronounced “vawx”),
who was probably the first person to call himself a “landscape architect” as opposed to a “landscape artist,” was responsible for
many of the park’s structures, helped by architect Jacob Wrey
Mould.
Olmsted’s pre-park experience included being a small farmer
on Staten Island, an agricultural writer, a founder of the Nation
magazine, and supervisor of a California gold mine. But he was
best known for his writing on slavery in the South. Vaux had come
to the United States to join a partnership with landscape designer
Andrew Jackson Downing, who would have been the most likely
candidate for park designer had he not drowned tragically before
the project began.
Olmsted landed a job in 1857 as the supervisor of land clearance for the park through influential friends. He then teamed up
with Vaux to design the winning Greensward Plan for the park. The
city’s request for proposal had specific design requirements,
which Olmsted and Vaux met masterfully. A parade ground became the Sheep Meadow; a fire lookout tower became Belvedere
Tower—“the castle”; a skating area became the Lake; and four
cross-streets became the four sunken transverse roads that are
hidden from view below ground level.
When their design was chosen as the winner, Olmsted was appointed architect in chief, while Vaux was made assistant to the
architect in chief. After designing the park, Olmsted went on to become one of the best-known park designers in the country, designing in whole or in part New York’s Prospect and Riverside
Parks, Boston’s Back Bay Fens, Philadelphia’s Fairmont Park,
Louisville’s park system, Detroit’s Belle Isle, Montreal’s Mount
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
182

Royal, Buffalo’s parks and parkways, Chicago’s Riverside suburb,
Oakland’s Mountain View Cemetery, Washington, D.C.’s Capitol
grounds, Stanford University’s campus, and more.
Though Vaux designed Prospect and Fort Greene Parks in
Brooklyn with Olmsted, their partnership ended in 1872. Vaux went
on to design the Metropolitan Museum, the American Museum of
Natural History, Frederic Church’s Olana home along the Hudson
River, and buildings for the Children’s Aid Society. He was never as
celebrated as Olmsted and became bitter in later life. He drowned
off the current site of the Brooklyn Navy Yard in 1895, and it is entirely possible that he committed suicide.
New Yorkers, especially wealthy ones, gradually developed a desire for a city park in the mid–nineteenth century.
Park boosters included writers such as William Cullen
Bryant and Horace Greeley, real estate speculators such as
James Beekman, and Mayor Fernando Wood. They compared New York unfavorably to European cities that had
parks. Further, the wealthy wanted a place to ride their carriages away from the hoi polloi of the city streets. There
were many competing arguments for the park: for example,
that it would establish New York as the nation’s cultural
capital, provide a retreat for the wealthy, and be a social
safety valve for the city’s poor, who were crammed into
tenement housing with no parks to the south.
Interestingly, the desire for a democratic park for all
people was frightening to the middle classes and precipitated a debate over the use of public space by “respectable”
and “disorderly” classes, as this editorial in the New York
Herald of 1858 illustrates:
It is folly to expect in this country to have parks like those in old
aristocratic countries. When we open a public park, Sam will air
himself in it. He will take his friends. . . . He will knock down any
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 183

better-dressed man who remonstrates with him. He will talk and
sing, and fill his share of the bench and flirt with the nursery maids
in his own coarse way. Now we have to ask what chance have
William B. Astor and Edward Everett against this fellow citizen of
theirs? Can they and he enjoy the same place? Is it not obvious
that he will turn them out, and that the great Central Park will be
nothing but a great beer garden for the lowest denizens of the city,
of which we shall yet pray litanies to be delivered?
Furthermore, a democratic park did not mean treating
those who currently lived in what would become parkland
democratically. A lot of propaganda and boosterism demonized the pre-park inhabitants of the land to make it easier
for the city to take their property. The New York Times, expressing anti–Irish Catholic bigotry typical of the nineteenth century, described park residents as “principally
Irish families [in] rickety . . . little one storie shanties . . . inhabited by four or five persons, not including the pig and
the goats,” and other newspapers made much of the
“vagabonds” and “scoundrels” living in the park.
More than 90 percent of those living on what would be
parkland were either immigrants, largely Irish and German, or African Americans. In the latter case, Seneca Village, whose principal street was in the park across from
West Eighty-fifth Street, was a well-established town with
a school, three churches, and 250 residents. Indeed, a careful search of records shows that a far higher percentage of
people living in the park actually owned their own land
than did people in the city at large. Nonetheless,
landowner, renter, and squatter alike were evicted in 1857
and 1858 to make way for construction.
We begin the tour by looking at the giant monument to
the Maine, regilded now and shining in the sun. To the
south of the park, Fifty-ninth Street is called Central Park
South and is lined with a row of buildings that, when seen
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
184

from the Sheep Meadow a few blocks north in the park,
make for one of the classic New York panoramas.
The Maine memorial is to the American battleship that
blew up, or was blown up, in Havana harbor in 1898, killing
over 250 sailors and precipitating the Spanish-American
War. William Randolph Hearst, whose New York Journal
fervently supported the war, helped raise money for this
monument. It was supposed to stand in Times Square but
never made it. Instead, visitors come here to see “Columbia Triumphant” (the statue at the top) surrounded below
and in front by Victory, Peace, Courage, and Fortitude; on
the back stand Justice, Warrior, and History; and on the
sides the Pacific Ocean (as an old man) and the Atlantic
Ocean (as a young man).
Facing the front of the monument, enter the park at the
leftmost stone entrance, called Merchants Gate. (Most
entrances are named, though few are labeled.) Take the
When the city bought Central Park’s 843 acres, it forced at least two thousand homeowners, renters, and squatters off the land. Nonetheless, people
have built homes in the park many times since, especially during financial
depressions. These are from the 1890s. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.
➢

footpath farthest to your left and stay to your left past the
first fork. Walk to your right as the path forks again and
you will very quickly come to Greyshot Arch, one of over
forty bridges designed by Vaux with Jacob Wrey Mould.
Walk under the sandstone balustrade and through the
vaulted, red-brick archway. The passage is just over thirty
feet wide, ten feet high, and eighty feet long. Continue
along the path and take the left fork to come to Pine Bank
Arch, two hundred feet beyond Greyshot Arch. Walk over
this cast-iron beauty. The entire structure was rebuilt with
a new wooden floor in 1984. Every single arch and every
bridge in the park is different.
At the end of the arch, take a right and then a left to walk
alongside Umpire Rock, the giant piece of Manhattan
schist that supervises the Heckscher Ballfields and the
Ballplayers House immediately to the north. Schist is what
makes up the bedrock under Manhattan; geologically, it’s a
combination of mica, quartz, feldspar, and hornblende. If
you look carefully at much of the schist that sticks up in the
park, you’ll see the pieces are smoother to the north side,
where glaciers first thoroughly scraped parts, and rougher
and more irregular to the south side. You can impress
friends by telling them that major outcroppings are called
roche moutonée (laying sheep) because the glacial cuttings
supposedly make them look like sleeping sheep.
Follow the path as it curves to the right between Umpire
Rock and Heckscher Ballfields.
As you walk past the ball fields, they seem a perfectly natural part of the park, as do concrete playgrounds. But recreation had little to do with the original park, which didn’t
have a single playground but only provided three meadows
for children’s field sports. And to play on the meadows,
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
186
➢

kids had to have a certificate of good attendance and character from teachers—a difficult prospect for many nineteenth-century children who were working and not in
school. Concrete and asphalt playgrounds came about at
the turn of the twentieth century and in the decades afterward thanks to social reformers who believed that playgrounds would save children from gangs and, as they got
older, unemployment. Further, adult baseball diamonds
weren’t a serious feature in the park until the 1920s! It is
worth remembering what Olmsted and Vaux envisioned, in
accordance with nineteenth-century sensibility:
We want a ground to which people may easily go after their day’s
work is done, and where they may stroll for an hour, seeing, hearing, and feeling nothing of the bustle and jar of the streets, there
they shall, in effect, find the city put far away from them. . . . We
want depth of wood enough about it not only for comfort in hot
weather, but to completely shut out the city from our landscapes.
Look to the south at the wall of buildings along Central
Park South as you read those words. Also, think about the
different ways in which people in a democratic society use
a public park. Is a picnic acceptable? Music? Volleyball?
Barbecuing? Dancing? What is “respectable” and what is
“unacceptable” today?
who built it, how big is it, and what did
it cost?
The park runs north-south from 110th Street (Central Park
North) to Fifty-ninth Street (Central Park South) and east-west
from Fifth Avenue to Central Park West (Eighth Avenue). It is just
over 840 acres, which is about twice as large as feudal-relic
Monaco and several times bigger than Governors Island in New
York Harbor. The city paid the landowners of this rocky, swampy
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 187

farmland almost $7.5 million for their land in the late 1850s. By
contrast, the United States paid a few hundred thousand dollars
less to Russia to buy Alaska only a few years later.
Construction began in 1858, and much of the landscaping
south of Seventy-ninth Street was finished by December 1860. It
took another five years to complete things up to 110th Street, but
the park is never truly finished; it is a continuous work in progress.
As far as historians can tell, Irish workers did almost all the labor
and there were no black workers. The only women employed
cleaned offices. The general rhythm of construction was, to begin
with, about two thousand workers in early spring, expanding to
thirty-five hundred by late summer and then cut back in the fall. A
ten-hour day paid $1 for unskilled laborers who brought in millions
of cubic yards of soil, planted hundreds of non-native trees, laid
out six and a half miles of road, dug out a 106-acre reservoir, and
built mile upon mile of trails and walkways.
When you reach a four-way intersection as you seem to
be curving away from the ball field, turn left and walk to
a fork. Then turn right and you will come to the Carousel.
The Carousel in front of you was built in 1908 in Coney
Island and moved to the park in 1951 to replace the park’s
original 1871 carousel, which burned down. The original
was supposedly powered by a blind horse and a blind mule
on a treadmill underneath it. The Carousel is a business
that receives a contract from the city. For years Sal Napolitano ran it, but he was outbid by the Makkos Organization
(formerly M & T Pretzel Company), an immigrant success story run by Greek immigrant Themis Makkos and
his sons.
Commercial activities for children were allowed in the
early park, and before the 1860s were over, the city had issued permits for boats at sixty cents an hour, carriages at
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
188
➢

twenty-five cents an hour, wheelchairs (with an attendant)
for fifty cents an hour; and a goat cart and pony rides for ten
cents each.
Take the path immediately to the east of the Carousel,
which slopes uphill and northward. Continue north to the
chain-link fence around the Sheep Meadow, the large
grass field to your left.
Originally landscaped to fulfill the function of a parade
ground, the Sheep Meadow began hosting sheep in 1864.
Olmsted required a particular breed of Southdown sheep
whose gray-and-white coloring offset the grass. In choosing sheep for their ornamental use, Olmsted was following
in the footsteps of William Gilpin, who wrote a book
called Forest Scenery, which Olmsted loved. Gilpin wrote:
“Sheep particularly are very ornamental in a park. Their
color is just that dingy hue, which contrasts with the verdure of the ground; and the flakiness of their wool is rich
and picturesque.” The Sheep Meadow was fairly green
until a series of concerts in the 1960s and 1970s killed much
of the grass. It was replanted in 1979 and remains green by
banning organized sports, concerts, and any activity when
the grass is wet.
Turn around and walk back to the path along Center Drive
(the roadway). Follow the traffic on the roadway east for
less than two hundred feet until you come to the southern end of what a huge, inlaid-marble plaque on the
ground asserts is Literary Walk. New Yorkers call it the
Mall. The left hand of the statue Columbus (1892) points
you in the right direction.
The Mall is the formal promenade at the center of the naturalistic park. A wide, straight pathway bordered on both
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 189
➢
➢

sides by double rows of overhanging elms runs northwest
right up to Bethesda Terrace, the formal center of the park.
Note the statues at the southern end. Surprisingly, Olmsted
and Vaux did not intend statues anywhere but at Bethesda
Terrace, which we’ll come to shortly. All the rest were
forced on them by the city, under pressure from civic, ethnic, and religious groups who wanted figures of their great
men in the park.
You will see Shakespeare (1870) toward the Mall’s eastern entrance, Sir Walter Scott (1871) on your immediate
right, and Robert Burns (1880) on your immediate left.
Walk north along the Mall until you come to the statue of
Fitz-Green Halleck, on your right.
Halleck, who died in 1867, was one of the most famous
poets in the country in the nineteenth century. His poems
are now almost completely forgotten, which is why you’ll
People walking on the Mall beneath the overhanging branches of the double
row of elms. The view is from the few statues at the southern end toward Bethesda Terrace in the north. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.
➢

be amazed to know that when this statue was unveiled in
1876, Rutherford B. Hayes, then president of the United
States, his cabinet, and ten thousand others came for the
unveiling ceremony. That today no one knows who he is
speaks volumes about representing people in statues, an
idea that is well past its heyday.
To drive the point further home: Can you name the
most famous statue of a woman in the park? It’s Alice in
Wonderland. In fact, there are no statues in the park of
women who were living, historical figures. All the statues
of women are allegorical figures or characters from nursery rhymes. In all of the public spaces in Manhattan there
are many statues of women, but again, these are invariably not of actual people. We can count, at present time,
only four: Gertrude Stein, Golda Meir, Joan of Arc, and
Eleanor Roosevelt.
Continue on along the Mall until you find yourself standing with a band shell on your right.
Olmsted and Vaux installed a cast-iron bandstand to the
west in 1859, but the current one is a historical anachronism.
In 1923, retired banker Elkan Naumberg donated money to
build it. This band shell has hosted Leonard Bernstein,
Duke Ellington, Benny Goodman, Martin Luther King Jr,
Fidel Castro, and Mayor Fiorello La Guardia selling war
bonds during World War II. It was a very popular spot for
ballroom dancing in the 1940s and 1950s, when the Goldman Band played here live. But as the popularity of ballroom dancing waned, so did the use of the band shell. The
city wanted to tear it down in accordance with plans by the
Central Park Conservancy (the nonprofit agency that actually runs the park), but Naumberg’s great-grandson and
others sued the city. The courts ruled that the city had to
maintain it as a gift it had willingly accepted, whether or
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 191
➢

not it fit with the old-style benches that have been built
around it.
Above the band shell on the hill is Rumsey Playfield, a
desolate asphalt lot with a storied history that is now home
to Summer Stage, the series of free concerts the park hosts
every summer. The hill was originally the site of the Ladies
Refreshment Pavilion, but in the late 1920s, Mayor “Gentleman” Jimmy Walker asked his friend Sidney Solomon to
An early 1930s playbill from the Central Park Casino, in whose Joseph
Urban–designed interior Mayor Jimmy Walker used to entertain friends. The
casino was open only from 1929 to 1934, when Parks Commissioner Robert
Moses had it torn down. The free concerts of Summer Stage now take place on
the site. Image courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

take over the space. Solomon hired Joseph Urban to redesign the interior, which included a black-glass ballroom.
Walker and his mistress Betty Compton reviewed the
plans, personally, and some financing even came from
Arnold Rothstein (who had fixed the 1919 World Series).
The building opened as the Central Park Casino (without gambling) in 1929 and remained one of the most elegant places to eat in until Walker fled office under corruption charges a few years later. In 1934, Robert Moses, then
parks commissioner, demolished the casino with the argument that only restaurants “within the reach of persons of
average means” should be in the park. Interestingly, Moses
then converted the sheepfold to the west of the Sheep
Meadow into Tavern on the Green restaurant, which persons of average means have always found too expensive to
afford.
the hired chair outrage
On June, 22 1901, the benches along part of the Mall were replaced with new, green rocking chairs. When park visitors sat in
them, uniformed attendants quickly walked up to demand five
cents for a chair with arms and three cents for one without.
Entrepreneur Oscar Spate had secured a rocking-chair franchise from Tammany Hall. He hoped to make $250 a day here and
in other city parks. Soon afterward, the angry public rioted,
smashing and stealing chairs. A chastened Parks Commission
withdrew Spate’s franchise and replaced his chairs with ones
marked “For the Exclusive Use of Women and Children, FREE.”
Continue north on the Mall. Walk down the steps underneath Bethesda Terrace and come out at Bethesda Fountain. Directly ahead of you is the Lake and beyond it is the
Ramble.
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 193
➢

Bethesda Terrace was the only place Olmsted and Vaux
wanted any statues, and they ended up with only one here.
The Moorish building you walked underneath was designed by Jacob Wrey Mould, who had studied Islamic architecture and reproduced its style here. The ceiling was
originally covered with thousands of tiles that are now
being reinstalled, thanks to the Central Park Conservancy.
Bethesda Fountain is crowned by Emma Stebbins’s
Angel of the Waters (1873), the only sculpture in the park
by a woman. Stebbins was the sister of the president of the
Central Park Board of Commissioners. The park’s fountain is a reference to the one in Jerusalem noted in the
Gospel of John: “There is at Jerusalem by the sheep market a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda.” In the Bible, the sick would wait at the pool for an
angel to stir up the waters and would then enter it to be
cured. There is a historical debate as to whether Stebbins’s
angel is a man or a woman. Some see it as a proto-feminist
statement celebrating women, while others argue that angels are sexless and that the statue merely reflects contemporary design.
The Lake’s boathouse in 1894, with the Ramble in the distance and to the left.
The current Loeb Boathouse has replaced the one in the photo, but the Lake
still boasts a gondola. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

Walk around to the left (west) of the fountain. Take the
last path on your left, going up a few steps and roughly
following the Lake keeping its shore on your right. In a
few hundred feet you’ll come to Bow Bridge, one of seven
cast-iron bridges built in the park.
If you look at Bow Bridge from ground level on the side,
you will see it is roughly shaped like a bow. As you stand
on the bridge and look to the west along Central Park
West, you’ll see the low-peaked, verdigrised roofs of the
Dakota with a flagpole at the top, perhaps Manhattan’s
most famous apartment building. When it was built in
the mid-1880s, there was very little this far north. Today,
most people know it as the building where John Lennon
lived, and where he was shot. To the left and right of the
Dakota, respectively, are two of Central Park West’s
twin-towered apartment buildings, the Majestic and the
San Remo.
The Lake beneath you was designed for skating and
boating. The small, square gazebos along its shore are
built on the sites of the original taxi-boat stops. You can
Skaters enjoying the frozen Lake, with the Dakota apartment building in the distance. This late nineteenth-century view makes it clear how little there was
around the Park in the 1880s. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.
➢

fish in the lake, catch and release, and you are supposed
to have a license.
Continue across Bow Bridge into the Ramble.
The Ramble was designed as a small forest with meandering paths curving around it. Olmsted believed: “There
can be no better place than the Ramble for the perfect realization of the wild garden.”
Be careful with these directions; it’s easy to get lost in
here. Walk straight, passing an intersection on your right.
Do not take this path but continue on to a fork. Turn right
at the fork and go uphill. Turn left at the next intersection
and then go up a few steps to reach the Rustic Shelter, a
rebuilt cedar-log shelter that is meant to mimic English
ideas of a Romantic landscape.
crime and the park
No discussion of Central Park would be complete without a discussion of crime. For whatever reason, crimes that take place in
the park have national resonance, while crimes that happen elsewhere in New York City usually don’t. The social or cultural explanation is likely that so many Americans think of the park as a sanctuary in the city that crime here appears as more of an assault on
the body politic than crime elsewhere.
Early arrests in the park were mainly for driving carriages too
fast along the roads. The first robbery-murder in 1872 caused the
New York Times to remark: “Murder has actually stained the turf
of that green fairy land.” In the 1880s the Police Gazette wrote:
“Perils of the park include murderous attacks upon the chastity of
pure-minded young females” (i.e., flashers). Homeless men—
“tramps” in nineteenth-century vernacular—were another focus of
the papers’ ire. The New York Tribune wrote in the 1870s that
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
196
➢
➢

“tramps and other unpleasant people [have] quit their winter
quarters for the benches in the Park. . . . Ladies and children hesitate to venture into the Ramble without escorts.”
Today the Park has its own police precinct, and it has the lowest rate of violent crimes of any precinct in the city. Nonetheless, the occasional horrific assault receives enormous media attention today. We never offer advice on where to go or not to go
in New York. Use your judgment and go only where you feel comfortable.
Walk around the left (north) side of the Rustic Shelter (as
you face it from where you came up the steps) and to the
path that runs behind it. Stay left on this path, and in a
few steps you’ll see the Gill (a small pool on your right).
Bear right at the fork. (If you find yourself going down
steps, back up and then bear right at the fork you
missed.) In a few steps you’ll come to another intersection, with a cement bridge with iron railings ahead of you.
The bridge is built over the Lost Waterfall, which was demolished and turned into a stream running downhill in
the 1930s.
Continue across the bridge, up a few steps, passing the
Lookout, a cedar bench on your right. Take your first left.
Walk past the first intersection on your right and then
turn right at your second intersection. There will be a
giant schist boulder immediately ahead of you as you approach this turn. Continue straight on this path, passing
first an intersection on your left, then a second on your
right, then a third crossing from left to right, and finally
you will begin to slope uphill. There will be a meadow on
your left. Continue uphill, where the path will begin to
weave. Walk up some stone steps, keeping to your right.
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 197
➢
➢

Walk up another set of steps and continue uphill to Belvedere Tower, the “castle.”
Vaux designed the castle to fulfill the function of a fire
watchtower. It sits on top of 135-foot-high Vista Rock,
through which, beneath your feet, is blasted a tunnel for the
Seventy-ninth Street transverse road. If the castle is open,
go inside and up the stairs to one of the lookouts. The original castle had no glass in its windows; instead, the structure was meant to deteriorate as the park grew and changed
around it. The effect was to show people that the work of
human hands is ephemeral while nature is eternal. Since
1920, the official weather-reading station for New York
City has been atop the castle and in the fenced-in area behind it. Instruments on top measure wind direction and
speed and minutes of sunshine. Those inside the fence
measure air temperature, precipitation, and humidity.
To the north, immediately below the castle, is the redone Turtle Pond. To the left of the pond is the 1960 Delacorte Theater, where free “Shakespeare in the Park” plays
are performed every summer. And the giant green ball
fields stretching out ahead make up the Great Lawn. The
lawn is built on the site of an 1840s reservoir that was
drained in 1930.
Until the early 1990s, the Great Lawn was the site of the
park’s giant free concerts and gatherings, including Elton
John’s performance in 1980(300,000 people), Simon and
Garfunkel’s in 1981(500,000), an antinuclear rally in 1982
(750,000), Diana Ross’s concert in 1983(400,000), Paul
Simon’s in 1991(600,000), a gathering led by Billy Graham
in 1991(250,000), and more. The Central Park Conservancy spent over $18 million renovating the Great Lawn,
laying irrigation, drainage, soil, and Kentucky bluegrass
and perennial rye to make it what it is today. No more large
events will take place on it.
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
198

seneca village
The largest town in the land that would become Central Park
was Seneca Village (the origins of the name are still being debated), which stretched from Seventy-ninth to Eighty-sixth Streets
to the west of the Great Lawn. Its main street ran east-west into
the parkland at what is today Eighty-fifth Street. In 1855, two
years before all its residents were evicted, Seneca Village had 264
residents (about three-quarters black and the rest Irish), homes,
gardens, three churches, cemeteries, a school, and a spring that
still bubbles up in the park east of Eighty-second Street. All that is
left today are the cornerstones of one of the churches.
How Seneca Village came to be is one of the most interesting
stories in the park.
Beginning in 1825, John and Elizabeth Whitehead started selling parts of their farm to black New Yorkers. The first buyer was
Andrew Williams, a twenty-five-year-old bootblack, who bought
three lots for $125. Williams was followed by members of the
African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Zion Church, “Mother Zion,”
from downtown. By 1829 there were nine houses on the side.
The building of the now-demolished old reservoir (not the new
one that’s still there), which was part of the Croton Aqueduct system at the center of the park from 1825 to 1832 displaced another
black community known as York Hill, and many of its residents
moved to Seneca Village. With increased European immigration to
New York in the 1840s and 1850s, Seneca Village also became the
home to German and Irish immigrants. The two most famous were
George Washington Plunkitt and Richard Croker, both of whom
went on to fame in the Tammany Hall Democratic machine.
Contrary to mid-nineteenth-century accounts that demonized
residents of the park as “vagabonds” or “squatters,” the tax and
housing records of Seneca Village tell a different story. Assessors’
maps show several twoand three-story buildings, one even with a
wraparound porch on three sides.
Land ownership provided not only homes and income for black
New Yorkers but voting rights. In 1821, New York revised its state
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 199

constitution to allow universal white male suffrage but required
free blacks to own $250 worth of property to vote. In 1855 there
were twelve thousand black residents in New York but only one
hundred black voters, and ten of these lived in Seneca Village. Indeed, black Seneca Village residents were far more likely to own
property than whites elsewhere in the city.
About three-quarters of Seneca Village residents regularly attended one of its three churches. The African Methodist Union
Church was established by black migrants from York Hill. All Angels’ Church was built in 1849 by the white Reverend Thomas Peters, with money he raised and other funds he donated. It held a
black and German congregation, including members of AME Zion
Church from downtown, until AME Zion moved into Seneca Village
in 1853. Peters described his congregation as “white, black and Indian, American, German and Irish practitioners in monogamy and
those who troubled themselves about no gamy at all; gentle folk
deteriorated and rough lovers of free and easy life, saints the most
exalted and sinners most abandoned.”
All Angels also housed Colored School No. 3, whose black
teacher struck a blow for equality a century before Rosa Parks.
In July 1854, teacher Elizabeth Jennings, twenty-four, boarded a
Third Avenue streetcar downtown at Chatham and Pearl Streets
on the way to church. The car did not have a sign saying “Colored
People Allowed in This Car,” as others did. When Jennings refused to get off, she was forcibly removed by the conductor and
a policeman. Jennings sued the Third Avenue Railway Company
and was represented at her 1855 trial by twenty-four-year-old future U.S. president Chester A. Arthur. A jury decided that, according to a state law, the railway company was “a common carrier, bound to carry all respectable people and that colored persons, if sober, well-behaved, and free from disease, had the same
rights as others.”
The third church was the oldest black church in New York but
the last to erect a home in Seneca Village. AME Zion was founded
in 1796 by black members of the John Street Methodist Episcopal
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
200

Church because no white church would ordain blacks. Its members
have included Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, Frederick Douglass, and Thomas Fortune, who founded the Freeman, the Globe,
and the Age.
Alas, not even churches were enough to preserve the community when it came time to build the park. A city commission surveyed and assessed the value of all lots in and around the park.
Those inside the park’s future limits were taken from their owners
by right of eminent domain, which means the government forcibly,
but with pay, takes your land for what it declares is the common
good. The city paid Andrew Williams, the first property owner,
$2,335 for his two-story house and three lots. Williams argued to
no avail that the value of the house alone was $1,400 and that he
had been offered $3,500 for house and lots.
About this time, the New-York Daily Times introduced white
New Yorkers to black residents of Seneca Village as a contrast to
Irish residents elsewhere in the park’s domain:
“West of the reservoir within the limits of the Central Park, lies
a neat little settlement, known as “nigger village.” The Ebon inhabitants after whom the village is called, present a pleasing
contrast in their habits and the appearance of their dwellings
to the Celtic occupants, in common with hogs and goats, of the
shanties of the lower part of the Park. They have been notified
to remove by the first of August. The policemen find it difficult
to persuade them out of the idea which has possessed their
simple minds, that the sole object of the authorities in making
the Park is to procure their expulsion from the homes which
they occupy. It is to be hoped that their removal will be effected
with as much gentleness as possible.”
How gently they went is unknown, but almost every property
owner protested vehemently that the city was not paying fair
market value for their land. Nonetheless, by 1857, Seneca Village
was gone. Its residents scattered among many neighborhoods,
and their history is unknown to most who walk through the park
today.
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 201

Return to the path immediately behind the castle. Go left
(east) along the castle’s back and follow the path down
that runs between the Turtle Pond and the Seventy-ninth
Street transverse. Go left at the first intersection to the
statue of King Jagiello on horseback.
The statue, by Stanislaw Ostrowski, was originally to be
placed in Kraków, but it was later used at the Polish pavilion at the 1939–40 World’s Fair, and the Polish government
in exile gave it to New York in 1945. Jagiello was actually a
grand duke of Lithuania who married the Polish queen to
unite the two lands.
Go on the path to Jagiello’s right, leading northward.
Walk until you come to a four-way intersection. Ahead of
you is the obelisk, and to your right is the Metropolitan
Museum of Art. Walk north and up a flight of stone stairs
to your right.
This two hundred-ton obelisk, also known as Cleopatra’s
Needle, was erected in the park in 1881 but was originally
installed in Egypt, in the fourteenth century b.c., by Thutmosis III. Over the next twenty-five hundred years it was
vandalized by those who carved on, burned, and eventually
buried it. The United States was offered this needle in the
nineteenth century, and the obelisk sailed from Egypt to
New York in 1880, with William Vanderbilt paying the
$100,000 shipping cost. It landed at West Ninety-sixth
Street and was rolled along on top of cannonballs and giant
timbers to railroad tracks. Then workers graded the road
ahead of it while picking up a railroad track from behind
and shifting it in front, over and over. All in all, the work
took 112 days to get from Ninety-sixth Street to where it
sits now. On January 22, 1881, the obelisk was pivoted into
place, upright, in under five minutes.
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
202
➢
➢

Contrary to what is often written, the surface of the
obelisk has been altered very little by pollution in New
York. Most of the blackening was fire damage from the
sacking of Heliopolis by the Persians thousands of years
ago. And being buried for five hundred years caused salt to
crystallize on the needle, making it more susceptible to
freezing and thawing.
Retrace your steps back to the intersection and make a
left through Greywacke Arch under East Drive. (Greywacke is a type of stone used in the arch, along with sandstone and brownstone.) After coming out of the arch, go
right on the path and follow it around the Metropolitan
Museum on Fifth Avenue.
As you pass under East Drive, remember that it was built
for elegant carriages, not cars. In fact, there was a New
York City tradition of a formal carriage procession that entered the park at Fifth Avenue and Central Park South and
proceeded up East Drive and then across Bethesda Terrace
to the west side. Commercial wagons were banned from
the park when it opened, and police would refuse entry to
anyone not driving a “pleasure carriage” onto the drive for
many years after the park opened.
Alas, the first auto was driven into the park in 1899 by
Winslow E. Buzby, who tested the park commissioner’s ban
with what he called an “automobile victoria-phaeton.”
Buzby was given a summons and appeared before a magistrate, who ruled that under the city ordinance that said,
“The drive shall be used only by persons in pleasure carriages, on bicycles, or on horseback,” Buzby’s car was a
pleasure carriage.
In response, the park board changed the rules to ban
“horseless carriages and motor wagons” but soon relented.
In the first official drive, Park Commissioner Clausen and
New York City’s Largest Work of Art | CENTRAL PARK 203
➢

a friend drove into the park, but their car broke down and
they had to walk out. Nonetheless, change was relentless,
and the park’s drives were asphalted beginning in 1912.
Today the drive is open to commuter traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours and sometimes late at night.
Today, the Metropolitan Museum is one of the largest
art museums in the world. If you’re counting, it has almost
three and a half million items ranging in age from prehistoric times to a few decades ago.
In 1872, Olmsted and Vaux, under pressure, allowed a
museum on this spot because the view to it was then
blocked by the walls of the reservoir that stood on the
Great Lawn. The museum was built in many pieces. The
first museum building, designed by Vaux and Jacob Wrey
Mould in 1871 and opened in 1880, is almost completely
hidden inside the many later accretions. The museum was
closed on Sundays until 1891, when forced to open due to a
combination of protests by workers, who wanted to visit
on their only day off, and the city, which threatened to
withhold funds. Go inside; the “suggested donation” is
only that—suggested.
CENTRAL PARK | New York City’s Largest Work of Art
204

