GREENWICH
VILLAGE
A Gay and Lesbian History
Start: We begin at the Christopher Street station for the
1/9 subway, located at the intersection of Christopher
Street, Sheridan Square, and Seventh Avenue South.
some contemporary travelguides refer
to New York City as having the largest lesbian and gay
populationof anycityonearth,andformanyyears,Greenwich Village was the center of this community. While the
geographic center of gay and lesbian life in the city has
been shifting in recent years (for men, up to Chelsea, and
for women, out to Brooklyn), Greenwich Village remains
the focus of legend and history, and a walk through the
streets of the Village will take you past landmarks from
more than one hundred years of the lesbian and gay past.
Greenwich Village is also home to the gay-and-lesbian
rights movement’s most sacred site: the building that once
housed the Stonewall Inn, site of the legendary Stonewall
riots. The three days of unrest that took place there in June
1969 are widely considered the spark that launched the
modern lesbian-and-gay liberation movement. (See page
106 for more on the Stonewall Inn.)
81
3
➢
With its mix of immigrant, elite, and artistic populations, the Village was a refuge for lesbians and gay men
from all walks of life for nearly a century before the riots.
They prized the anonymity and freedom of its streets, tenements, and boarding houses and the relative openness of
its bohemian society. Once the subway was extended down
Seventh Avenue South, the Village was accessible from all
parts of the city and became known as “the place where the
Bronx meets Brooklyn” for a taste of wild nightlife. As an
enclave within the bustling metropolis of New York City,
Greenwich Village became an oasis for men and women
from around the world.
There is evidence of homosexual activity in New York
from the time of the earliest Dutch settlement in Manhattan. Early court records and legal codes in New Amsterdam and New York set down prohibitions against the “sin”
or “vice” of sodomy, and several prosecutions were recorded in the seventeenth century. By the late 1800s, New
Yorkers and other American city dwellers were well aware
of gay men and lesbians in their midst. In 1889, the American Observer wrote: “There is in every community of any
size a colony of male sexual perverts who are usually
known to each other and are likely to congregate together.”
In Greenwich Village at the time, clubs featuring waiters in
drag had become a top tourist attraction.
Lesbian lives were far less visible on the streets of U.S.
cities, but awareness of women’s relationships with each
other grew in certain circles. In the late nineteenth century,
relationships between women were common within communities of educated women of some financial means.
Temperance leader Frances Willard, who herself had several romances with other women, observed, “The loves of
women for each other grow more numerous each day.
That so little is said about them surprises me, for they are
everywhere.”
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
82
As you walk through the streets of the Village, this
chapter will point out some of the traces of years of lesbian
and gay history that are, indeed, everywhere.
sodomy laws in new amsterdam and
new york
Historians investigating lesbian and gay history in New York
before self-identified subcultures began to emerge in the late
nineteenth century turn to legal and court records for evidence of
gay life. The earliest and most macabre evidences related to homosexuality in New York City are the criminal statutes prohibiting
“sodomy,” which date back to the first European presence. Sodomy laws were established in all the European colonies in North
America, although each colony defined the crime slightly differently. The term was sometimes used to encompass a variety of homosexual and heterosexual activities deemed unnatural. Only a
few sodomy laws covered sexual acts between women, which
tended to be covered by prohibitions against “lewd and lascivious”
behavior. In New York and New Amsterdam, sodomy was narrowly
defined to cover only sex between men.
In 1613, when the Dutch established their rule over New Amsterdam, sexual activity between men was punishable by death. In
1665, when the English duke of York established his laws for the
colony, sodomy remained among New York’s eleven capital crimes.
Executions for sodomy in New York City were gruesome: on June
25, 1646, a black man named Jan Creoli was sentenced to be
“choked to death and then burnt to ashes” for having sex with another man, and on June 17, 1660, Jan Quisthout pleaded guilty to
the same charge and was condemned to be “tied in a sack and cast
into the river and drowned until dead.”
The New York state legislature repealed the death penalty for
sodomy in 1796, though sexual activity between men in New York
City remained a crime (subject to much lesser penalties) until
1980. Sodomy laws were ubiquitous in the United States until
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 83
1962, when Illinois became the first state to repeal its statute.
Today, while many other states have followed suit, sodomy laws remain on the books in nearly twenty states.
Walk east along Sheridan Square (the street, not the
square itself) to the southeast corner of Barrow Street
and Washington Place. We know this intersection is confusing. With your back to the newsstand that sits on top
of the uptown 1/9 stop, look for the very tall brick building with the bas-relief of a seahorse just above the
ground-floor door that is facing you. That’s Sheridan
Square, and if you keep the seahorse building on your
left, you’re heading in the right direction.
Café Society, an integrated club known as “the wrong place
for the right people,” was in the basement of the two buildings (one is 1 Sheridan Square) that meet at the corner of
Barrow Street and Washington Place across from the end
of Sheridan Square. From 1938 to 1950 the owner ran a club
where, he said, “black and white worked together behind
the footlights and sat together out front.” In the late 1940s,
New York Confidential referred to Café Society as “one of
the most famed cabarets” in the Village, New York’s
neighborhood for “long-haired men, short-haired women,
and those not sure exactly what they are.” The gossipladen guide also noted with alarm that the president of the
corporation operating the club was the wife of “America’s
No. 2 Communist,” and that the club’s patrons “hopped
across the race fence.” Just the bohemian locale to scandalize visitors to Greenwich Village.
Over the years, Café Society hosted performances by
such jazz greats as Billie Holiday, Lena Horne, Sarah
Vaughan, and Art Tatum. Its patrons included a number of
prominent figures in lesbian and gay history and the his-
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
84
➢
tory of the American left, including Eleanor Roosevelt (see
page 103); Lillian Hellman, sometime Village resident and
the author of the lesbian-themed drama The Children’s
Hour; and Paul Robeson.
In the late 1930s, a young man named Bayard Rustin frequented Café Society both as patron and performer. (He
also liked the Village Vanguard, across and up Seventh Avenue.) An aspiring singer who was attending City College
at the time, Rustin would go on to become a key figure in
the Civil Rights movement. However, despite playing a
crucial role in the triumphant 1963 March on Washington—the civil rights march that produced Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr.’s “I have a dream” speech—Rustin was
continually limited and hindered by homophobia from
within and outside the movement.
Rustin was a committed disciple of nonviolence who
went to prison as a conscientious objector during World
War II. He was an important lieutenant of A. Philip Randolph during the 1940s, before an arrest in California for
soliciting another man for sex forced him to take a lower
profile in organizing efforts. During the Montgomery bus
boycott, Rustin went south and worked with King behind
the scenes, helping him make nonviolence his strategic
focus. Rustin was one of King’s closest advisers until the
early 1960s, when a rival civil rights leader threatened to
spread the false rumor that King and Rustin were having an
affair. To avert a scandal, King distanced himself from
Rustin.
In 1963,A.PhilipRandolphbroughtRustinbackintothe
fold, making him his deputy for the planning of the March
on Washington. Despite attacks by Strom Thurmond, who
denounced Rustin from the floor of the Senate as a pervert
and a Communist, the march was a success. Those in the
know called Rustin “Mr. March,” but he never received the
public credit he deserved before his death in 1987.
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 85
Return to Seventh Avenue South and, crossing the avenue, walk west on Christopher Street one block and then
turn right on Bleecker, going a few buildings to No. 337,
the former home of Lorraine Hansberry.
Lorraine Hansberry was an African American playwright
whose A Raisin in the Sun brought a groundbreaking portrayal of black family life to Broadway when it opened in
1959. The play ran for two years, and Hansberry became
the first black playwright to win the New York Drama
Critics Circle Award for Best Play of the Year.
Hansberry was married to Robert Nemiroff, but during
the 1950s, she wrote a number of anonymous letters to One
magazine and The Ladder, publications of “homophile organizations” that were just beginning to campaign for gay
rights. Nemiroff was aware of her lesbianism. The couple
divorced in 1964 but remained close.
Her letters reveal an understanding of the links between
sexism and homophobia and describe her own discomfort
with more obvious and “out” butch-femme couples. In a
letter to The Ladder in 1957, she wrote: “Someday I expect
the ‘discreet’ lesbian will not turn her head on the streets at
the sight of the ‘butch’ strolling hand-in-hand with her
friend in their trousers and definitive haircuts. But for the
moment it still disturbs. It creates an impossible arena for
discussion with one’s most enlightened (to use a hopeful
term) heterosexual friends.”
the early activists: the daughters of
bilitis and the “homophile” movement
The Daughters of Bilitis (DOB), founded in San Francisco in
1955, was part of the first wave of the organized gay rights movement. From 1956 to 1970, the DOB published a magazine called
The Ladder, to which Lorraine Hansberry wrote in the late 1950s.
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
86
➢
The first New York chapter of the Daughters of Bilitis was organized in 1958 by activist Barbara Gittings and, from 1963 on,
had its headquarters nearby in a basement office at 26–32 Charleton Street, nine blocks south of Hansberry’s apartment. The New
York chapter of the DOB was at the forefront of public actions in
support of gay rights, including the “Annual Reminder” marches in
front of Independence Hall in Philadelphia from 1963–1969 and the
1965 picket in front of the White House to protest regulations prohibiting federal government employment of gay men and lesbians.
The DOB was one of the “homophile” organizations founded in
the 1950s that began the fight for “full citizenship for homosexuals.” The other homophile organizations were the Mattachine Society (founded in 1950) and ONE (founded in 1954). Created in the
midst of the repression of the McCarthy era, homophile organizations took a conservative approach to activism, asking, for example, that members “dress appropriately” for public demonstrations—men in suits and ties and women in skirts and dresses. The
emphasis of early homophile activism was on enlisting the support of medical experts and members of the clergy, appealing to
the idea that homosexuals were deserving of sympathy rather
than scorn.
Turn around and walk back (east) on Bleecker two blocks
to the intersection with Seventh Avenue South. Cross
Seventh Avenue and pick up Barrow Street on the other
side, and immediately on your right you’ll see Greenwich
House.
By the late 1800s, the streets of the Village south of West
Fourth Street and Washington Square Park had become
the city’s second most important Little Italy. Greenwich
House (27 Barrow Street), a settlement house founded by
Mary Simkovitch in 1904, is a reminder of that aspect of
the neighborhood’s past. The settlement house provided
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 87
➢
classes in English for members of the community, cooking
lessons for immigrant women dealing with unfamiliar
American ingredients, and activities for the neighborhood’s children when they weren’t in school. Further evidence of the former Italian presence is visible along
Bleecker and Cornelia Streets, where Italian businesses and
restaurants survive.
This immigrant neighborhood was one in which gay
men might seek companionship relatively openly. In Gay
New York, historian George Chauncey describes evidence
of the “relative acceptance” of homosexual relations in
New York City Italian and Jewish immigrant communities
in the early years of the twentieth century. This does not
mean that gay men were accepted for who they were but
that having sexual relations with another man was not seen
as absolutely out of the question for men who might otherwise think of themselves as “normal.” You could have certain kinds of homosexual sex and not have to think of yourself as “a homosexual.”
Evidence from the past shows that gay men might actually approach other men in the streets of New York. In
1915, the second edition of Havelock Ellis’s groundbreaking work on Sexual Inversion included the observation:
“The great prevalence of sexual inversion in American
cities is shown by the wide knowledge of its existence.
Ninety-nine normal men out of a hundred have been accosted on the streets by inverts, or have among their acquaintances men whom they know to be sexually inverted.
Public attitude toward them is generally a negative one—
indifference, amusement, contempt. The world of sexual
inverts is, indeed, a large one in any American city, and it is
a community distinctly organized with words, customs,
traditions of its own.”
As you walk through the streets to the east of Seventh
Avenue South, you will notice the tenement buildings that
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
88
line most streets. These, like the tenements of the Lower
East Side, were built to house a growing immigrant population in the late nineteenth century. Later these buildings
provided a base of cheap housing stock that made the
neighborhood accessible to the starving artists and writers
of “New Bohemia.”
Return to Bleecker Street and turn left, walking east six
short blocks (crossing Sixth Avenue) to Kenny’s Castaways at 157 Bleecker Street (just before Thompson
Street).
Bleecker Street was notorious in the mid– to late nineteenth
century, second only to the Bowery in its reputation as a
rough and racy part of town. Greene and Mercer Streets
were among the busiest red-light districts in the city. In the
early 1890s, in the building that now houses Kenny’s Castaways, an entrepreneur started a drag club called the Slide.
Drag clubs came into fashion in the late nineteenth century. The most famous was Columbia Hall (a.k.a. “Paresis
Hall,” after a kind of madness that comes from syphilis) at
392 Bowery. These were places where straight patrons
might come to gape, but they were also centers of gay male
social activity and relatively safe gathering places to meet
other men.
The Slide quickly became infamous. In 1892, the New
York Herald reported that the Slide was becoming a tourist
attraction for out-of-towners seeking a glimpse of the low
life in the city: “It is a fact that the Slide and the unspeakable nature of the orgies practiced there are a matter of
common talk among men who are bent on taking in the
town. Let a detective be opportuned by people from a distance to show them something outre in the way of fast life,
the first place he thinks of is the Slide, if he believes the outof-towner can stand it.”
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 89
➢
A vice cop described his visits to the Slide and the men
he encountered there: “Men of degenerate type were the
waiters, some of them going to the extent of rouging their
necks. In falsetto voices they sang filthy ditties, and when
not otherwise busy would drop into a chair at the table of
any visitor who would brook their awful presence.” The
Slide was closed by the police in 1892. (Down the block at
183 Bleecker Street, a sex club called the Black Rabbit, featuring gay-themed acts, managed to stay open until 1900,
when it, too, was raided by the police.)
Across the street from the Slide is an apartment building
now called the Atrium. Above the modern lettering one can
still see the shadow of its old name, “Mills House No. 1.”
HERE, MR. NICOLL, IS A
PLACE TO PROSECUTE.
Witness the Scenes in “the Slide”
as the Herald Describes Them
to You, and Straightway
Begin Your Work
of Reform.
MOST INFAMOUS OF ALL “DIVES.”
Depravity of a Depth Unknown in the
Lowest Slums of London or Paris
Can Here Be Found.
ORGIES BEYOND DESCRIPTION.
The Police Profess Ignorance of Its
Existence, but They Can Easily Secure the Evidence Necessary
for a Conviction.
The Slide was a drag club on Bleecker Street that was both
a center of gay male social activity and popular with
straight visitors who wanted to observe. These histrionic
New York Herald headlines helped inflame public sentiment against the Slide, which police closed in 1892. Illustration from the New York Herald, January 5, 1892.
The Mills Houses were male residence halls created by the
philanthropist Darius O. Mills. (The other Mills House was
on Rivington Street on the Lower East Side.) This one was
built in 1896. Mills intended to provide sanitary and moral
accommodation for unmarried working men. As historian
George Chauncey notes, these inexpensive rooms were
home to a number of working-class gay men, including a
few who ended up in court for homosexual activity.
from “uranian” to “queer”: evolving
names for homosexuality
The “love that dare not speak its name” has, in fact, had many—
in medical journals, in the records of vice cops and the courts, and
in the codes and slang used by gay men and lesbians themselves.
In the 1860s, a gay German writer and activist named Karl
Heinrich Ulrichs wrote a series of articles about his theory of “Uranians”—people who were physically male or female but had spirits
of the opposite sex. Ulrichs derived his new term from Plato’s
Symposium and wanted to create a respectable label for a nature
that he insisted was not sick or sinful. Ulrich rejected the terms
pervert and sodomite, which were commonly used by the public
and the police to refer to gay men. The first known use of the word
homosexual was in a letter to Ulrichs written by a friend in 1868.
In the late nineteenth century, as doctors and psychologists
began to study human sexuality, they discussed a condition similar to what Ulrichs described that they termed “sexual inversion”—
the condition of being a man trapped in a woman’s body or vice
versa. Those who suffered from the condition were known as “inverts.” Degenerate was a term eugenicists used for gay men and
lesbians. Like the mentally unfit or the physically disabled, gay
men and lesbians were considered less than human, and their degenerate state justified measures to segregate them from “normal” people.
The slang of the New York streets had a range of words for
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 91
gay men and lesbians. Fairy was the most common word for a
homosexual man in the early years of the twentieth century,
though gay men themselves would use it only to refer to more
effeminate men, using queer as the more universal term. Black
gay men and lesbians would refer to being “in the life” to identify themselves to one another. The word gay itself was originally used in the nineteenth century to refer to prostitutes (“gay
women”). The gay men who frequented the city’s rougher neighborhoods and often kept company with prostitutes adopted the
term as a code word among themselves. Police records make it
clear that the cops didn’t crack the code until the late 1940s,
when the great mobility of World War II had led to the nationwide
use of the word by gay men and lesbians.
Turn around and walk west two blocks on Bleecker to
MacDougal Street, then turn right on MacDougal and up
one block to Minetta Lane.
Until the time of the Civil War, the southeastern section of
Greenwich Village was home to one of New York City’s
largest African American communities, in an area known as
“Little Africa.” Many of the buildings along Minetta Lane
and Minetta Street survive from that period. Among Little
Africa’s many residents in the 1860s was a young black
woman from Connecticut named Addie Brown, who
worked as a domestic servant. One of her employers, a
prosperous African American man named John H. Jackson, had a house on Sullivan Street and ran a hotel on
Broadway. From her room in Jackson’s house, Brown
wrote letters to her dearest love, Rebecca Primus, a black
woman from Hartford with whom she had an intimate and
passionate “romantic friendship.”
Their correspondence is one of the most remarkable
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
92
➢
documents of romantic friendship between women that
survives from the nineteenth century. It is also one of the
few examples of black women’s writing that survives from
the mid-1800s. The record we have of their relationship is,
unfortunately, uneven: 120 of Brown’s letters to Primus
have survived, but none of Primus’s replies.
Brown’s letters reveal a close and passionate connection
between the two women. In 1859, Brown wrote to Primus:
“How did I miss you last night. I did not have anyone to
hug me up and to kiss. No kisses is like yours.” On another
occasion Brown wrote: “O Rebecca, it seem I can see you
now, casting those loving eyes at me. If you was a man,
what would things come to? They would after come to
something very quick.”
Primus’s family in Hartford were aware of the intensity
of the women’s bond. In 1866, Brown visited Primus’s
family and reported a remarkable statement that Primus’s
mother made to a gentleman caller to their home. After the
visitor made a disparaging remark about Brown and
Primus’s affection for each other, Mrs. Primus defended
them, saying, Brown reported, “that I thought as much of
you as if I was a gentleman. She also said if either one of us
was a gent we would marry. I was quite surprised at the remark.” Both Primus and Brown eventually married men,
though the letters reveal ambivalence and tension about
their decisions.
words into action? the evidence of
“romantic friendship”
What would you make of this excerpt from a letter written by a
man to another man in 1777: “I wish, my dear Laurens, it might be
in my power, by action rather than words, to convince you that I
love you.” What would you make of the fact that this letter was
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 93
written by Alexander Hamilton to a fellow soldier in the Continental Army?
Historians have long debated what to make of the numerous
examples of effusive, loving, and sometimes passionate correspondence between men and between women that survive from
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. We know that many men
and women had what historians have termed “romantic friendships” with people of the same sex. The eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries were tremendously homosocial—that is, people tended
to have their most important emotional relationships with others
of the same sex. What historians debate is the extent to which
these relationships might ever have been sexual.
The evidence of romantic friendship in the 1800s—with the notable exception of the Brown-Primus correspondence—tends to be
from the letters and diaries of wealthy white men and women.
Among those whose letters reveal such attachments are Ralph
Waldo Emerson, Margaret Fuller, and Susan B. Anthony.
After the Civil War, romantic friendship among men became increasingly suspect and faded from view. Paradoxically, however, at
about the same time, a new institution for women emerged from
the tradition of romantic friendships. Some women began to form
long-term partnerships with other women—arrangements that
came to be known as “Boston marriages”—and some even set up
households together. (The term Boston marriage derives from the
prevalence of such relationships among propertied white women
in Boston and from the novel The Bostonians, by Henry James,
which depicts such a relationship.)
Boston marriages were relatively acceptable in the late 1800s
and seem not to have provoked great scrutiny from the public, who
seem to have accepted that two older single women might choose
to live together without considering the sexual possibilities of
such a relationship. With the advent of new medical and psychological attention to “inversion” among women at the turn of the
century, however, these pairings fell under suspicion; people
began to look askance at these “unnatural” relationships.
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
94
Continue walking north on MacDougal Street, keeping
the Empire State Building in view, eventually stopping at
Washington Place but taking note of the sites described
below along the way.
MacDougal Street was the main drag of New Bohemia and
the Village’s first Christopher Street. This was the center of
lesbian and gay life and the place where the city’s first gay
and lesbian businesses outside of the seediest neighborhoods, were established in the 1910s and 1920s. By the
1930s, the west side of Washington Square Park was a
major cruising area known as the “meat rack” or the “auction block.”
Eve Addams’s Tea Room, located at 129 MacDougal
Street, was New York City’s first lesbian bar. “Eve Addams” was Eva Kochever, a Polish Jewish immigrant who
started her business here in 1925. Outside the door hung a
sign that read “Men admitted but not welcome.” In 1926
police raided the bar. Kochever was charged with writing
an obscene book and with disorderly conduct. After serving a one-year sentence in a New York prison, she was deported to Paris in December 1927.
Beginning at the turn of the century, the Village’s immigrant neighborhood to the south of Washington Square
Park saw an influx of artists and writers who formed the
core of New Bohemia. This community was tolerant of
homosexuality in its ranks and even witnessed periods of
what might be termed “lesbian chic,” when women’s explorations of lesbianism and bisexuality were in vogue. In
a famous tale from the 1920s, poet Edna St. Vincent Millay conveys the spirit of the times in her exchange with an
analyst. Seeking relief from persistent headaches, Millay
asked an analyst’s advice at a party. The analyst, not wanting to shock this lovely woman, said: “I wonder if it has
ever occurred to you that you might perhaps, though you
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 95
➢
are hardly conscious of it, have an occasional impulse towards a person of your own sex?” Millay responded:
“Oh, you mean I’m a homosexual! Of course I am, and
heterosexual too, but what’s that got to do with my
headache?”
At 146 MacDougal was the Calypso Restaurant, where
James Baldwin worked as a waiter in the early 1940s. The
gay African American writer became friends with many
locals who would come to see him at the restaurant, including Henry Miller, Paul Robeson, Marlon Brando,
and Eartha Kitt. Baldwin met Brando when the two were
students at the New School. Brando, who lived on nearby
Patchin Place at the time, never tried to hide his own homosexual impulses. In 1956, Baldwin would publish Giovanni’s Room, his second novel and one of the first to deal
openly and centrally with homosexuality.
The Greek revival townhouses along Washington Square North between University Place and Fifth Avenue, completed in 1833, are known as “The Row.”
Most now house New York University offices. Photo courtesy of the New-York
Historical Society.
Turn left on Washington Place (not Washington Square
South), which intersects Washington Square Park from
the west, and walk about a half-block to No. 82.
From about 1908 to 1913, 82 Washington Place was home
to novelist Willa Cather and her partner Edith Lewis.
Cather, author of such works as My Antonia and Death
Comes for the Archbishop, had two central relationships
with other women and referred to herself as “William”
in letters that she wrote to a woman whom she admired
while an undergraduate at the University of Nebraska.
Cather and Lewis lived together at various addresses in
Greenwich Village for nearly forty years, until Cather’s
death in 1947.
Cather lived at a time when women’s relationships with
each other were increasingly suspect, and she herself was
clearly ambivalent about her life and loves. She took great
care to destroy most of her personal correspondence before her death. In one surviving letter that she wrote in college, Cather laments her “unnatural” attraction to another
woman.
Cather’s correspondence with her mentor, author Sarah
Orne Jewett, provides an illustration of the shifting situation for women who lived with other women at the turn of
the century. Jewett was in a Boston marriage with Annie
Fields from the 1880s through the early twentieth century.
Jewett was not as ambivalent as Cather about the life she
and Fields made together. The difference in the women’s
lives is also visible in their writing.
While Jewett’s stories often center on two women,
Cather’s do not. In fact, some literary critics identify male
leads in Cather’s stories as stand-ins for Cather herself.
In critiquing Cather’s work, Jewett often remarked on
Cather’s choice to write about heterosexual pairs instead
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 97
➢
of focusing on relationships between women. In 1908, for
example, Jewett wrote the following to Cather about
Cather’s story “The Gull’s Road:”
The lover is as well done as he could be when a woman writes in
the man’s character—it must always, I believe, be something of a
masquerade, and you could almost have done it as yourself, a
woman would love her in the same protecting way, a woman
would even care enough to wish to take her away from such a life
by some means or another.
Writer Willa Cather (1873–1947) lived in Greenwich Village for most of the last
forty years of her life with her partner Edith Lewis. Although a lesbian, Cather
didn’t write openly about women’s relationships with each other in her brilliant
fiction, instead choosing to use heterosexual couples as stand-ins. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.
Uncomfortable with her own attraction to other women,
Cather did not feel free to write so openly about women’s
relationships with each other.
Return to MacDougal Street (Washington Square West)
and walk northeast through Washington Square Park, exiting at the Arch at Fifth Avenue.
As you walk through the park, you’re passing over the remains of probably thousands of bodies interred here in its
years as a potter’s field in the eighteenth century. The park
and the neighborhood have gone through many changes
since then. A yellow fever epidemic in 1822 forced many to
flee downtown New York City for the “village.” Many
stayed and the area developed, growing further as population expanded northward. In the 1830s, luxury townhouses
appeared on the northern edge of the park and some still
remain. Tenements to the south came in the latter part of
the nineteenth century. The Arch itself was designed by
Stanford White (see our Four Squares Tour in chapter 4) in
1892 to replace a papier-mâché antecedent erected in 1889
to celebrate the centennial of George Washington’s return
to the city after the Revolutionary War.
Continue north on Fifth Avenue to No. 23.
In her apartment at 23 Fifth Avenue, Mabel Dodge ran a
weekly salon that became a center for Village artists and
intellectuals. Openly bisexual herself, Dodge opened her
doors to many unconventional women, including Emma
Goldman, Margaret Sanger, and Gertrude Stein. (Stein’s
work A Portrait of Mabel Dodge was named in the hostess’s
honor.) Dodge was also one of the people who made possible the Armory Art Show, which opened in February 1913,
bringing Marcel Duchamp’s Nude Descending a Staircase
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 99
➢
➢
and works by Picasso, Cézanne, and others to the protesting masses.
Continue north on Fifth Avenue to Eleventh Street. Walk
east to University Place and then north to 86 University
Place, the former site of the Bagatelle.
The Bagatelle was one of the few lesbian bars in the city in
the 1950s. The other popular ones were the Sea Colony (a
more working-class bar on Eighth Avenue) and the Swing
Rendezvous (on MacDougal Street). Audre Lorde, black
poet and essayist, wrote about spending time at the Bagatelle in her autobiography Zami: A New Spelling of My
Name. There was a tiny dance floor in the back, and the
front room “smelled like plastic and blue glass and beer and
lots of good-looking young women.” Lorde describes that
she and the other “out” black lesbians in the bars rarely acknowledged one another, and most of the women with
whom she spent time, and with whom she slept, in her early
years were white. While there were other places for
women to go at the time, she said that “the Bag was always
The Club.”
If you would like to take an interesting detour that will
add fifteen to twenty minutes to your tour, walk east several blocks on Eleventh Street to No. 125, the site of Webster Hall. (If not, backtrack on Eleventh Street to Sixth
Avenue; cross over and go left a few doors to 457 Sixth
Avenue.)
Detour: From 1913 through the 1930s, Webster Hall was the
site of the annual Greenwich Village Ball. (Today Webster
Hall is a popular and mostly straight nightclub.) The masquerade balls were sponsored by various organizations and
patronized by the Village’s bohemian society, including
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
100
➢
➢
many gay men in drag. By the early 1920s, gay men and lesbians were holding events of their own at Webster Hall.
In 1934, the New York Herald Tribune described the mixing, role-playing, and inversion that characterized the
Greenwich Village Ball:
Blonds equipped themselves with dark hair. Caucasians came disguised as orientals. Mongoloid individuals blackened their faces
and appeared as Ethiopians, Negroes powdered their skins and
dressed as Scandinavian villagers. College boys masqueraded as
hoboes. Waitresses and soda clerks wore full evening dress. Men
danced with women in men’s clothes. Women danced with men in
women’s clothes. And strange androgynous couples careened
about the floor, oblivious to the workings of society and nature.
By the 1920s, drag balls were an established part of gay
male culture in New York, particularly that of the black
gay community of Harlem. The most famous and well attended of such events was the Hamilton Lodge Ball in
Harlem, which began as the Masquerade and Civic Ball organized by the Grand United Order of Odd Fellows. By
the early 1920s the ball was increasingly noted for the presence of “fairies.” By the late 1920s it was known as the
“Faggots Ball.” Attendance at the ball ranged from four
thousand to eight thousand (both spectators and participants) between 1927 and 1937.
The drag balls gave rise to the use of one of contemporary gay life’s most familiar terms: coming out. Today,
coming out is generally thought of as “coming out of the
closet,” emerging from terrified secrecy. Earlier origins of
the phrase in the ball scene, however, were much less dark
and sad. Participants in the balls used the term coming out
with a wink and a nod to straight debutantes. As the Baltimore Afro-American put it in 1931: “1931 Debutantes Bow at
Local ‘Pansy’ Ball: The coming out of new debutantes into
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 101
homosexual society was the outstanding feature of Baltimore’s eighth annual frolic of the pansies when the Art
Club was host to the neuter gender at the Elks’ Hall Friday
night.” (This is the end of the detour.)
The house at 457 Sixth Avenue was the former home of
Murray Hall, a “ward heeler” for Tammany Hall, the machine behind Democratic politics in New York City from
the early 1800s through the 1950s. Hall was responsible for
“organizing the vote” in this district. Hall was married
twice and was known for being a heavy drinker and a
brawler and for being “sweet on women.” In 1901, Hall
died, leaving a wife and an adopted daughter, and it was revealed that Hall had died of breast cancer. Hall was a
woman who had passed as a man for all of her adult life.
The New York Times gave the revelation extensive coverage over a number of days, as Hall’s friends and associates reacted to the news. A lawyer friend quoted in the
Times recalled: “I’ve known him for a number of years. He
could drink his weight in beer and stand up under it. I saw
him play poker with a party of the Jefferson Market clique
one night, and he played the game like a veteran. And for
nerve, well, I just can’t believe he was a woman, that’s all.”
(So much so that he still referred to Hall as “he.”) Senator
Bernard F. Martin (D–NY) also averred: “I wouldn’t believe it if Dr. Gallagher, whom I know to be a man of undoubted veracity, hadn’t said so.”
Passing women were not uncommon in the nineteenth
century. Local papers across the country carried items
about men revealed to be women, usually after an arrest or
at their death. Historians debate why women made the
choice to pass as men. Some might have understood themselves to be men born in female bodies (or “transgendered,” in contemporary terms). Some might have been
women who wanted the greater freedom and autonomy
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
102
that men enjoyed, some the work opportunities and higher
wages available to men. Some might also have been women
who wanted to make lives with other women. Many passing women were, indeed, married. While a wealthier
woman had the possibility in the late nineteenth century of
forming an independent household with another woman in
a Boston marriage, working women did not have the financial independence that made such an arrangement possible.
Go north on Sixth Avenue one block to Twelfth Street,
then west on Twelfth Street toward Seventh Avenue
South.
From the 1920s through the 1950s, the building at 171 West
Twelfth Street was home to a number of lesbian couples, an
extended network of friends and comrades-in-arms that
included artist Nancy Cook and educator Marion Dickerman; activist Polly Porter and Democratic Party official
Molly Dewson; and Grace Hutchins and her partner Anna
Rochester, both leaders in the Communist Party. Many of
these women, particularly Dickerman and Cook, were
good friends with Eleanor Roosevelt, who had apartments
of her own at 20 East Eleventh Street from 1933 to 1942 and
at 29 Washington Square West from 1942 to 1949. Since her
young adulthood, Roosevelt had been part of a circle of
women reformers, many of them in long-term relationships with other women.
When Franklin D. Roosevelt became president, Eleanor
became a fierce champion for women in government, and
many of her friends got government positions during the
New Deal. Molly Dewson served as director of the
Women’s Division of the Democratic National Committee
and as a member of the Social Security Board. Among
President Roosevelt’s other appointees were Frances
Perkins, the secretary of labor from 1933 to 1945 and the
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 103
➢
first woman cabinet member, and Grace Abbot, who was
chief of the Children’s Bureau. From within the government, these women could press for action on the issues they
had pursued for years, such as wages and hours’ legislation,
workers’ compensation requirements, and child labor laws.
Roosevelt herself had an intimate relationship with another woman. In 1932, an Associated Press reporter named
Lorena Hickok was assigned to file stories on the new first
lady. They quickly became fast friends. Hickok would
eventually come to live in the White House. The nature of
the Hickok-Roosevelt relationship has been hotly contested by biographers and historians, but their letters reveal
a passionate intimacy—in 1933, for example, Hickok wrote
to Roosevelt:
I’ve been trying today to bring back your face, to remember
just how you look, most clearly I remember your eyes, with a
kind of teasing smile in them, and the feeling of that soft spot
just North-east of the corner of your mouth against my lips.
Good night, dear one, I want to put my arms around you and
kiss you at the corner of your mouth. And in a little more than a
week now, I shall.
Despite such effusive letters, many biographers strenuously insist that Roosevelt herself was not a lesbian.
Upon reaching Seventh Avenue South, cross the avenue
and walk north to Thirteenth Street. Turn left (west) on
West Thirteenth Street to No. 208.
Since 1984, 208 West Thirteenth Street has been the home
base for New York’s gay and lesbian community. On any
given day, the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center, which is open to the public, will host dozens of meetings and events. With offices and meeting rooms for nu-
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
104
➢
merous lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgendered (LGBT) organizations, its halls have witnessed many key moments in
lesbian and gay history.
On March 14, 1987, for example, novelist and activist
Larry Kramer rose at a center event—he had been scheduled to read from one of his novels—and delivered an impassioned plea for action on AIDS. Within a week the
AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power, or ACT UP, was
founded and rejuvenated lesbian and gay activism in the
Reagan era. ACT UP’s defiant brand of in-your-face activism led to action on AIDS by pharmaceutical companies
and local, state, and national governments. While the organization has declined somewhat from its heyday in the
late 1980s and early 1990s, ACT UP meetings continue at
the center to this day.
Return to Seventh Avenue South, cross the avenue, and
walk down four blocks to Waverly Place. Turn left on Waverly Place and walk two blocks to Julius’ in the nondescript stucco building at the corner of West Tenth Street.
Julius’, at 159 West Tenth Street, dates back to before Prohibition and is one of the oldest bars still open in the Village. A lively if somewhat down-at-the-heels neighborhood gathering place to this day, it was the site of an important early gay rights victory in New York State.
In 1966, the Mattachine Society of New York staged
what it called a “sip-in” in the bars of the Village, consciously linking their action to the tactics of the civil rights
movement. At the time, if a bartender knowingly sold alcohol to a homosexual, the New York State Liquor Licensing Authority (SLA) could rescind the establishment’s
liquor license. Bars around the Village had signs in the windows that read “If you’re gay, go away.” However, many
bars that catered to lesbians and gay men were run by the
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 105
➢
Mafia, which could afford to pay off the police and stay
open despite serving homosexual patrons.
For the “sip-in,” members of the Mattachine Society
went from bar to bar, sat down, announced that they were
homosexual, and ordered drinks. In most places, they were
served. However, when they got to Julius’, they were refused. Working with the City Human Rights Commission,
the Mattachine Society brought suit, and in 1967 the New
York State Supreme Court ruled that the liquor authority
needed substantial evidence of indecent behavior (not just
same-sex kissing or touching) to close a bar. Wearing
clothes inappropriate to one’s sex counted as such substantial evidence, a fact that would be important just two years
down the road and just two blocks away.
Continue along Waverly Place (Stonewall Place) one
block to Christopher, then turn right on Christopher and
walk to 51–53 Christopher Street, the Stonewall Inn.
This stretch of Christopher Street is widely considered
the birthplace of the modern lesbian and gay rights
movement. In 1999 the blocks around the site of the former Stonewall Inn were designated a National Historic
Landmark: the Stonewall National Historic District, the
first recognition of lesbian and gay history by the federal
government.
The bar that once stood here at No. 53, the Stonewall
Inn, was an unprepossessing place, crowded and popular
on weekends but nothing fancy. (The bar that now stands
here, called Stonewall, is not the original.) Like most other
bars in the city that served a gay clientele, the Stonewall
Inn was owned by the Mob, which paid off the local police
in order to stay in business. Police raids and shakedowns
for such establishments were the norm, and many bars had
a light over the front door that would go on when the po-
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
106
➢
lice were coming in order to alert patrons to approaching
danger.
In the early morning hours of June 28, 1969, the patrons
of the Stonewall Inn fought back against such routine police harassment, refusing to disperse quietly when the cops
singled out several drag queens for arrest and sent the rest
of the crowd into the streets. When one butch lesbian
struck the cop who had hit her, the crowd unleashed a hail
of coins and a flood of invective. The police were forced
back into the bar, and the crowd attacked the building, trying to set fire to the bar and leading the cops to draw their
guns. When riot police arrived they averted a possible
shooting, but the invigorated crowd still refused to back
down. The actions of that night sparked several nights of
unrest and launched a new phase of gay and lesbian activism, “gay liberation.”
On the first anniversary of the Stonewall riots, New
York City witnessed its first Gay Pride march, up Sixth
Avenue from Christopher Street to Central Park. Every
year since, lesbians and gay men in New York City and
around the world have remembered the Stonewall riots
with parades and marches in the month of June. The
riots quickly became the stuff of legend. One activist
once remarked, “I am probably one of six people who
lived in the Village at the time who does not claim to have
been at the Stonewall riots.”
The riots at the Stonewall Inn in 1969 sparked the Gay
Liberation movement, a vibrant and in-your-face effort to
eliminate antigay prejudice in American law and society.
This effort was spearheaded by two organizations: the Gay
Liberation Front (GLF), launched immediately after the
riots, and the Gay Activists Alliance (GAA), which split off
from the GLF after infighting over the scope of the work
gay and lesbian activists should take on. Both the GAA and
the GLF had their headquarters in Greenwich Village: the
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 107
first GLF meetings were held in the space of an organization called Alternate U, at 534 Sixth Avenue at Fourteenth
Street; and from 1971 to 1974, the GAA had its headquarters in a renovated firehouse at 99 Wooster Street.
The GLF and GAA were building on work done by the
homophiles, but they had a new style and a new politics.
The Gay Liberation Front saw itself as part of the larger
New Left movement of the late 1960s and sought to incorporate gay liberation into the agenda of the radical politics
of other organizations. The GLF’s commitment to coalition politics led to friction within the group, as some members argued for an effort more centered on gay rights than
on revolution.
In December 1969, a group of GLF members broke off
to form the Gay Activists Alliance. The group sought to
avoid the pitfalls of movement politics and the sometimes
chaotic style of GLF organizing. The GAA had clear
membership requirements and a constitution that prohibited endorsement of or alliance with “any organization not
directly related to the homosexual cause.”
Together, the GLF and the GAA transformed gay activism, responding to homophobia with “zap” actions directed at the offenders (a tactic that would reemerge in the
1980s with ACT UP) and creating a new level of visibility
for the gay cause. The GAA Firehouse became a center of
gay life and activism until it was firebombed in October
1974. That fall saw a rash of arson attacks on gay bars,
homes, and offices, a reaction to the growing visibility and
militance of gay liberation activism.
From a nation in which, as we have seen, gays were
choked to death or drowned, we have become one in which
being publicly gay is celebrated—in some places. Greenwich Village remains a center of established gay and lesbian life, which overlaps—as does gay and lesbian history—with the other lives and other events of these streets.
GREENWICH VILLAGE | A Gay and Lesbian History
108
A Gay and Lesbian History | GREENWICH VILLAGE 109
