THE LOWER
EAST SIDE
Immigrant New York
Start: B/D/Q station at Grand Street at Sara Delano Roosevelt Park.
the lower eastsideis probably the single
most significant multiethnic neighborhood in America. For
the past two hundred years it has been the first area of settlement for numerous migrant and immigrant communities, and it continues to be so today. This walking tour is an
introduction to the many layers of ethnicity in the Lower
East Side.
What is the Lower East Side anyway? The geographic
boundaries of the neighborhood have varied over the
years, and New Yorkers continue to argue about where it
begins and where it ends. The contemporary neighborhood is bordered to the north by Houston Street, to the
west by Lafayette, and to the south and east by the East
River. But the Lower East Side should also be thought of as
a living multiethnic neighborhood—one not necessarily
constrained by geographic boundaries.
Early eighteenth-century maps show the area as the
location of the country estates of established Dutch and
39
2
➢

English settlers of New York. Early property owners included the Stuyvesant, Delancey, Rutgers, DePeyster, and
Roosevelt families. After the American Revolution, the estates and farms began to make way for smaller semirural
and then almost suburban settlements.
By the mid–nineteenth century, the Lower East Side had
accelerated process of urbanization and began to see its
first significant influx of immigrants. By the 1840s the
largest numbers of ethnic residents were Irish, Germans,
and free blacks. A half century later these groups had
largely moved northward and were replaced by southern
and eastern Europeans from Italy, Russia, Poland, and elsewhere. Most of today’s immigrant residents are Latino and
Asian immigrants.
According to U.S. Census records, in 1930 the section of
the Lower East Side bordered by Delancey, East Broadway,
Bowery, and the East River was home to almost eightythousand residents. Over half of them were foreign born,
mostly immigrants from Poland, Russia, Austria-Hungary,
and Italy. In 1990, despite increased immigration to New
York in recent decades, the population of the Lower East
Side was only forty-seven thousand, of which about a third
were foreign born, mostly from China, Hong Kong, and
the Dominican Republic. It is important to note that there
is a substantial Puerto Rican population on the Lower East
Side, but they are not counted as immigrants by the Census
Bureau because Puerto Rico is an American commonwealth and its residents are American citizens.
The pattern of arrival, settlement, and migration to the
second area of settlement is a complicated process. Some
families live in the neighborhood for only a brief time
while others call the Lower East Side home for generations.
Countless individual decisions drive families and groups to
move into or out of a neighborhood: wanting a bigger
apartment; marriage; work; not wanting to live with newer
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
40

immigrants. And some folks remain in a neighborhood regardless of changes around them.
Further complicating our understanding of the place
called the Lower East Side are the labels immigrants are assigned on arrival in America. As we will see on this walking tour, the various neighborhoods may bear such names
as Little Italy and the Jewish East Side, but in reality there
were (and are) multiple Italian communities within Little
Italy, and a vast array of Jewish immigrants settled in the
Jewish East Side. In the end, there is no single Lower East
Side. This is a deeply textured neighborhood with a
tremendous and complex array of immigrant groups.
Beginning our tour at Sara Delano Roosevelt Park illustrates the tremendous changes in the Lower East Side over
the past century. Seven blocks of tenement houses were destroyed from 1932 to 1936 to create this “green” space.
Construction was part of a Depression-era plan to employ
thousands of laborers using federal relief funds. The city
proclaimed “eminent domain” over the existing tenements,
removed the tenants, and tore the buildings down. Like
most public spaces in New York, the park is named for a
significant New Yorker—Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s
mother. Sara was raised in a manor house, now long gone,
on Chrystie Street.
In 1900 the Lower East Side was the most densely populated spot on earth. It had 850 residents per block and
nearly 1,000 per acre. In fact, a single square block adjacent
to the park—bordered by Canal, Hester, Eldridge, and
Forsythe Streets—housed 2,628 people in 1890. This block
currently houses no residents. The contemporary buildings
on the block are a school and a few manufacturers. Other
blocks in the neighborhood were destroyed to build the approaches to the Manhattan and Williamsburg Bridges in
1903 and 1909, forcing tens of thousands of people out of
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 41

their homes. Many people stayed in the neighborhood, but
more began to move uptown and to outer boroughs in the
years leading up to World War II.
Walk west on Grand Street past Chrystie Street toward
the Bowery.
We begin our walk in the area some call the New Chinatown. Thousands of immigrants from mainland China
have moved to these blocks in the past ten or fifteen years.
Walking along Grand Street between Chrystie Street and
the Bowery, note the incredible array of fish and produce
stores that line the street. This block in particular has become one of the best food shopping blocks in Chinatown.
But note, it is shopping for residents—not for tourists. Pay
close attention to how the Lower East Side functions as a
commercial district on some blocks while it simultaneously
attempts to cater to tourists with cafés, restaurants, and
souvenir shops on others.
the bowery
In 1637 the Bowery was created by New Amsterdam governor
Willem Keift to connect the distant Dutch farms of what we now
call the East Village with the city, which was south of Wall Street.
Some historians claim that Bowery derives its name from bowerij,
the Dutch word for farm, but others state it is from de bowerie, the
road to the farms. Either way, it connected the city to the countryside. By 1776, the Bowery connected New York City with
Boston, Massachusetts.
During the mid–nineteenth century, this bucolic roadway became increasingly commercial and simultaneously gained a reputation for being New York’s Skid Row, a place of saloons, sailors,
homeless men, and a wide array of activities condemned as unsavory by the middle class. In 1884, more than a quarter of all the po-
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
42
➢

lice arrests in Manhattan took place here. In that same year there
were eighty-two saloons on the Bowery, an average of more than
six per block.
In the early twentieth century, the Bowery was a geographical divider between Little Italy (to the west) and the Jewish
Lower East Side (to the east). Not only was this a major commercial street, but between 1878 and 1955 an elevated train ran the
length of the Bowery. Prior to electrification, the soot and burning embers falling from the engines made crossing under the
tracks dangerous and unpleasant. Furthermore, the El tracks
shrouded the Bowery in darkness, adding to the seedy and dingy
atmosphere.
Beginning in the early 1970s, commercial development by Chinese immigrants began moving up the Bowery from Chatham
Square, and by the late 1980s, gentrification began to spread
south from Cooper Square. Despite these changes, in 1999 there
were still eight flophouses and three charitable missions on the
Bowery.
The Hotel Providence stands on the southeast corner of
Bowery and Grand Street, at 125 Bowery. This is one of the
eight surviving Bowery “flophouses.” These private hotels
emerged on the Bowery in the early 1870s. The largest was
the Mills Hotel on Bowery and Rivington Street, which had
five hundred rooms and slept over one thousand men.
Today, for $8 to $15 per night, a male resident can get
a four-by-eight-foot cubicle with a cot and a hanging
light. There are shared toilets and baths on each floor. By
looking through the windows, you can see how the second floor of the Hotel Providence is a common space
with tables and chairs; the rooms are on the upper floors.
The rooms are nicknamed “cages” because the walls do
not go to the ceiling. Just above the door jamb, the wall
and ceiling are replaced with a wire screen. Theoretically
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 43

this is for ventilation, but it also creates a cagelike space,
open at the top, with limited privacy.
Across the Bowery from the Hotel Providence stood
Steve Brodie’s Saloon, at 114 Bowery. Steve Brodie, a national champion racewalker, jumped from the Brooklyn
Bridge in July 1886. He collected a $200 bet for surviving
his leap and used the money to open his saloon here. On
the wall behind the bar he painted a large image of himself falling between the bridge and the water. While a
regular saloon, Brodie’s also quickly became a prime
tourist spot. For a “small consideration” Brodie would
retell his story to visitors. Should anyone not believe his
tale, he would point to the signed affidavit from the
nearly dozen witnesses who saw his leap. A cloud of suspicion does remain—those who signed were members of
Brodie’s gang. For years after Brodie’s death, an old man
would pretend to be Brodie and recount the tale, much to
the delight of the tourists.
On the northwest corner of Bowery and Grand Street,
at 230 Grand, is the old Bowery Bank building. Built in
Steve Brodie’s Saloon at 114 Bowery around 1890. Brodie won a $200 bet for
jumping from the Brooklyn Bridge in 1886 and used the money to open his saloon, which included a mural of his leap painted behind the bar. Photo courtesy
of the New-York Historical Society.

1890, this was one of the many smaller banks that filled the
city before banking consolidation and the financial crashes
of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Wrapped around the Bowery Bank is the Bowery Savings
Bank (1894–95, designed by Stanford White). The street
address of the L-shaped Savings Bank is 130 Bowery and is
one of the few landmarked buildings on the Lower East
Side. As we go to press, this magnificent building is no
longer open to the public, as the bank’s offices have moved
to 116 Bowery.
The Bowery Savings Bank was created in 1834 by three
prominent New York businessmen: Hamilton Fish, Peter
C. Stuyvesant, and Anson Phelps. The original 1834 safe
box is displayed as part of a small historical exhibit in the
restored main banking room. While the Bowery is popularly known as “Skid Row,” it has been a significant commercial district for more than a century.
Continue walking west on Grand Street, three blocks toward Mulberry Street.
Di Palo’s Fine Foods on the northeast corner of Mott and
Grand is one of the few remaining Italian stores (except for
those along the two-block stretch of Mulberry Street north
of Canal) in the midst of New Chinatown. DiPalo’s was
opened by Savino Di Palo, the great-grandfather of the
current owner, in 1910. In 1925 it moved to its present corner, where it has remained ever since. The Di Palo family
comes from the Puglia province in Italy.
Puglia is a rural area known for its dairy farmers and
cheese-makers. Savino brought his trade to America and
the family shop still makes its own mozzarella and other
cheeses. The small shop has a selection of goods that rivals
any of its more famous uptown competitors, such as Balducci’s in Greenwich Village and Zabar’s on the Upper
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 45
➢

West Side, and at far better prices. The current owner,
Louis Di Palo, has kept the shop as it was when it opened.
The low marble counters are reminiscent of the Italian
kitchen table and are designed for conversation as well as
commerce, and the entire front of the store is maintained at
cheese-curing temperature.
Diagonally across Mott Street, at 203 Grand Street, on
June 22, 1905, Dr. Vincent Sellaro founded the Order of
the Sons of Italy in America. Sellaro sought to create an
organization that fulfilled a dual mission: first, to encourage Italian immigrants to work together despite their
provincial or local origins; second, to maintain the Italian
languages and customs in America. The Sons of Italy has
grown into a national umbrella organization, bringing
together more than 750 different Italian social clubs, family societies, and fraternal orders. It is similar to other
ethnic umbrella groups such as the Chinese Consolidated
Benevolent Association and the Irish Ancient Order of
Hibernians.
italians in new york
Between 1880 and 1920, nearly 4.1 million Italian immigrants
came to the United States. No other ethnic group in American
history has sent so many in such a short period of time. While
Manhattan had fewer than twenty thousand Italian residents in
1880, by 1930 more than 1 million New Yorkers were of Italian
descent. Today, more than 80 percent of the residents of what
used to be Little Italy are Asian. The Italians, like the Irish, German, and other immigrants before them, have migrated from the
neighborhood.
Italians left their homes in Italy for at least five reasons, all of
which are linked to great poverty—especially among southern Italians, who formed the bulk of immigrants to New York. Although
Italians chose to leave Italy, “push” factors influenced millions of
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
46

landless farmers—contadini—to leave. First, extreme poverty in
southern Italy made it a place to escape from. Second, heavy local
and national taxation further impoverished Italians. Third, a sudden population surge in the latter half of the nineteenth century
made jobs and land even scarcer than they had been. Fourth, the
growing industrial disparity between northern and southern Italy
and the subsequent rise in the Italian cash economy replaced the
traditional barter system. Finally, recurring agricultural and economic crises increased the misery.
Although Italians came to America for economic opportunities
not available at home, they also had the highest rate of return to
their homeland of any immigrant group. Over a third of Italians
who emigrated to America returned to the old country at one point
in their lives, some to visit and but many to stay. Italian immigrants
in the New World—whether they stayed or not–annually sent millions of dollars back to their families.
Immigration was such a prominent part of Italian life that once,
when the Italian prime minister visited southern Italy, the mayor
of Moliterno greeted him “on behalf of the eight thousand people
of this community, three thousand of whom are in America, and
the other five thousand preparing to follow them.”
Banca Stabile (189 Grand Street at the southwest corner of
Grand and Mulberry Streets) is an 1865 Neapolitan family
bank that served the varied needs of the Italian immigrants.
The tin ceilings, terrazzo floors, large vault, and brass
tellers’ cages have all been preserved. Beyond its role as a
bank, Stabile also provided currency exchange, translation
services, and steamship-ticket sales. Look inside at the
cashiers’ cages, which are still labeled “tickets,” “money
exchange,” and “foreign transfers.”
Walk south on Mulberry Street four blocks toward Mosco
Street.
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 47
➢

As you walk along the first two blocks of Mulberry Street
between Canal and Grand, you are walking on most of
what remains of Little Italy. And today’s version is a conscious effort by the local businesses to preserve an “Italian”
flavor to the space. Why? Money. The neighborhood supposedly attracts as many tourists as Greenwich Village or
Rockefeller Center.
All that remains of commercial Little Italy can be
found here. The Italians who once made this stretch little
Naples have moved out. Most of the residents are Asian,
although the shops and restaurants are often still owned
by Italians.
Despite the “touristification” of Little Italy, there is still
tremendous history on these blocks. The oldest building in
this area now houses Paolucci’s Restaurant at 149 Mulberry, between Grand and Hester Streets. Originally built
as the Van Rensselaer residence in 1816, it is a perfect example of an early nineteenth-century merchant house. The
first floor was for the family’s carpet and dry-goods shop
and the basement was for storage. The family lived on the
upper floors, with servants or slaves residing in the attic
Looking north on Mulberry Street toward Mulberry Bend from just north of
Mosco Street, around 1890. All the buildings on the left side of the street were
torn down a few years later to build Mulberry Bend Park (now Columbus Park).
Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

with the dormer windows. In the 1880s it became the Italian Free Library, with a collection of Italian-language
books for neighborhood residents.
The Franciscan Fathers who care for the Shrine of San
Gennaro (Saint Januarius) have a rectory at 109 Mulberry
Street, just north of Canal Street. Look at the plaque on the
gate into the rectory courtyard: it commemorates the death
of Private First Class Frank Vallone, United States Marine
Corps, who died fighting in Vietnam in 1968. Today the
Church of the Most Precious Blood is home to the Co Bac
Si Thuong Truc, or the Refugee Social Services, and the
Vaco Youth Center, serving the community of Vietnamese
Catholic immigrants. In Private Vallone and the Co Bac Si
Thuong Truc are writ the rapid changes that take place in
the Lower East Side.
Directly behind the rectory, at 113 Baxter Street, is the
entrance to the Church of the Most Precious Blood. The
church was built in 1901, one of the peak years of immigration to the Lower East Side. From the late nineteenth
century to the mid–twentieth, Mulberry Street was the
home of Italian immigrants from Naples. The religious
center for many in this community was here at the Shrine
of San Gennaro.
San Gennaro, the patron saint of Naples, was martyred
by the Romans at Pozzuoli in a.d. 305. After his beheading,
the legend goes, his blood was gathered by an old couple
and preserved in a vial. This blood liquifies twice a year—
the miracle of San Gennaro—on the first Sunday in May
and on September 19.
Two thousand years later, in 1917, four Neapolitan
businessmen on Mulberry Street decided to celebrate
Gennaro’s martyrdom, and a great New York tradition
was born. Every year for ten days in mid-September,
Mulberry Street from its southern end at Canal Street all
the way up to Houston Street is closed for the Feast of
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 49

San Gennaro. Although most of the “feast” today consists of endless sausage and zeppole stands, a bust of San
Gennaro is paraded through the streets by the faithful
during the feast. In between parades, the saint’s bust sits
in the window of the Mulberry Street Cigar Company at
140 Mulberry.
Continue walking south on Mulberry Street across Canal
Street.
Canal Street was the great divide between Little Italy and
Chinatown for many New Yorkers for much of the twentieth century. This ethnic border no longer exists, as you’ve
seen walking along Grand and Mulberry.
Canal Street was dug as a canal, beginning in 1805, to
drain the Collect Pond to the south (an upcoming site). It
was filled in and paved over to make way for the progression of urban development. Because Canal Street is a direct
connection between Brooklyn (via the Manhattan Bridge)
and New Jersey (via the Holland Tunnel), it is incessantly
clogged with traffic.
As you cross Canal Street, notice the immediate change.
Mulberry Street above Canal is an Italian tourist district
with restaurants, outdoor cafés, and gift shops. Mulberry
below Canal is a residential and commercial Chinese
neighborhood. The tables outside the Italian restaurants
have been replaced by streetside vendors, fish markets, and
houseware shops.
One block south of Canal, on the northeast corner of
Bayard and Mulberry, is a red-brick building that used to be
New York City Public School 23. Tens of thousands of
immigrant children went to this elementary school from
1893 to 1976. The school was closed when a new one
opened on Division Street (a later stop). Rather than tear
down the building, it was converted into a community cen-
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
50
➢

ter for the contemporary Chinese neighborhood. Inside,
the Museum of the Chinese in the Americas holds exhibits
tracing the history of Chinese immigration to America and
the process of Americanization.
Diagonally across the street and stretching southward is
Columbus Park. Built between 1892 and 1894, this park
was the first open space designed and built for the neighborhood. The person most responsible for its creation was
Jacob Riis, the Danish American photographer and writer
who chronicled the lives of poor New Yorkers in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
To create this park, the city destroyed an entire block of
tenement houses, displacing their residents by right of eminent domain; that is, the city took the property from its
owners for the public good—or so the city would argue.
The residents would argue differently, of course. The park
was first called Mulberry Bend Park, but Italian residents
rechristened it Columbus Park in 1911. The structure at the
north end dates back to the late 1890s, a time when public
concerts and patriotic celebrations were presented to the
neighborhood.
As you continue walking along the park, note how Mulberry Street curves. This sharp crook is the infamous Mulberry Bend, an area with individual tenements that both
residents and contemporary newspapers named Ragpickers’ Row, Bandits’ Roost, and Thieves’ Alley. Jacob Riis
wrote about it in his patronizing How the Other Half Lives
(1890):
Where Mulberry Street crooks like an elbow within hail of the depravity of the Five Points, is the Bend, foul core of New York’s
slums. . . . Around the Bend cluster the bulk of tenements that are
stamped as altogether bad, even by the optimists in the Health Department. . . . In the scores of back alleys, of stable lanes, and hidden byways, of which the rent collector alone can keep track, [the
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 51

poor] share such shelter as the ramshackle structures afford with
every kind of abomination rifled from the dumps and ash barrels
of the city. . . . There is scarce a lot that has not two, three, or four
tenements upon it, swarming with unwholesome crowds.
Columbus Park sits atop the former Five Points District
and the old Collect Pond. Prior to 1790, the site immediately to the west was a beautiful freshwater pond, surrounded by low hills and the country cottages of wealthy
New Yorkers who lived farther downtown. In 1790 the primary landowner, Sarah Delancey, daughter of British colonial governor James Delancey, leased much of her property to a consortium of forty-six butchers. These butchers
established a slaughter yard along the shore of the Collect.
Bone-boiling and leather-tanning shops soon followed, all
contributing to the rapid pollution of the pond. This early
nineteenth-century environmental hazard was drained by
the City of New York along the aforementioned Canal in
1805. In an early public-works project, city government
hired workers to level the surrounding hills and fill the
pond, extended streets, and renamed the area Paradise
Square. The area was then subdivided into lots and sold to
real estate speculators.
Unfortunately for the new residents, the Collect had
been formed by a series of underground springs and natural water sources. With the constant dampness of the
ground, Paradise Square quickly began to decay. The
upper-middle-class residents of the area began moving to
the newer neighborhoods of Greenwich Village and St.
John’s Park in today’s TriBeCa. This outflow of people coincided with an influx of poor Irish Catholic immigrants.
Paradise Square had become Five Points, so called because
three streets—Park (now Mosco), Worth, and Orange
(now Baxter)—came together forming a five-pointed intersection. The exact location of the intersection that gave
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
52

the neighborhood its name is at the southwestern tip of
Columbus Park.
irish in new york
The Irish are one of the oldest immigrant groups in New York
City. In fact, Colonial Governor Thomas Dongan, who served in
1683, was Irish, and the first post-Revolution mayor, James Duane,
was an Irish American. The first St. Patrick’s Day parade was held
in 1766. In 1784 the Society of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick was
formed, the first specifically ethnic self-help organization in the
city. Most of the early Irish immigrants were Protestant and middle class.
Mass Irish immigration began in the 1820s and peaked during
the Irish famine years of 1845–1855. By 1860, roughly one in six
city residents claimed some Irish heritage. Most of these later Irish
were poor Catholics. They arrived in New York at a time of tremendous urban and industrial growth, and many were able to find work
as unskilled laborers. By 1855, 86 percent of the city’s laborers
and nearly 75 percent of its household servants were Irish born.
As the Irish population increased, so too did their cultural and
political significance. The Irish were instrumental in the founding
of the New York City police and fire departments and other
branches of city government and civil service. They were invited
into the Democratic Party through Tammany Hall and by the 1870s
came to dominate the organization. Tammany Hall became known
as a rampantly corrupt political machine, but to the thousands of
immigrant Irish it was a crucial institution that offered tremendous social welfare. All Tammany asked in return was a vote. It was
Tammany that was behind the 1880 election of William Grace, New
York’s first Irish Catholic mayor.
While large-scale Irish immigration continued well into the
twentieth century, the center of Irish settlement changed. The
Irish Lower East Side gave way to the Italian Lower East Side as
the next great wave of immigrants reached this neighborhood.
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 53

Almost at the corner of Mosco Street, 32 Mulberry Street is
a wonderful example of the layers of history in this area.
Take careful note of the old (and barely visible) handpainted sign above the modern electric one for New Jeannie’s Restaurant. Somewhat obscured under untold layers
of paint, the name of the previous restaurant—Moneta’s
—is still legible.
On the south corner of Mosco and Mulberry Streets, at
28 Mulberry, is a building with marble pillars and a terracotta eagle as entrance ornamentation. Currently the Wah
Wing Sang Funeral Corporation, this was Antonio Cuneo’s 1881 bank. Cuneo, a Piedmontese immigrant, arrived
in America in 1855. He began selling nuts and fruit from a
pushcart and slowly built a real estate and banking empire.
Cuneo sold this bank to Felice Tocca a few years later.
In 1887 a United States congressional investigation
found that the bank operated under the padrone system, a
labor arrangement where the bank, for a fee, operated an
agency in Naples that coordinated prepaid steamer tickets and requests for underpaid labor. This system, outlawed in 1885 by the Contract Labor Law, brought immigrants into the country to undercut America’s industrial
and unskilled wages. The Contract Labor Law was supported by both the Daughters of the American Revolution and the American Federation of Labor. It simultaneously protected American workers from having wages
undercut by immigrants and mandated that immigrants
be paid a living wage.
Next door to Cuneo’s bank was the Bacigalupo Funeral
Parlor. Its ornate terra-cotta and marble entranceway
shows traditional funeral details of shrouded urns and angels. Much of this detail is obscured by a modern awning.
At the southern end of the block, where Mulberry intersects Worth, was the Cow Bay section of Five Points. Cow
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
54

Bay was the largest free-black neighborhood in Manhattan
in the early nineteenth century. In 1805, nearly 1,200 out of
the 1,960 free blacks in Manhattan lived in this general area.
By 1825 the community had built seven churches. African
Americans remained in the neighborhood throughout the
century.
Historians debate whether or not the free blacks coexisted peacefully with the Irish immigrants. Older historians
claim these were two separate, competing, and often warring communities. Newer research, however, indicates that
they not only coexisted on the street but even shared
houses. Historian Graham Hodges reports that a dozen intermarried couples were living here in the late 1860s.
Walk east on Mosco up the short hill to Mott Street.
When you reach the top of the hill, walk a few feet to your
left to see the Church of the Transfiguration at 29 Mott
Street. Originally built in 1801 as the English Lutheran
First Church of Zion, this Georgian-style church served
the farmers of the surrounding area. In 1827, as the neighborhood became increasingly Irish, the Lutheran congregation leased their building to the Catholic Church, which
ultimately bought it in 1853. If you look carefully at the facade, you will notice that different stone was used for the
church and the steeple. The steeple was added after 1853.
The parish was founded in 1827 on Ann Street in Lower
Manhattan by Padre Félix Francisco José Maria de la Concepcion Morales y Valera, New York’s first Spanish-speaking priest. Born in 1788 in Havana, Cuba, to a prominent
family, Valera was an outspoken voice for Cuban independence from Spain. After his expulsion from Cuba, he
moved to New York and became a leader of this church and
its Irish parishioners. The plaque on the church calls Valera
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 55
➢

“Father to needy Irish immigrants” for his role in establishing this parish. At a time of great tension, he was an
early advocate for Catholic and Protestant dialogue and
presided over Transfiguration’s growth into the largest immigrant parish in Manhattan.
By the early 1880s, the Irish began to migrate out of the
parish and Italians began using the basement for services.
Although the two congregations worshiped the same God,
their styles of worship were different enough and the communities separate enough that they didn’t worship together. In 1902 an Italian priest, Father Cappo, moved the
Italian community upstairs into the main chapel to sit with
the Irish. With Italian immigration, this became the church
of Enrico Caruso, Jimmy Durante, and Mother Cabrini,
the first naturalized American saint.
By the 1960s the congregation had become increasingly
Chinese; today the congregation is almost exclusively Chinese. Note the Mass schedule outside the church: Mass is
given in Cantonese, Mandarin, and English. Recent members of the congregation are Father Ignatius Kung, the
bishop in exile from Shanghai, and Father Dominic Tang,
the archbishop in exile of Canton. Both were imprisoned in
the 1960s during the Chinese Cultural Revolution. They
remained jailed for nearly twenty years before being released on the condition that they leave China.
If you go into the church, note the stained-glass window
on the left-hand side of the foyer. The image in the window
is of St. Patrick. Directly below the window is a memorial
photograph of Mother Cabrini. The sanctuary, which was
restored in 1999, has maintained the form it held in its
Protestant past with its high-vaulted ceiling and sweeping
balcony.
Walk north on Mott Street one block to Pell.
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
56
➢

chinese in new york
Of all the immigrant groups that have passed through the
Lower East Side, the Chinese have had the longest continuous
presence. A small group of Chinese, predominantly sailors, lived
here as early as 1850. In 1859, the New York Times estimated that
some 150 Chinese lived in the district, working as sailors, cooks,
and vendors.
Following the completion of the transcontinental railroad in
1869, the conclusion of the California Gold Rush, and increased
anti-Chinese nativism throughout the nation, Chinese immigrants
moved from rural America to cities, including New York. Mott, Pell,
and Doyers Streets became home to two thousand Chinese within
a decade.
America’s anti-Chinese bigotry culminated in the passing of
the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. With this law, the Chinese became the first and the only ethnic group to be excluded from admission into, and denied citizenship of, this country.
Looking south past crowds on Mott Street in 1937, toward the Church of the
Transfiguration in Chinatown. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical
Society.

When the law was passed, the majority of Chinese living in
America were men, and these Chinese laborers were not allowed
to bring their wives to the United States. The result was a Chinese
community that became known as a “bachelor society.” In New
York, the ratio of Chinese young men between the ages of fifteen
and twenty-one to Chinese young women of the same age range
was 3,961 to 100 in 1910. By 1940 the ratio had somewhat improved—896 to 100.
The United States revoked the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1943,
allowing a very small number (105 per year) of Chinese Americans
once again to come to America and, for the first time, to become
naturalized citizens. However, Chinese immigration did not significantly increase until the Immigration Act of 1965, which replaced
the existing national quota laws with numbers based on broad
hemispheric definitions. The new law also included a “uniting the
families” provision, allowing migration based on familial connections rather than job skills. The Chinese quota changed overnight,
from 105 immigrants allowed per year to nearly 20,000. The result
in this neighborhood was phenomenal—the Chinese population increased from 11,000 in 1960 to nearly 150,000 by 1995.
There are multiple Chinatowns within this one small area. The
heart of Old Chinatown can be found on Doyers, Pell, and lower
Mott Streets. The majority of the communal societies and long-established businesses are by and for the Guangdong (Cantonesespeaking) Chinese residents. This area is surrounded by a number
of newer neighborhoods populated by immigrants from Fujian
Province in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and other Asian countries.
On the third floor of the building at 12 Mott Street, south
of the Church of the Transfiguration, was the former New
York headquarters of the Kaoshen (High Mountain) Club,
a secret political organization founded by Dr. Sun Yat Sen
in 1895. This was the local chapter of Sun’s secret revolutionary party, the Hsing Chung Hui, which helped over-
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
58

throw the Chinese emperor in 1911. After spending most of
his life as a revolutionary, Sun went on to become the first
president of the Republic of China, but only for a month.
A junior high school on Hester Street is named for him.
Across the street from the Church of the Transfiguration, at 32 Mott, is Quong Yuen Shing & Co., (also known
as the Mott Street General Store). This store was founded
by the Lee family in 1891. Originally a grocery, it is the oldest continuously operating shop in Chinatown. In the early
days of Chinatown it served as a post office, meeting place,
message center, bank, and, of course, store. The store has
maintained its original interior and exterior and offers a
unique glimpse into the commercial life of Old Chinatown.
Take a brief detour north to the tallish white-faced
building on the west side of the street. This is home to the
Lee Family Association. This social organization was established to assist the extended Lee family with monetary,
legal, and medical aid. It assists all Chinese with the surname Lee. All immigrant groups who have come to New
York in substantial numbers have set up these mutual-aid
societies. Apart from family organizations, immigrant
groups often establish aid societies based on occupation or
on the town or region they came from.
For Chinatown, the umbrella organization that oversees
many of the various social organizations is the Zhonghua
Gong Suo—the New York Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association (CCBA)—at 62 Mott Street, with the Taiwanese flag flying from the roof. Just like the Sons of Italy,
this is a self-help and protective organization for Chinese
immigrants. It was founded in 1883 in response to the Chinese Exclusion Act. The CCBA served as the spokesperson
and advocate for the community, settled disputes among
the Chinese organizations, collected funds to hire lawyers
to defend the interests of Chinese in court, and sponsored
various social welfare programs.
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 59

For a long time the CCBA was seen as the “informal
government” of the Chinese community, bringing together more than sixty different family and fraternal associations. Since the 1960s this organization’s influence in the
community has declined, as Chinese and Asian residents of
Chinatown have become more diverse and no longer come
primarily from Guangdong Province.
Walk east on Pell Street one short block toward Bowery.
The intersection of Pell and Mott Streets is the center of
historic Chinatown. Prior to the founding of the Ming Ch’i
Daily in 1915, the community had no regularly published
daily newspaper. Instead, on this intersection stood a bulletin board that provided residents with news of the old
country as well as neighborhood announcements and job
postings.
As you walk these narrow and curved streets of Chinatown, you will notice that they predate urban development
and the automobile. Pell Street, which appeared on maps
beginning in 1776, is named for John Pell, a prosperous
butcher. Mott Street is named for Joseph Mott, also a
butcher. The street names are our last link to those very
early residents of this neighborhood.
Further along Pell Street, at No. 24, is the former Sun
Wui Association, the last wooden pagoda building in Chinatown. It remains as a great example of symbolism in Chinatown architecture. The roof is a pagoda with two fish,
symbols of good luck and abundance. (The word for fish in
many Chinese languages is the same as the one for profit or
surplus.) The colors are red, gold, and green. Red is a symbol of good luck; gold represents money or wealth; and
green stands for growth and flowering. Many signs in Chinatown are a combination of these three traditional colors.
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
60
➢

Until recently, this building was home to the Chinese Theatrical and Musicians Union.
The Hip Sing Tong, the most powerful individual fraternal organization in Chinatown, is at 16 Pell Street in the
building labeled Pell Street Social Club. The tongs illustrate the two sides of immigrant communal organizations.
“Tong” has the same meaning as wui; both mean “association.” But tong is a charged word carrying insinuations of
criminal activity and danger. The tongs are secret societies
that originated in China several hundred years ago. They
began arriving in New York in the early 1880s to protect
their members’ business interests. Over the years, numerous tongs have been investigated and indicted for criminal
activities—extortion, prostitution, gambling. But at the
same time they also serve important community functions
for those outside the established political order. For example, the Hip Sing Tong contains a federally insured credit
union for members and offers business loans and student
scholarships.
Return on Pell and walk south-southeast on Doyers
Street to the Bowery/Chatham Square.
In the nineteenth century, scores of seedy saloons lined
Doyers Street. Novelist Rupert Hughes wrote in 1904 that
these saloons were filled with
soldiers, sailors, workingmen, cooks, ladies of the pavement
and their impresarios who live upon their earnings. At a rickety
piano sat a hardworking mechanic in shirt sleeves, whose most
artistic effect was a so-called mandolin attachment, which gave
the decrepit instrument a still tinnier sound. A youth in a striped
sweater stood alongside and roared out dismal melodies in a
saturated voice.
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 61
➢

Where the Chinatown Post Office now stands at 4–6
Doyers Street was one of the most famous of these saloons: Callahan’s. Neighborhood saloons hired singing
men and scantily clad women as waiters and waitresses to
attract customers. Callahan’s hired two of the most popular young Jewish men to sing: Asa Yoelson and Israel Baline. When these two were able to move out of the neighborhood they changed their names, to the more familiar
(and American) Al Jolson and Irving Berlin.
Doyers Street ends at an intersection that is an urban
planner’s nightmare—Chatham Square. Ten different
streets collide at this one site. The square is named for
William Pitt, the earl of Chatham, an eighteenth-century
English prime minister who became a local hero when he
argued against the impending war with the British colonies
in America. Directly across from Doyers Street, on the
southeast corner of Catherine Street and Chatham Square,
stands a feeble attempt by the Manhattan Savings Bank
(now HSBC Holdings) to cloak a financial institution in a
Hollywood version of a Chinese temple.
Cross Bowery to the 1962 Benjamin Ralph Kimlau Memorial Arch, standing on an island slightly south of Doyers.
The arch is dedicated to all Chinatown residents who died
serving in the American armed forces during World War
II. The war was a crucial turning point in Chinatown. Prior
to the 1940s, numerous books, plays, movies, and reporters
described the Chinese as opium addicts, gangsters, and the
“Yellow Peril.” The war began to change that perception.
For most Americans, World War II began in December
1941 with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, but for Chinese Americans it began in 1932 after the Japanese invasion
of Manchuria. When America entered the war, numerous
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
62
➢

American propaganda films presented the Chinese as patriotic and loyal. Then, other Americans slowly began to see
Chinese in an entirely different light.
Continue across and south about a block onto St. James
Place.
At 55–57 St. James (between St. James Place and Oliver
Street) is the First Cemetery of the Spanish and Portuguese
Synagogue, Shearith Israel. Built in 1654, this site is both a
National Historic and a New York City Landmark. It is the
oldest Jewish cemetery in the United States and one of the
oldest cemeteries in New York City. Buried here, among
others, are Jewish American soldiers who fought in the
American Revolution and Benjamin Mendes-Seixes, one of
the founders of the New York Stock Exchange. When the
cemetery was established, it was over a mile north of the
city limits. Dutch governor Peter Stuyvesant, New York’s
first prominent anti-Semite, ordered it built outside New
Amsterdam proper. This congregation still exists and
meets at Seventieth Street and Central Park West.
Adjacent to the cemetery and just out of view is St.
James Church. This beautifully maintained 1837 Greek
revival church is one of the centers of New York’s Irish
history. Also part of Father Valera’s 1827 parish, this is
the “sister” church to Transfiguration. It is credited as
the founding site of the first American chapter of the Ancient Order of Hibernians. The Hibernians were formed
in Ireland in 1565 as a Roman Catholic social and benevolent society. Established here in 1836 in the midst of a
strong anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant moment in New
York history, the Hibernians brought together Irish
Americans in the name of charity, brotherhood, and selfdefense. It is an ethnically specific umbrella organization
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 63
➢

very similar to those we have already seen for Italians
and Chinese immigrants.
Walk north past Chatham Square and then head east
onto Division Street.
New York City has a wonderful tradition that allows
neighborhood residents to name public places and schools.
The 1976 elementary school P.S. 214, located just opposite
Market Street, is named for Yung Wing. Both the school
and the man serve as role models for the predominantly
Chinese immigrant children who learn here. Yung Wing
(1828–1912), was born near Macao, China. He came to the
United States as a student visitor in 1847, entered Yale University, and, in 1854, became the first Chinese person to
graduate from an American college. After graduating,
Yung Wing resolved to devote most of his life to the modernization of China and returned there. While primarily an
educational reformer, he also served as a Chinese diplomat
in the United States. Despite his lack of American citizenship, he remained in America until his death in 1902. He is
buried in Hartford, Connecticut.
Along your way to Eldridge Street, you will walk beneath the Manhattan Bridge, the third bridge connecting
Lower Manhattan with Brooklyn. Designed by engineer
Gustav Lindenthal in 1905, the bridge was the divider between Chinatown and the old Jewish East Side. This rather
unattractive structure is greatly enhanced by the newly restored 1916 colonnade that stands at the Canal Street entrance to the bridge. Built by the architects Carrere & Hastings, this triumphal arch is a wonderful example of the City
Beautiful movement, which, from 1890 to World War I,
saw New York City invest in the beautification of urban
neighborhoods. Trees were planted on sidewalks; “slums”
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
64
➢

were cleared to create parks, and architectural enhancements were built.
Cross under the bridge and take your second left to walk
north on Eldridge Street. Continue one block toward
Canal Street.
jews in new york
The East European Jews began arriving in large numbers in the
early 1880s and almost exclusively settled in the Lower East Side.
These immigrants attempted to reestablish their Old World institutions and traditions in America. In this attempt they came together not as Jews but by country and area of origin, creating ethnic enclaves of Russians, Poles, and Hungarians within the larger
Jewish immigrant community.
Describing these immigrants as “Jews” is problematic. First, it
is against American law to ask the religion of an immigrant or a citizen. It is therefore difficult to determine from immigration data
how many Jews came to America, although estimates range
widely, from 3 to 5 million. We know how many Russians or Poles
immigrated but not how many Jews or Catholics. Second, Jewish
immigrants came from a variety of countries, thus creating a number of Jewish communities within the neighborhood. Unlike most
Italian immigrants, most Jews were fleeing political or religious
oppression and were viewing America as a permanent home. For
every one thousand Jews to come to America through Ellis Island,
only three chose to return to Europe.
The eastern part of the Lower East Side was the most densely
populated. By 1894, the population had reached a density of almost one thousand people per square acre. The population of the
Lower East Side climaxed with some 542,000 residents in 1910.
Yet the population quickly declined with the building of the subways and the development of new neighborhoods uptown and in
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 65
➢

the outer boroughs. By 1915, the heart of Jewish Manhattan was
no longer this area but East Harlem.
At 12–16 Eldridge Street stands the Congregation Khal
Adath Jeshurun and Anshe Lubz Synagogue, popularly
known as the Eldridge Street Synagogue. Built in 1886–87
by the Herter brothers, German architects, in a Moorish revival and Romanesque style, this synagogue was named a
National Historic Landmark in 1996.
While the exterior rose window is similar to those
erected by various Christian groups, it is distinctly Jewish. It contains twelve rondels, or smaller windows, representing the twelve tribes of Israel. Also note the recurring patterns of two tablets (the Ten Commandments),
five windows (the five books of the Torah), and three sets
of stairs leading to four sets of doors (Jewish biblical
matriarchs and patriarchs). The interior is a beautiful Orthodox synagogue complete with women’s balconies and
designed overall in Moorish/Sephardic style. The Eldridge Street Synagogue Project is currently reconstructing the building.
Walk east along Canal Street two blocks toward Orchard
Street.
The wide Allen Street thoroughfare on your way east is
very different today than it was in the heyday of the Jewish
Lower East Side. Prior to 1932, the street was only thirtytwo feet wide and was completely covered by an elevated
train. In that year the buildings on the east side were torn
down and the street was widened to 138 feet to accommodate the automobile.
The city removed the elevated train in 1942. At that
time the city planned to build the Second Avenue subway
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
66
➢

to connect the northern Bronx with Wall Street. Construction finally began in 1972 but was soon discontinued
for lack of money and fears about construction disrupting commerce. New York, like so many other American
cities, became beholden to the automobile at the expense
of public transportation. Only in the late 1990s, after
years of economic prosperity and federal regulations to
limit auto exhaust, did the city begin to reconsider the
project. In 2000 a voter referendum on a municipal bond
to build the subway failed to pass.
On the southwest corner of Canal and Orchard, notice
the tall building taking up most of the block. It’s the former
Jarmulovsky Bank. Founder Sender Jarmulovsky is a fine
example of how one could “make it” and then “lose it” all
on the Lower East Side.
Jarmulovsky began his banking career with his savings
from his peddler days. He built this building in homage to
himself in 1912, although Jarmulovsky’s bank predated
this building. The bank essentially catered to poor immigrants, especially those sending money back to family in
the Old World as financial support and to help emigration.
Jarmulovsky died of old age a few months after his building was completed. His sons continued the family business.
By 1914 the bank had established quite a clientele—at least
until the outbreak of World War I. The war led many Jewish depositors to withdraw their money and send immediate help to family caught in Europe. Furthermore, the immigrant depositors held no confidence in paper money and
demanded silver and gold coins. The “runs” on the banks
caused the state superintendent to close the Jarmulovsky
bank on August 4, 1914, but not before the family was ruined. The New York Times reported:
On August 5, two thousand people demonstrated in front of
Yarmulowsky’s bank; three days later riots broke out in front . . .
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 67

and one hundred policemen were called to restrain a mob of fifteen hundred enraged depositors. . . . On September 5, five hundred people gathered in front of M. Yarmulowsky’s apartment,
forcing him and his family to flee.
Throughout this part of the neighborhood there are
street signs that proclaim you are in the “Historic Orchard
Street Bargain District.” These signs were hung by the
local business improvement association in an attempt to
bolster commercial activity. This is a controversial group,
comprised mostly of the older Jewish businesses from the
surrounding blocks. By using the term historic they are, in
some ways, excluding the two important new arrivals—the
new Chinese businesses and the even newer (and hipper)
shops, bars, and restaurants that are flocking to the area.
Walk north on Orchard Street one block to Hester Street.
Four buildings, 27–33 Orchard Street, are excellent examples of “pre-law” tenements. These are some of the oldest
multifamily buildings on the Lower East Side. A pre-law
tenement is a multifamily dwelling built before 1879. These
older buildings were built before modern housing laws and
are some of the least desirable housing in New York City.
Each building contains sixteen apartments, four on each
floor. Each apartment is, on average, three rooms totaling
270 square feet—that’s a kitchen, bedroom, and living
room, each only nine feet by ten feet. The only windows in
each apartment are two in the living room facing the street
or the backyard, depending on whether it is a front apartment or a back one. There is no elevator, and before 1901
there was no indoor plumbing. The residents shared outhouses and hand pumps in the backyard. The outhouses
were cleaned out twice a year. Today the apartments have
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
68
➢

indoor plumbing and heat, but they are still only three
small rooms.
Note the smoke damage on the upper floors of No. 31.
This building had an accidental fire in December 1997.
When it burned, a total of ninety-six people lost their
homes. That is an average of six people per apartment.
Compare these older tenements with the more ornate
ones in the neighborhood. As the neighborhood aged and
elevated trains and subways offered newer neighborhoods
to residents, builders and landlords began to decorate the
facades of later tenements as enticements for tenants. Despite the ornate exterior, most are identical inside—small,
dark, and cramped rooms. An excellent example of the
1890s ornate tenements are a few doors back on Orchard
Street. Walk back and view the terra-cotta details on 14–16
Orchard Street. The two rows of Jewish stars surrounded
by twelve pomegranates are exceptional in detail. Contrary
to popular lore, these were never “Jewish” buildings.
Rather, the decoration was meant to entice Jews to live
here.
Hester Street, between Orchard and Essex, was the site
of the Khazzer Mark—“Pig Market” in Yiddish. Here
Jewish and Italian peddlers set up pushcarts to sell an incredible array of goods. Why Pig Market? Jacob Riis gives
this description of turn-of-the-century Hester Street:
There is scarcely anything else [other than pork] that can be
hawked from a wagon that is not to be found, and at ridiculously
low prices. Bandannas and tin cups at two cents, peaches at a cent
a quart, “damaged” eggs for a song. . . . The crowds that jostle
each other at the wagons and about the sidewalk shops, where a
gutter plank of two ash-barrels does the duty for a counter! Pushing, struggling, babbling, and shouting in foreign tongues, a veritable Babel of confusion.
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 69

Pushcart peddling was abolished by Mayor Fiorello La
Guardia in 1935, after it was determined that the average
peddler was not only making a decent living but was paying minimal taxes. La Guardia had enclosed markets built
throughout the city and offered peddlers a bargain—
heated and ventilated buildings complete with police for
safety and theft deterrence—all in exchange for getting a license and paying taxes. Unfortunately, the space in the new
markets was nowhere near enough to house all the peddlers
chased off the streets.
Take a right and walk east on Hester Street two blocks to
Essex Street.
While walking toward Essex Street, it is impossible not to
note the small, three-acre Seward Park in front of you.
Built in 1901 and named for Abraham Lincoln’s secretary
of state William Seward (1801–1872), this was the first park
Looking west on Hester Street from the corner of Norfolk Street in 1898.
Today, the pushcarts are gone and the corner in the photo would be in the middle of Seward Park. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.
➢

built in this part of the neighborhood. The City of New
York tore down three blocks of tenement houses and displaced nearly three thousand people to create this open
space. Why choose these particular blocks? Seward Park
sits atop three of the most densely crowded blocks of 1900
New York. Just as we saw at Columbus Park, this was not
simply a philanthropic act for the immigrants of the Lower
East Side but an early attempt at “slum” clearance and
neighborhood population control.
This park is best known as a gathering point for striking
garment workers during their numerous work stoppages.
In 1909, 1912, and 1916, thousands of workers gathered
here and gazed south toward the Jewish Daily Forward
Building, waiting to hear reports on their demands for a
living wage and an eight-hour day.
Walk south on Essex Street one block past Canal to East
Broadway/Straus Square.
Straus Square is the small traffic triangle with the marble
pillar directly in front of you. The square’s namesake is
Nathan Straus, the great financier, philanthropist, and a
leader of the New York Jewish community. Straus is best
remembered for sponsoring the 1919 program to bring free
sterilized-milk stations to children throughout the country.
The marble column is a tribute to the Jewish men and
women of the neighborhood who gave their lives in both
world wars and the Korean War. It was presented by the
Morris Dickstein Post No. 462 of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars in May 1953.
Look directly across the square to the southeast at the
old Forverts (Forward) Building at 173 East Broadway.
Built in 1912 and designed by George A. Boehm, the
twelve-story Jewish Daily Forward Building was a towering presence over the neighborhood. This building used to
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 71
➢

have the name Forverts inscribed across the top, along with
a huge clock.
From 1901 until 1951 the Forward (Forverts) was edited
by Abraham Cahan, a Russian Jewish immigrant, who
made the Forward the most widely read Yiddish paper in the
world. Cahan used the paper as an Americanizing tool—a
way to introduce the East European Jewish immigrants to
American life. He also wrote extensively about American
politics and culture. The most widely read section of the
paper was the “Bintel Brief ” (the “Bundle of Letters”), a
section in which readers could present their concerns and
problems and receive an answer from the editors.
The Forward moved from this space in 1975. The Forward Building was then purchased by the New York Ling
Liang Church, an evangelical Protestant missionary
church and Bible publisher. The church building, located
within the former socialist Yiddish newspaper building,
was sold in 1999 to a developer who is transforming the
space into luxury condominiums. This will be the first luxury doorman condo in the Lower East Side, a clear sign of
things to come—increasing gentrification.
Walk east on East Broadway three long blocks toward
Montgomery Street.
At the southeast corner of East Broadway and Jefferson
is the Educational Alliance, known as “the Edgies.” Built
in 1889, the alliance was established by “uptown” German Jews as an attempt to Americanize the East European immigrants by providing day and evening classes in
English, citizenship, and hygiene. The alliance also coordinated the immigration process for all Jews arriving at
Ellis Island and was the center for all American relief to
Jews in Nazi-occupied Europe. Furthermore, the Educational Alliance helped create a Legal Aid Bureau and the
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
72
➢

American Desertion Board, which aided in the search for
fathers and husbands who had abandoned their families.
The alliance still provides for the community through a
series of events and classes in the arts, sciences, and vocational skills.
The main building was renamed for David Sarnoff after
its 1960s renovation. Sarnoff ’s life is a veritable Horatio
Alger story. Born in Russia in 1891, the eldest of five children, Sarnoff arrived in America at age nine. The family’s
first American home was a fourth-floor walk-up on Monroe Street, for which they paid $10 a month. Within days of
his arrival, the young David Sarnoff began earning money
by picking up copies of the Yiddish newspaper Tageblatt at
4 a.m. and selling them on the streets around his home. For
every fifty papers he sold, he earned twenty-five cents.
Sarnoff eventually graduated from newsboy to working at
a newsstand. At night he enrolled in English-language
classes at the Educational Alliance. Next he became a messenger at the Commercial Cable Company. From there his
career took off: he eventually became president and CEO
of RCA. Sarnoff was instrumental in the RCA creation of
NBC television in 1926.
Further east, the converted double tenement at 229 East
Broadway was the first home of the Hebrew Sheltering and
Immigrant Aid Society, now known as HIAS. Founded in
1892 to provide burial services for Jews who had died on
Ellis Island, by 1897 the organization had grown to provide
job training, legal aid, temporary housing, and interpreter
services for Jewish immigrants. HIAS quickly became a
national organization, offering aid in Boston, Philadelphia,
and Baltimore as well as New York. While primarily concerned with Jewish arrivals, HIAS was a strong advocate
for unrestricted immigration and by 1914 was one of the
most outspoken voices that stood in opposition to immigration restrictions.
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 73

In 1921, HIAS moved from this site to the former Astor
Library in the East Village. In the same year, the Young Israel Synagogue of Manhattan purchased the HIAS site.
Young Israel, an international Orthodox movement, was
founded in 1912 in the Lower East Side at a time when
many young Orthodox were greatly concerned with what
they saw as the “damage” being done to Jewish practices by
the growing popularity of the Reform movement, socialism, and Jewish crime.
The spark that led to the founding of Young Israel came
during a Friday-evening lecture on American Judaism by
the Reform rabbi and Zionist Stephen S. Wise at the nearby
but now-razed Clinton Hall. During the course of the
evening lecture, collection baskets were passed around the
hall. This action, which violated the Jewish law against the
use of money on the sabbath, outraged many of the young
Orthodox in the audience, who stalked out. With the assistance of local civic leader, Benjamin Koeningsberg, they
called on Dr. Judah Magnes to discuss possible responses.
To counter the growing Reform sentiment, Magnes agreed
to give a series of lectures on Orthodox religious themes at
the Kalvarier Synagogue on Pike Street (now a Buddhist
temple), and Young Israel was born.
The rest of this block of East Broadway is known as
“Shteebel Row.” A shteeblach (room) is a Jewish synagogue
based in a house. Most of these tenement buildings contain
synagogues. Each has a sign in Hebrew and English. Note
how the communities are created based on place of origin
rather than on Jewish religious denomination. Jewish immigrationwasdividedbyone’slandslayt,orhomeland,and
synagogues in this neighborhood reflect that distinction.
Continue east on East Broadway, turn right (south) at
Montgomery Street, and then left (east) onto Henry
Street.
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
74
➢

At 263, 265, and 267 Henry Street are three 1827 Federalist
buildings that are National Historical and New York City
Landmarks. It was here in 1893 that Lillian Wald began the
Henry Street Settlement. With the assistance of philanthropist Jacob Shiff, she began the Visiting Nurse Service
to care for the ill and infirm. Rather than require a visit to a
medical office, these nurses would bring care to the people
in their homes. The Henry Street Settlement House is still
a strong anchor of nonsectarian assistance for the neighborhood; they run an arts-and-theater center around the
corner on Grand Street. Prior to being added to the settlement house, no. 267 had been the Hebrew Technical School
for Girls, a trade school for immigrants.
Turn around and walk back west the half-block to Pitt
Street (or Samuel Dickstein Plaza). Turn right on Pitt
Street and walk two short blocks to Grand Street. Turn
left onto Grand and begin walking toward the west.
St. Mary’s Church on the corner of Grand and Ridge
Streets is the oldest Catholic church building in all of New
York City and its third parish, founded in 1827. Originally
built in 1833, the structure’s brick facade and double spires
were added in 1871 by architect Patrick C. Keely. St.
Mary’s is dramatically different from the other houses of
worship in the Lower East Side. This building has served
the Catholic community since it was first erected. No other
house of worship has served one religion for so long in this
neighborhood.
When the Catholic Church abolished mandatory Latin
Mass in 1965, it enabled buildings such as this to become diverse gathering places for believers. St. Mary’s currently
offers Mass in English and Spanish, thus opening its doors
to a wider community. Certainly there are older churches,
but they have gone from Lutheran to Catholic, as we saw at
Immigrant New York | THE LOWER EAST SIDE 75
➢

the Church of the Transfiguration, or from Baptist to Jewish, as we will see later.
Continue west on Grand. There are only two buildings
standing on the north side of Grand Street between Clinton and Suffolk Streets. No. 402 is a wonderful example of
an 1830s merchant house. The shop would have been on the
street level and the family would have resided in the floors
above. Next to the merchant house is a fine example of a
dumbbell tenement (as opposed to the pre-law tenements
we saw on Orchard Street). The change in tenement law
came in 1887. The crucial addition was the airshaft, along
with the requirement for a window in every room. The airshafts failed, however, in their mission to provide fresh air
to the apartments. In the end they resulted mostly in residents losing square footage of usable space. We are given
this description of a dumbbell tenement from an 1888 journal:
They are great prison-like structures of brick, with narrow doors
and windows, cramped passages and steep rickety stairs. . . . The
narrow court-yard . . . in the middle is a damp foul-smelling place,
supposed to do duty as an airshaft. . . . In case of fire they would
be perfect death-traps, for it would be impossible for the occupants of the crowded rooms to escape by the narrow stairways,
and the flimsy fire-escapes which the owners of the tenements
were compelled to put up . . . are so laden with broken furniture,
bales and boxes that they would be worse than useless.
Continue walking along Grand Street until you reach Norfolk Street. Turn right and walk north on Norfolk one
block to Broome Street.
At 60 Norfolk is the Beth Hamedrash Hagadol (Great
House of Study). Built in 1850 as the Norfolk Baptist
Church and purchased by a Jewish congregation in 1885, it
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
76
➢

is the oldest Russian (Ashkenazic) Orthodox congregation
in the United States. The congregation was formed in 1852.
In 1899, this was the pulpit of Rabbi Jacob Joseph, the
first and only chief rabbi of New York’s Orthodox community. Joseph, a native of Vilna, Lithuania, came to
America in 1888 with high hopes for leading the growing
Orthodox Jewish population. However, because of the diverse Jewish communities, the multifaceted neighborhood
was unable to sustain a single chief rabbi.
Once the largest Russian synagogue in the country, the
congregation is now rather small. The synagogue is open
for daily prayer and should be visited to see the beautiful
Gothic interior. In January 1967, Beth Hamedrash Hagadol was made a New York Historical Landmark.
Walk Broome Street west one block to Essex.
Broome Street is worth pondering for a moment. In 1946,
Robert Moses, urban planner, head of the Triboro Bridge
View north on Bowery from Grand Street to Cooper Union, with the Bowery
Savings Bank to the far left and the two tracks of the elevated railroad that
used to darken the street clearly evident. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.
➢

and Tunnel Authority, and great builder and destroyer of
New York, wanted to build the Lower Manhattan Expressway across Broome Street. This expressway was to connect
the Holland Tunnel with the Williamsburg and Manhattan
Bridges. It would have run at a height of about one hundred feet above the ground and would have caused the devastation of this neighborhood. Luckily, Moses was foiled.
Walk Essex Street south one block to Essex and Grand.
Before you reach Grand, be certain to note the very small
plaque on the wall to your east at what would be 60 Essex
Street. This was the site of Sinsheimer’s Cafe. It was here
that the B’nai Brith (Sons of the Covenant) was organized
by immigrant German Jews on October 13, 1843. Just as we
have seen for other immigrant groups on the Lower East
Side, it was founded as a self-help and defensive organization to protect American Jews in the face of anti-immigrant
sentiment. It is the oldest Jewish fraternal organization in
America.
From this point you can walk east on Grand Street five
short blocks back to where we began.
THE LOWER EAST SIDE | Immigrant New York
78
➢
➢

