FOUR SQUARES
Union Square, Stuyvesant Square,
Gramercy Park, and Madison Square
Start: The George Washington Statue, located on the
Fourteenth Street side of Union Square.
the city squarerepresents a civic ideal that opposes the environmental chaos that can result from unplanned urban development. Especially on Manhattan Island, where real estate is limited by geography, unguided
urban growth tends to create overcrowded, densely packed
residential and commercial housing. The city square, by
preserving some of this jealously coveted real estate for
communal use, offers a slice of uncluttered, open space for
the public to enjoy. In city squares, one can retreat from the
bustle of the crowded streets to enjoy a relaxing hour on a
park bench beneath the cover of trees or to absorb the
warmth of sunlight on an expansive picnic lawn. By commemorating important events, honoring the memory of
leading citizens, or celebrating historical figures held in
high esteem, the public monuments that grace these
squares pronounce civic values. This carefully constructed
environment is intended to elicit a sense of community in
its inhabitants.
This walking tour visits four New York squares:
Union Square, Stuyvesant Square, Gramercy Park, and
Madison Square. None of these squares has been impervious to historical change. Situated amid an astonishingly
111
4
➢

fast-changing urban environment, these public spaces
have been shaped and reshaped as the communities
around them have changed. Originally designed to attract a “better class” of New Yorkers to form a quiet, residential neighborhood, only one, Gramercy Park, has
maintained a fairly stable identity through its existence.
Each square, however, has seen periods of decline and
resurgence, of conflict and community.
The man most responsible for the founding of these
squares in the 1830s was the lawyer and visionary real estate investor, Samuel Ruggles. At that time, the area between Fourteenth and Twenty-eighth Streets had begun
to take shape as a genteel suburb on the northern outskirts of the city. Correctly anticipating New York’s impending growth uptown, Ruggles purchased numerous
undeveloped plots of land in the area that would become
Union Square and Gramercy Park. Ruggles saw an opportunity to beautify these suburban communities and
turn them into neighborhoods for the city’s elite. By designing an exclusive, fenced park in the center of each
square, Ruggles hoped to entice the wealthy to settle
around them. The value of Ruggles’s property grew after
the Great Fire of 1835 prompted Manhattanites to migrate uptown in large numbers. In 1839, Union Square
opened with an oval-shaped iron fence surrounding the
park at its center. Ruggles built a four-story home for
himself at Union Square, but his masterpiece, although
he never lived there himself, was Gramercy Park, which
opened in 1844.
At Samuel Ruggles’s urging, the residents of what
would become Madison Square also organized their neighborhood around a residential park that was constructed in
the 1840s. The Stuyvesant family also began to develop
public squares on their land, beginning with Tompkins
Square (which we won’t be visiting) in 1834. In 1836, Peter
FOUR SQUARES | Union Square
112

Gerard Stuyvesant deeded the land that would become
Stuyvesant Square to the city for $5.
The period during which Union Square and Madison
Square remained residential enclaves for the wealthy was
relatively short-lived. Geographically placed at the strategic center of the city, right along the highly trafficked path
of Broadway, Union and Madison Squares rapidly became
commercial and cultural centers as the city expanded
northward. None of the original residential houses still
stands at either Union or Madison Square. Elegant brownstones and townhouses from as early as the 1840s, however,
can be found at both Gramercy Park and Stuyvesant
Square, as well as on the side streets throughout the neighborhood. They are the remnants of the area’s first epoch.
UNION SQUARE
Our tour begins on the southern side of Union Square, between Fourteenth Street and the monument of George
Washington on horseback.
Looking around Union Square today, one sees the results of a revitalization effort that has been transforming
this neighborhood over the past fifteen years. Although it
wasNewYork’smostfashionableshoppingandtheaterdistrict in the late nineteenth century, Union Square experienced a long period of decline beginning in the 1920s. The
department stores and boutiques that made up “Ladies
Mile” moved further uptown, closer to the upscale residential districts of the Upper East and West Sides. Caught betweenthemidtownanddowntownbusinessdistricts,Union
Square and its environs were left to deteriorate. Union
Square became known in the 1960s and 1970s as a site for
drug dealers and a place for the homeless. A $3.6 million reconstruction project, launched in 1985, dramatically
Union Square | FOUR SQUARES 113

refurbished the park’s neglected landscape and successfully
addressed its safety problems. Crowning its restoration,
Union Square Park was designated a National Historic
Landmark in 1997 by the National Parks Service.
ladies’ mile and the rialto
The proliferation of department stores along Broadway from
Ninth to Twenty-third Street, terminating at Madison Square,
earned this stretch the nickname “Ladies’ Mile” in the 1870s. This
development began in the 1860s when A. T. Stewart, owner of a
dry-goods store near City Hall, decided to build a massive emporium on the corner of Broadway and East Ninth Street. In a castiron building that filled the entire block, A. T. Stewart’s sold expensive furnishings, antiques, fabrics, and women’s wear. The triumphant success of A. T. Stewart’s brought a succession of
upscale department stores to this stretch of Broadway, which
transformed the character of the neighborhood. Tiffany and Company demolished James Renwick Jr.’s Church of the Puritans at
Union Square to build its store in 1869. Orbach’s established itself
on Fourteenth Street at Union Square; W. & J. Sloane’s and Arnold
Constable’s together took up the entire block between Eighteenth
and Nineteenth Streets on Broadway; and Lord & Taylor’s inhabited the elaborately designed building on the southwest corner of
East Twentieth. The shopping district also included a stretch of
Sixth Avenue two blocks west, where Macy’s and B. Altman’s
opened.
Interestingly, the nickname “Ladies’ Mile” took on a far different meaning at night. Above the department stores one could find
lavishly furnished brothels that catered to the men of the upper
class. These high-priced “Temples of Love” advertised themselves
in publications such as the Gentleman’s Directory, promising
women who were not only beautiful but also charming and refined
conversationalists. Outside the elite brothels, throngs of streetwalkers worked Ladies’ Mile after dark. By the 1890s, reformers
FOUR SQUARES | Union Square
114

complained that both Union and Stuyvesant Square Parks had become a place where “tramps [both] male and female haggle and
dispute over their price.”
While Broadway brought department stores, Union Square’s
other tributary, the Bowery, brought theaters. Dubbed “the Rialto”
by New York Sun reporter Ted McAlpin, by the 1870s, Union
Square had replaced the Bowery as the hub of theater activity in
the city. In 1854 the Academy of Music, one of the largest theaters
in the world, opened on Fourteenth Street near Union Square. The
city’s primary opera house, the Academy of Music hosted the
American premieres of Aida (1873), Lohengrin (1874), Die Walküre
(1877), and Carmen (1878). All of New York society pined for the
prestige of owning an opera box at the academy. Despite a cost of
as much as $30,000, the waiting list for boxes was long and included such names as Vanderbilt, Astor, and Gould.
Some referred to Union Square Park as the “slave market” because aspiring actors bargained for contracts with theater managers in impromptu negotiations within it. The Rialto’s major theaters included Irving Hall, at Fifteenth and Irving Place; Wallack’s
Theatre, at Thirteenth and Broadway; the Hippotheatron, across
from the Academy of Music on Fourteenth; and the Union Square
Theatre. Nearby restaurants, such as Luchow’s (opened in 1882),
became legendary hot spots where celebrities and performers
mingled and danced while critics wrote their reviews at the dinner tables. The popular tune “Yes Sir, That’s My Baby” is said to
have been written one drunken night by Gus Kahn on a Luchow’s
tablecloth.
Atthesouthsideof theparkisHenryKirkeBrown’sGeorge
Washington, dedicated on July 4, 1856. Considered by some
to be the finest equestrian statue in the country, it depicts
Washington’s triumphant return to New York City on November 25, 1783. As British troops ended their seven-year
occupation of the city at the close of the Revolutionary
Union Square | FOUR SQUARES 115

War, Washington came personally to repossess the city he
had lost to the British in 1776. At this spot, Washington and
his officers were greeted by a crowd of jubilant citizens.
Known then as Union Place, this grassy clearing north of
the city was named for the juncture of Boston Post Road
(later to become the Bowery) and Albany Post Road (later
Broadway). As the statue depicts, Washington then headed
southward, accompanied by the cheering crowd, down the
path of Albany Post Road toward the city, where New
Yorkers thronged the streets to catch a glimpse of him. For
years afterward, the anniversary of this day would be celebrated in New York as “Evacuation Day.”
Walk west toward the intersection of University Place and
Fourteenth Street.
K. B. Patel’s statue Mohandas K. Gandhi (1986) stands in a
floral bed known as the Gandhi Garden to the southwest of
Union Square Park, where Fourteenth Street and Broadway meet. Donated by the citizens of India, this statue was
originally intended to be placed at the newly established
Washington Market Park in TriBeCa, but its neighborhood
residents rejected it. It is fitting, however, that the great
philosopher and practitioner of nonviolent protest should
be honored at Union Square instead, which has a long tradition of (mostly) peaceful protest.
On September 5, 1882, the nation’s first Labor Day parade ended at Union Square after marching up Broadway
from City Hall. After that event, Union Square became the
preferred site of labor rallies and mass political protests.
Soapbox orators regularly drew crowds, while thousands
would turn out to celebrate every May Day and Labor Day.
Anarchist Isadore Wisotsky later recalled the atmosphere
of Union Square in the 1910s: “We gathered to make revolution and stayed to talk. And how we talked—anarchism,
FOUR SQUARES | Union Square
116
➢

atheism, against the military, for birth control, against injustice, for socialism and for the rights of workers to organize. . . . The right to speak at Union Square was more
precious than the bread we sweated to earn.
One of the most tension-filled protests at Union
Square occurred on August 22, 1927. On that night, five
thousand people gathered to hold a candlelight vigil for
the anarchists Sacco and Vanzetti, who were about to be
executed in Boston. The New York Police Department
was so apprehensive of violence that it stationed machine
guns on the nearby roof of Klein’s department store. No
incidents occurred. However, a few years later, police
and protestors battled furiously in a bloody riot here on
March 6, 1930. The demonstrators had come to Union
Square that day, six months after the 1929 Stock Market
crash, to celebrate International Unemployment Day, an
event sponsored by the American Communist Party.
When thousands of demonstrators attempted to march
down Broadway without a permit, the police opposed
them with force, igniting a violent conflict that resulted
in hundreds of injuries.
America’s first Labor Day, as it was held in Union Square, September 5, 1882.
The parade was organized by P. J. McGuire. McGuire’s mottos—“Organize, Agitate, Educate.” Illustration from Frank Leslie’s, September 16, 1882, in John
Grafton, New York in the Nineteenth Century (New York: Dover), 1977.

Enter Union Square Park and walk toward its northern
end. Stop at the statue of Abraham Lincoln, which stands
on a pedestal facing Seventeenth Street.
On the west side of the park is an elaborate fountain designed by the German sculptor Karl Adolf Donndorf
(1881), that was originally placed at the center of the park.
When the park was redesigned in the 1920s, Independence
Flagstaff (1926) by Anthony de Francisci became the center of the park. Erected to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence, this flagpole’s massive base is adorned with a relief
sculpture depicting the forces of good and evil in a struggle
during the American Revolution.
On the north side of the park is a structure dating from
the 1920s that operates as an outdoor restaurant during the
summer months. Looking beyond it, one can see a richly
ornamented red-brick building facing the park on Seventeenth Street. Designed by William Schickel in 1881, it was
built as the headquarters of Century Publishing, whose
Century magazine was one of the most respected literary
journals of the 1880s. Currently it houses an expansive
Barnes and Noble bookstore.
The northern and western edges of Union Square
Park have become the home of an extremely popular
Greenmarket. Four days a week, more than one hundred
upstate farmers bring an impressive display of fresh produce, wine, flowers, preserves, pastries, and breads. By
attracting new consumers to the area, the Greenmarket
has helped pave the way for the commercial transformation of the square. Gradually, the failing discount businesses that once dominated the square have been replaced by chic restaurants, coffee shops, and major national chains, including Barnes and Noble, Toys R Us,
Seaman’s, Staples, and Starbucks.
FOUR SQUARES | Union Square
118
➢

Directly in front of the band shell is the statue Abraham Lincoln, sculpted by Henry Kirke Brown and dedicated at Union Square Park in 1868. It is believed to be
the first public statue of Lincoln erected in the country.
Unlike Brown’s masterful George Washington on the opposite end of the park, this statue was not well received
after its unveiling. Brown’s Lincoln, with his rumpled
clothes and plain demeanor, may have accurately captured the historical man but it was deemed uninspiring
because it failed to meet the public’s expectations of the
mythical president. The outpouring of public emotion
following Lincoln’s assassination on Good Friday 1865
raised the fallen president to an almost Christlike stature
in the popular mind. In Brown’s rendering, the solemn
president holds a rolled copy of a speech—or perhaps
the Emancipation Proclamation—in his left hand, which
hangs calmly and unheroically at his side.
Union Square is a fitting spot for New York to honor
Lincoln’s memory. It was during the Civil War that Union
Square became the central gathering place in the city—the
Times Square of the nineteenth century. After the fall of
Fort Sumter, President Lincoln’s call for volunteers was
answered by thousands of young men who flocked to enlist
at recruiting tents that dotted the interior of the park.
Nearly a quarter-million people gathered at Union Square
on Saturday, April 20, 1861, to hear speakers denounce the
Southern rebellion while the tattered American flag rescued from Fort Sumter waved from the statue George
Washington, where it had been patriotically placed.
Exit the park by walking east of the Lincoln statue and
down the ramp to Park Avenue.
Across the street and a block to your north, at the corner of
Seventeenth Street and Park Avenue, is the New York Film
Union Square | FOUR SQUARES 119
➢

Academy. The academy is housed in the last of the Tammany Hall headquarters, built in 1929 during the administration of Mayor Jimmy Walker. Walker, the last mayor to
be elevated to power by Tammany Hall, embodied the
flashy style of the affluent 1920s. The construction of this
federal-style building was financed by Wall Street investments, but the stock market crash that ruined the investors
later that year also helped bring about the downfall of
Tammany Hall itself. In 1933, New Yorkers elected a Republican mayor, Fiorello La Guardia, who promised to destroy Tammany forever.
tammany hall
The Society of St. Tammany or Columbian Order was formed in
1788. The name Tammany is derived from the legendary Delaware
Indian chief Tamanend, who was adopted as the club’s patron
saint. The organization enjoyed using pseudo–American Indian titles, such as “sachems” for council members, “braves” for its rank
and file, and “wigwam” for its headquarters. It became a Jeffersonian political club under the influence of Aaron Burr in the 1790s
and later a Jacksonian Democratic club under the leadership of
Martin Van Buren.
The club formed a powerful grassroots alliance with immigrant
voters, based on a system of graft in which local “bosses” would
dispense financial assistance and protection to supporters in exchange for their vote. Fernando Wood first used the Tammany political machine to capture the mayor’s office in the 1850s. In the
1860s, Tammany’s “Grand Sachem,” William M. “Boss” Tweed,
used the organization autocratically to control patronage of the
city’s elected and appointed public offices, while embezzling millions from the city’s coffers. The exposure of the Tweed ring in 1871
scandalized the nation.
In 1868, Tammany Hall moved to Fourteenth Street near Union
Square (on ground now occupied by the Con Edison Building). The
FOUR SQUARES | Union Square
120

impressive building—whose top was adorned with a statue of a
fierce-looking American Indian, armed with a tomahawk and scalping knife—hosted the 1868 National Democratic Party Convention.
Despite the downfall of Tweed a few years later, Tammany Hall continued to be a powerful force in city, state, and sometimes even national politics until the 1930s. Remaining a staunch defender of
the working man and maintaining an entrenched patronage system, Tammany facilitated the long political career of Governor Alfred E. Smith (a presidential candidate in 1928) and Mayor Jimmy
Walker, both the sons of Irish immigrants.
The Tammany Hall Wigwam, East Fourteenth Street near Third Avenue, circa
1870. Built in 1868 under the direction of William Marcy “Boss” Tweed, the
building was razed in 1911, when the Con Edison Building was constructed in its
place. The clock tower was designed by Warren and Wetmore. Photograph
courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

The 1932 judicial investigation into corruption charges against
Tammany, launched by Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt and led by
Judge Samuel Seabury, ended in the sensational downfall of the
Walker administration. The corruption scandal that resulted forced
Mayor Walker to flee to Europe to escape prosecution. During the
twelve-year reign of Mayor Fiorello La Guardia, Tammany became
all but extinct.
Perhaps the prevailing ethic of Tammany Hall was best
summed up by George Washington Plunkitt, who once explained
the extraordinary wealth he had acquired as a Tammany “sachem”
by saying: “I seen my opportunities and I took ‘em.”
Walk south toward Fifteenth Street, along the east side of
Union Square.
The statue of the French general Marquis de Lafayette
(1873) was done by Frédéric-Auguste Bartholdi, the same
man who designed the Statue of Liberty. Lafayette
served as a major general on the staff of George Washington. An inscription on the monument’s pedestal
quotes Lafayette’s words: “As soon as I heard of American Independence my heart was enlisted.” In 1824, at the
invitation of Congress, Lafayette returned to America,
where he was warmly embraced as the toast of New York
society. Lafayette was the first foreigner ever bestowed
with honorary American citizenship (the second being
Winston Churchill).
Walk to the corner of Fifteenth Street and Park Avenue.
On the northeast corner of Fifteenth Street is the old
Union Square Saving Bank, designed by Henry Bacon in
1924. A landmarked building, it is now used as a concert
hall. The Corinthian temple exterior of the bank is some-
FOUR SQUARES | Union Square
122
➢
➢

what suggestive of Bacon’s later masterpiece: the Lincoln
Memorial in Washington, D.C.
To the southeast of the square is an infamous intersection once known as “Dead Man’s Curve,” where speeding trolley cars and horse-drawn carriages often mowed
down careless pedestrians who thronged this shopping
and theater district. Looming over Dead Man’s Curve
today are the four massive red towers of the Zeckendorf
Towers (Davis, Brody and Associates, 1987), a mixed
residential and business complex. The Towers stand on
the former site of S. Klein’s discount department store,
which left its building abandoned in 1975(thus betraying
its nickname, “S. Klein-on-the-Square”). Neighborhood
residents protested against the construction of this enormous complex, which partially blocks the view of the
striking Con Edison clock tower that stands behind it to
the east. But the luxury apartments offered by the Zeckendorf Towers have played a key role in the regentrification of Union Square.
On the south side of Fourteenth Street is a similar apartment complex completed in 1998, housing the Virgin
Megastore and Circuit City at the street level. Adorning its
facade is an elaborate $3 million dollar piece of artwork titled Metronome. Unveiled in September 1999, Metronome is
a jumble of symbols that has been described by its creators,
Andrew Gizel and Kristen Jones, as “an ode to the impossibility of knowing time.” It features fifteen digital numbers that count off the time elapsing from midnight, a black
and gold sphere that rotates in synchronization with the
phases of the moon, and a five-foot opening that periodically belches blasts of steam. In a whimsical nod to its
neighborhood surroundings, Gizel and Hones cast the disembodied hand that stretches forth from the top Metronome
from Henry Kirke Brown’s statue of George Washington
across the street.
Union Square | FOUR SQUARES 123

Cross Park Avenue and walk east on Fifteenth Street
three blocks to Stuyvesant Square, passing the sights described below.
At 109–111 East Fifteenth Street stands the oldest surviving clubhouse in the city: the Century Association Building, now the Century Center for Performing Arts, which
was designed by Charles Gambrill and Henry Hobson
Richardson in 1869. Formed in 1847, the Century Association (and Club) was founded as an intellectual society
bringing together men “of all guilds,” aspiring to cultivate “a taste for Letters and the Arts and social enjoyment” among New York’s leading citizens. Though its
members aspired for their club to become the American
equivalent of the French Academy, in reality it remained
more about socializing than about serious intellectual discussion. In the 1880s, William Watson Gilder, the first
editor of Century magazine, borrowed his journal’s name
without permission from the Century Club, of which he
was a member.
The headquarters of the Consolidated Edison power
company towers above the southeast corner of Fourteenth
Street and Irving Place. It stands on the site of its predecessor, the Manhattan Gas Light Company, which was located here from 1885 to 1910. Construction of this building
began in 1911, and the main section was designed by Henry
J. Hardenbergh, who was also responsible for the Dakota
on Seventy-second and Central Park West. The building’s
most majestic feature is the Tower of Light (Warren and
Wetmore, 1926), a massive clock tower that caps the building and is most impressive when brilliantly illuminated at
nighttime.
Walk north on Rutherford Place to the Sixteenth Street
entrance to Stuyvesant Square.
FOUR SQUARES | Union Square
124
➢
➢

STUYVESANT SQUARE
On arriving at Stuyvesant Square from Fifteenth Street, the
first landmarks to grab your attention are the red-brick
Friends Meeting House and Seminary to your left, which
date from 1860. Part of a five-building complex that also
includes the original schoolhouse, an elegant nineteenthcentury townhouse (across Fifteenth Street), and a modern
school building, the Friends Seminary dominates the
southwest corner of the square. A doctrinal split in the
Quaker community prompted the construction of this
meetinghouse when this group seceded from another congregation a few blocks away at Gramercy Park. When the
two groups reconciled in 1958, the Gramercy Park congregation abandoned their building to join this one.
St. George’s Episcopal Church stands north across Sixteenth Street from the Friends Meeting House. Completed
in 1856, this brownstone structure is one of the earliest examples of Romanesque revival architecture in America.
The exterior by Otto Blesch had to be restored after the
church was badly damaged in an 1865 fire. Leopold Eidlitz,
who designed the original interior, rebuilt it according to
Blesch’s original plans. The two spires were never properly
restored and finally were torn down in 1888. Next door, on
the north side of the church, is St. George’s Chapel (1911),
a fine Gothic revival companion to the older building.
Enter the park.
The four-acre twin parks of Stuyvesant Square are bifurcated by Second Avenue, which creates a noisy invasion of
this otherwise pastoral setting. The extension of Second
Avenue through the park was part of the original plan
when the square was deeded to the city by Peter Gerard
Stuyvesant in 1836, but no one could have foreseen the
Stuyvesant Square | FOUR SQUARES 125
➢

incredible volume of traffic that would later speed down
this avenue. The cast-iron fence that surrounds each section of the park dates from 1850.
Like the other residential squares developed in the
1840s, Stuyvesant Square originally occupied the center of
an upper-class neighborhood. Several excellent examples
of early residences can still be found in the vicinity. One
prime example facing the park from the north is the Sidney
WebsterHouse(1883)at 245 EastSeventeenthStreet.(Note
its four-peaked front.) This modified French Renaissance–style townhouse is believed to be the last surviving
residential building in New York designed by the great
Richard Morris Hunt. This house and most other buildings
around the west side of the square are protected as part of
theStuyvesantSquareHistoricDistrict,designatedin 1976.
Near the center of the Square’s western wing is the
bronze statue of the famous peg-legged Dutch governor,
Peter Stuyvesant (1936), sculpted by Gertrude Vanderbilt
Whitney, founder of the Whitney Museum. (Stuyvesant
Square, and all the land from Twentieth to Fifth Street, was
within the farm of Peter Stuyvesant in the 1650s.)
Cross Second Avenue to the eastern wing of the square.
Across Second Avenue, in the far northeast corner of the
square’s east wing, stands a life-size bronze monument of
the celebrated Czech composer Antonín Dvorˇák, done by
Yugoslavian sculptor Ivan Mesˇtrovic´. For nearly three
decades this statue was tucked away in obscurity on the
roof of Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center, where a
planned roof garden was never built. It was finally placed
here by the New York Philharmonic in 1997. Dvorˇák lived
on East Seventeenth Street (Dvorˇák Place), within sight of
this statue, during his tenure as director of the National
Conservatory of Music from 1892 to 1895. During this
FOUR SQUARES | Stuyvesant Square
126
➢

time, he composed the acclaimed symphony From the New
World, colloquially “New World Symphony,” his tribute to
the music of America.
By the 1890s, Stuyvesant Square had become a small,
wealthy enclave of American-born residents amid a growing immigrant population of Jews and Catholics who had
moved up from the Lower East Side. “It is an aristocratic
neighborhood,” says an 1893 guidebook, “but the Square is
mostly used by the East-Side tenement dwellers.” Indeed,
the proximity of the struggling immigrants of the Lower
East Side to the wealthy residents of Stuyvesant Square
and Gramercy Park formed a dynamic that was at times
both creative and destructive.
For instance, St. George’s Parish was dominated for
decades by its senior warden, the banker J. P. Morgan—
one of the world’s most powerful men. The church faced a
crisis in the 1890s because the neighborhood’s rapidly
dwindling Episcopalian population left its pews increasingly deserted. To reach out to the non-Protestant immigrants of the neighborhood, St. George’s, with Morgan’s
approval, became a leader in the Social Gospel movement.
It survived as an institution by de-emphasizing religious
doctrine and offering a variety of secular programs to address social ills, both educational and recreational, enlisting
thousands of young people from the nearby tenements.
The proximity of the classes elicited a mix of political
ideas, movements, and forms of expression. William Dean
Howells, one of the most influential literary figures in
America, lived in a formerly elegant brownstone at 330
East Seventeenth Street, just east of the square, in the
1880s and 1890s. The leading light of American realism,
Howells often drew inspiration for his fiction by perusing
the tenement districts and pondering the injustices of capitalism through a genteel medium of social protest—the
popular novel.
Stuyvesant Square | FOUR SQUARES 127

Just a few blocks away, Emma Goldman lived on the
sixth floor of a tenement (still standing) at 210 East Thirteenth Street that housed the cramped headquarters of
Goldman’s fledgling anarchist movement. Goldman was a
frequent stump speaker at Union Square, and in response to
her antiwar stance and criticism of mandatory conscription
laws during World War I, the U.S. government imprisoned
her for two years and then deported her in 1919.
On Sunday, April 18, 1920, a neighborhood anarchist
named Thomas W. Simpkin tried to assassinate J. P. Morgan Jr. outside St. George’s. Incensed by anti-Communist
remarks made by the younger Morgan, Simpkin attempted
to ambush him as he left Sunday Mass. In a case of mistaken
identity, Simpkin instead tragically shot and killed Dr.
James Markee, the Morgan family doctor. Five months
later, the bombing of the Morgan Bank on Wall Street was
widely assumed to be another “anarchist attack” aimed at
Morgan.
Dominating the east side of Stuyvesant Square is the Beth
Israel Medical Center and the Hospital for Joint Diseases
Orthopaedic Institute, a fully integrated member of Mount
Sinai/New York University Health Organization. Beth Israel opened in 1891 on the Lower East Side, where it
evolved from a neighborhood dispensary for Orthodox
Jews. It moved to Stuyvesant Square in 1964 after it purchased Manhattan General Hospital.
Walk to the corner of Seventeenth Street and Second
Avenue.
On the northwest corner of Seventeenth Street and Second
Avenue is the former Manhattan General Hospital Building, the most impressive of the several hospital buildings
that border Stuyvesant Square. Completed in 1902 with
FOUR SQUARES | Stuyvesant Square
128
➢

money donated by J. P. Morgan, these stately headquarters,
designed by Robert H. Richardson, originally housed the
New York Lying-In Hospital. Once the largest maternity
hospital in the United States, the Lying-In Hospital served
the vast population of the impoverished Lower East Side
and often allowed its bills to go uncollected. Because it was
viewed in philanthropical circles as Morgan’s personal
charity, the hospital had difficulty finding other benefactors
and inevitably turned to Morgan each year to make up its
deficit. As a result, it became one of Morgan’s most expensive philanthropical ventures. Today, this building houses
luxury apartments and medical offices and is on the National Register of Historic Places.
Just a few blocks north, on the corner of Second Avenue
and Twenty-second Street, once stood the Union Steam
Works factory. Perhaps the fiercest battle of the New York
City Draft Riots took place there in July 1863. Much of the
neighborhood remains exactly as it appeared then.
Walk north on Second Avenue and left onto Eighteenth
Street. Then turn right onto Third Avenue and walk one
block to Nineteenth Street. Turn left onto Nineteenth
Street and continue to Irving Place.
new york city draft riots
The New York City Draft Riots were the largest and most destructive urban riots in American history, resulting in at least 105
deaths. Spanning four days, this series of riots was also the greatest uprising of Americans against their government, with the exception of the Southern Confederacy’s secession. The riots resulted from the long-simmering anger of New York’s working
classes, especially Irish immigrants, who resented the Civil War
draft laws and did not support Lincoln’s decision to emancipate
the Southern slaves.
Stuyvesant Square | FOUR SQUARES 129
➢

When the Emancipation Proclamation went into effect on January 1, 1863, many New York Democrats were furious. Led by Fernando Wood, who as mayor had advocated New York City’s secession from the Union in 1861, New York’s Peace Democrats virulently denounced Lincoln’s emancipation policy and predicted that
the city’s labor market would become flooded with freed black
workers. In March 1863, the passage of the National Conscription
Act, which threatened to enlist tens of thousands of New York’s
working class by lottery, added fuel to their explosive antiwar rhetoric. A clause that allowed draft substitutes to be purchased for
$300 was deemed particularly obnoxious by Peace Democrats,
who perceived the law as promoting “a rich man’s war, but a poor
man’s fight.” The inflammatory rhetoric of Democratic leaders
stoked working-class resentment.
On Saturday, July 11, 1863, the draft law went into effect. On
Monday, July 13, working-class protestors marched on the draft
house at Third Avenue and smashed the lottery wheel. By midmorning a full-scale riot had broken out in several sections of the
city. The rioters’ path of destruction focused on symbols of the
war effort, including draft houses, Republican leaders’ homes and
businesses, and African Americans. At least eleven black men
An 1863 Harper’s magazine depiction of the New York City Draft Riots along
First Avenue. Image courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

were lynched and mutilated. Rioters also torched the Colored Orphan Asylum on Fifth Avenue, leaving its 237 children to flee for
their lives. Wealthy individuals who might buy their way out of the
draft were also targets, and the rich neighborhoods around
Gramercy Park and Stuyvesant Square were a focal point of attacks on property.
A mob of thousands besieged the Union Steam Works, a former
wire factory that had been converted for wartime arms production. Owned by a prominent Republican, the Steam Works was a
popular symbol of the war effort as well as a strategic source of
arms. Twice the mob took control of the building and seized thousands of weapons. The Metropolitan Police were joined by the
Twelfth New York Infantry in the bloody effort to dislodge rioters
from the building. Howitzers were used by policemen to clear Second Avenue. In the end, rather than surrender the factory, the rioters burned the five-story brick building to the ground, killing ten
of their own who remained trapped inside.
The next day, July 15, five regiments of the Union Army, diverted directly from the battle of Gettysburg, began to arrive in
the city. The 152 New York Volunteers established their camp in
Stuyvesant Square, while the Eighth Regiment Artillery Troop encamped in Gramercy Park. By Thursday, July 16, order was restored. Rather than impose military rule in New York, President
Lincoln worked with the “War” Democrats of Tammany Hall to indict and prosecute the rioters. Only sixty-seven people were eventually prosecuted for crimes related to these tragic events. For
years afterward, the Metropolitan Police continued to find and
confiscate weapons originally stolen from the Second Avenue
Union Steam Works during the riots.
At 146 East Nineteenth Street, you will see an oval plaque
that marks the former home of George Bellows, who lived
here from 1910 until his early death in 1925. A great realist
painter, Bellows’s work was often classified as part of the
Stuyvesant Square | FOUR SQUARES 131

“Ashcan” school because he preferred to capture gritty
scenes from everyday life. Like William Dean Howells, his
subject matter was often drawn from frequent visits to the
tenement districts. An avid socialist, Bellows frequently entertained leading radicals, including Emma Goldman, Eugene O’Neill, Max Eastman, and John Reed.
Directly across the street from Bellows lived Carl Van
Vechten, in a home that used to stand at 151 East Nineteenth
Street. A novelist and photographer, Van Vechten is most
famous as the man who introduced New York white society to Harlem in the 1920s. Van Vechten’s still-controversial 1926 novel Nigger Heaven helped popularize the Harlem Renaissance. His parties brought figures such as the
poet Langston Hughes and jazz singer Bessie Smith in contact with the artists and wealthy patrons of the Gramercy
Park neighborhood.
The entire block of East Nineteenth between Third
Avenue and Irving Place is known as “Block Beautiful”
and has achieved landmark status as part of the Gramercy Park Historic District. In the 1920s, architect Frederick J. Sterner renovated the facades of several of the
townhouses, a fine blend of styles, some of which date
from the 1840s.
Turn right at Irving Place and continue north one block to
the front gates of Gramercy Park.
GRAMERCY PARK
To a remarkable degree, the Gramercy Park neighborhood
has remained true to the vision of its founder, Samuel Ruggles. This secluded enclave provides a striking contrast to
the noisy commercial districts that surround it. When Ruggles took possession of Gramercy Seat in 1831, it was a
FOUR SQUARES | Stuyvesant Square
132
➢

mixture of swampland and small hills. The name “Gramercy” some believe, is a corruption of an old Dutch phrase,
krom moerasje, meaning “little crooked swamp.” Others say
it comes from the phrase crommessie vly, meaning “knifeshaped swamp.” Whatever the case, Ruggles filled in the
swamp in the 1830s with soil acquired from the leveling of
the nearby Bowery Hill. When Ruggles drew up the deed
to the park in 1831, he provided that five trustees, regularly
elected by the neighborhood, be given the task of maintaining the grounds according to his precise specifications.
Ruggles carefully laid out the pathways through the park
and had fifty different trees and shrubs planted. The eightfoot iron fence has stood around it since it officially opened
in 1844.
Gramercy Park was one of the first New York developments to impose building restrictions. Ruggles’s deed
prohibited the construction of any buildings on the
square “save brick or stone dwelling[s]” and “any . . . trade
or business dangerous or offensive to the neighboring
Gramercy Park West in the late nineteenth century. The contemporary block
appears much as it did a century ago. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

inhabitants.” He listed several examples of such businesses,
which included any “slaughter house, smith shop,” “brewery, distillery, public museum,” or “circus.” Ruggles’s aspirations for his neighborhood were not based merely on a
desire to turn a profit on his real estate investment. Open
spaces where citizens could gather and reconnect to nature,
Ruggles believed, were necessary to promote a feeling of
community and a “civilized” temperament.
From the 1850s until the 1870s, Gramercy Park remained among the city’s most fashionable neighborhoods.
It lost status, however, after the Third Avenue Elevated
Railroad was constructed close by in 1878. Though many
left, its residents remained influential enough to persuade
Governor David Hill to veto a measure that would have
extended a cable-car line on Lexington Avenue through
the park in 1890. In the years that followed, several more
proposals to cut a road through the park were defeated.
Since the 1940s, most of the townhouses on the square have
been converted into apartments. By the 1980s, Gramercy
Park once again had become a fashionable neighborhood,
home to many celebrities. Gramercy Park is the only private park left in New York City today.
The earliest residential housing on the square exists
along the southern and western rims.
We like to begin our walk around the square at 1 Gramercy
Park West in the northwest corner, so walk west half a
block on East Twentieth and then a short block north on
Gramercy Park North to begin in front of No. 1.
A solid row of red-brick townhouses, the residences occupying the west side of the park are the best-preserved section. Dr. Valentine Mott lived at 1 Gramercy Park, built in
1849, which he inhabited during the latter days of his life.
A founder of both New York University Medical College
FOUR SQUARES | Gramercy Park
134
➢

and Bellevue Hospital, he was the most famous surgeon of
his time. Dr. Mott died of shock after being told of President Lincoln’s assassination by John Wilkes Booth in April
1865. He is buried in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn.
The buildings at 3 and 4 Gramercy Park West were designed by Alexander Jackson Davis. Probably the two
finest houses on the square, their elaborate cast-iron
porches are reminiscent of New Orleans’ architecture. The
two “mayoral lamps” that stand outside No. 4 were placed
there by former mayor James Harper when he moved into
this townhouse in the 1840s. These lamps were traditionally used to help citizens identify the mayor’s home in an
emergency and had formerly stood outside Harper’s Rose
Street home.
Walk south to Twentieth Street.
At 10 Gramercy Park South was the former home of the
painter Robert Henri. Considered the “father” of American realism, Henri led the movement away from romanticism in painting and trained such revolutionary painters as
Edward Hopper and George Bellows. Henri encouraged
his students to broaden their choice of subject matter. He
held a popular weekly open house for local artists in his
top-floor studio, which continues to be preserved by the
Henri estate.
Walk east on Twentieth Street.
Both 15 and 16 Gramercy Park South, completed in 1845,
were among the original townhouses on the square. Today, No. 15 houses the National Arts Club. In the 1870s
and 1880s, however, it was the home of 1874 New York
governor and 1876 presidential candidate Samuel J. Tilden. Tilden’s political success was built upon his role in
Gramercy Park | FOUR SQUARES 135
➢
➢

bringing down the Tweed ring. Fearing for his life from
disgruntled Tammany henchmen, Tilden built an underground tunnel from his house to Nineteenth Street as an escape route in case of an emergency. When Tilden died in
1886, he left behind a vast book collection and an estate exceeding $5 million, which he left to New York City specifically to be used for the building of a new public library and
reading room. The New York Public Library’s new headquarters opened in 1911, and his book collection was combined with the Astor and Lenox library collections to make
up its original holdings.
The National Arts Club, founded in 1898, moved into
Samuel Tilden’s former home in 1906. The face of the
building had been redesigned in 1884 by Calvert Vaux, who
added the bow fronts and arched windows in Victorian
Gothic style. The faces of Goethe, Dante, Franklin, and
Milton can be seen in the decorative medallions adorning
its facade. Founding club members include J. P. Morgan,
Frederic Remington, Theodore Roosevelt, and Woodrow
Wilson.
At 16 Gramercy Park South is the Players Club,
founded by Edwin Booth in 1888. Widely considered to be
the greatest actor of his generation, Booth came from a
family of distinguished actors that included his unstable
brother John Wilkes Booth. Devastated by Lincoln’s assassination at his brother’s hand, Booth vowed never to appear
in public again and resigned from his starring role in a popular production of Hamlet. Friends and admirers, however,
persuaded him to return to the stage nine months later,
where he was greeted with an outpouring of sympathy and
approval by New York society.
The acting profession was not highly regarded in nineteenth-century America. Perhaps because of his own family history, Edwin Booth felt this stigma most deeply and
endeavored to raise the social standing of actors to “a
FOUR SQUARES | Gramercy Park
136

higher social grade than the Bohemian level.” He conceived of the Players Club as a genteel private society
where actors could mix with those who were more cultivated. In 1887, Booth enlisted his friend Stanford White to
remodel the facade of this building by adding the portico
and balcony. Founding members included Mark Twain and
General William T. Sherman. At the center of Gramercy
Park stands a statue of Edwin Booth performing in the role
of Hamlet (Edmond T. Quinn, 1917), erected by the Players Club in 1918.
At 19–20 Gramercy Park South is the former Sonnenberg mansion, a brick townhouse built in 1845 but altered
many times since. When the Sonnenberg estate put the
house up for sale in 1979, the New Yorker’s Brendan Gill
called it “unquestionably the greatest house remaining in
private hands in New York.” Originally a four-story building, the fifth floor and mansard roof were added in the
1850s. In 1887 it was again remodeled, mostly on the interior, by the firm of McKim, Mead and White. (The work
has traditionally been attributed to Stanford White, but recently discovered evidence suggests otherwise.) In 1931,
publicity man Benjamin Sonnenberg purchased the house
along with the fashionable apartment complex next door at
No. 20. Sonnenberg installed connecting doors between
the two buildings and turned No. 20’s studio apartments
into guest rooms for his mansion, which now totaled thirtyseven rooms. The expanded mansion remains a private
home today.
Walk to the southeast corner of the square.
At 144 East Twentieth Street, off the southeast corner of
the square, is the Brotherhood Synagogue, formerly the
Friends Meeting House, built in 1859. The Italianate architecture is almost identical to Henry Ward Beecher’s
Gramercy Park | FOUR SQUARES 137
➢

1849 Plymouth Church in Brooklyn Heights. Rescued
from demolition by the Historical Landmarks Commission in the 1960s, it was purchased in 1975 by the
Brotherhood Synagogue of West Thirteenth Street for
$425,000. To the east side of the building is a Holocaust
memorial.
The first cooperative apartment in New York City, 34
Gramercy Park East, was designed by architect George da
Cunha. Opened in 1883, this gorgeous brick building with
red terra-cotta ornamentation originally contained twentyseven apartments, three per floor, offering seven to twelve
rooms each. Abundant amenities were offered to attract a
“better” class of residents, including a gourmet restaurant
owned by Louis Sherry, conveniently located on the eighth
floor. The original gaslights flank the entrance and the hydraulic elevators inside (the first in the city) still function.
Another early cooperative apartment stands next door at
No. 36 Gramercy Park East. Designed by James Riley
Gordon in 1910, the building’s elaborate white terra-cotta
ornamentation has a whimsical medieval theme. Monks,
gargoyles, and cherubs can be detected in the finely detailed
facade, while the front entrance is guarded by two caststone knights in armor.
Walk to the northeast corner of Gramercy Park North and
Lexington Avenue.
In the nineteenth century, a number of prominent New
Yorkers made their homes near the northern entrance to
the park. At 1 Lexington Avenue lived the daring entrepreneur Cyrus West Field. Field conceived of and organized
the massive project of laying the first undersea transatlantic
cable, establishing telegraph communication between London and New York. After several disappointments, the
FOUR SQUARES | Gramercy Park
138
➢

cable finally became operable in 1865, making Field a national hero. Field also built much of Manhattan’s elevated
railroads in the 1870s.
Next door, at 9 Lexington Avenue, lived one of Field’s
friends and strongest supporters in the Atlantic cable project, Peter Cooper. One of New York’s most beloved citizens, Cooper was an inventor of extraordinary talents. He
created America’s first steam locomotive, the “Tom
Thumb;” produced the first steel rails; and invented numerous household products, including glue and gelatin.
Never having had the benefit of a higher education himself,
he founded Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science
and Art, a visionary free university designed to provide
higher education for the working classes. Thanks chiefly to
his original endowment of nearly $1 million, Cooper Union
still operates tuition-free for its select group of qualified
students.
Continue west on Gramercy Park North.
Architect Stanford White lived along here from 1901 to
1906. One of the greatest and most prolific architects of his
time, White designed lavish mansions, churches, clubhouses, and monuments that can be found all over New
York City. White was also a serious art collector who imported antiques from around the world, keeping to furnish
his home those he did not sell to clients. Despite his artistic
achievements, White is best remembered today not for his
architecture but for the scandalous circumstances of his
death. More on this later when we visit the site of his tragic
murder.
Continue west on Gramercy Park North to the corner of
East Twenty-first Street and Park Avenue.
Gramercy Park | FOUR SQUARES 139
➢
➢

Calvary Church, once the prestigious parish of the Roosevelt, Vanderbilt, and Astor families, has now been assimilated into St. George’s Parish of Stuyvesant Square.
When this impressive brownstone church was completed in
1848, it heightened the attraction of the Gramercy Park
area and prompted the sale of Samuel Ruggles’s several
still-vacant lots on the square. Its architect, James Renwick
Jr., also designed Grace Church and St. Patrick’s Cathedral. Both Edith Wharton and Eleanor Roosevelt were
baptized at Calvary. The church is best viewed from across
the street, where the empty base of one of the two original
wooden steeples can be seen. The steeples were taken down
after repeated lightning strikes.
Walk north along Park Avenue to Twenty-third Street.
Turn left (west) onto Twenty-Third Street and continue to
Broadway. Walk north across Twenty-third.
Across from the southeast corner of the park is the Metropolitan Life Tower, one of the most beautiful on the skyline. When completed in 1909, it more than doubled the
height of the Flatiron Building to the south of the park to
become the world’s tallest building. Its seven hundred-foot
tower, designed by Napoleon Le Brun, with its four-sided
clock was inspired by the Campanile in St. Mark’s Square
in Venice.
Coming to a rounded point to the south of the park is
the radically designed Flatiron Building (Daniel H. Burnham, 1902), which has remained a favorite among art critics and the general public for a century. Originally named
the Fuller Building after its developers, the Fuller Construction Company, the Flatiron acquired its nickname because its unusual triangular shape, which conforms with
the intersection of Broadway and Fifth Avenue, was
thought to resemble an old-fashioned flatiron. Measured at
FOUR SQUARES | Gramercy Park
140
➢

a then-whopping three hundred feet in height, the Flatiron
Building was a revolutionary construction and an early
steel skeleton–supported structure. Its limestone-andterra-cotta facade has subtle French Renaissance detailing,
and the rounded northern corner is only eight feet wide
(making for some unusual interior offices). Photographer
Edward Steichen, who captured the mesmerizing effect of
the Flatiron Building in his famous series of photographs,
compared its northern side to that of “the bow of a monster ocean steamer” plowing up the heart of Midtown Manhattan.
MADISON SQUARE PARK
Once the home of the most fashionable hotels and restaurants in New York, Madison Square is now bordered on all
sides by massive office buildings. The neighborhood
around Madison Square has been through many transformations. Like Union Square, it degenerated in the 1960s
and 1970s into a meeting place for drug dealers and the
homeless. It has just undergone a $5 million restoration
project (half of which was donated by the surrounding
businesses).
This site was first used by New Yorkers as a paupers’
burial ground in the eighteenth century, before becoming a
military parade ground soon after the American Revolution. In 1811, the Commissioner’s Plan that laid out the grid
pattern of Manhattan’s streets designated the entire area
between Twenty-third and Thirty-fourth Streets and
Third and Seventh Avenues as a park. It was named in
honor of President James Madison in 1814.
Madison’s Square’s first claim to fame was that it became the site of the earliest baseball games in the country. In the 1840s, the Knickerbocker Base Ball Club—the
Madison Square Park | FOUR SQUARES 141

nation’s first baseball team—used a vacant lot at Twentyseventh and Madison as its original playing field. In 1846,
however, the residential development of Madison Square
forced the club to move out of the city to Elysian Fields in
Hoboken, New Jersey, where they held the first baseball
game under modern rules.
From its official opening in 1847 until the 1870s, Madison Square was the center of a genteel, residential neighborhood. In 1859, Amos Enos constructed the enormous
white marble Fifth Avenue Hotel, which occupied an entire
block between Twenty-third and Twenty-fourth Streets,
Stanford White’s Madison Square Garden in 1893. Built in 1889 at a cost of
more than $3 million, it was New York’s second tallest building. White scandalized “proper” New York society by placing Augustus Saint-Gauden’s
naked Diana atop his lavish creation. Photo courtesy of the New-York Historical Society.

facing Madison Square. Dubbed “Enos’s folly” during its
construction, skeptics believed the hotel too far uptown to
be successful. But Enos was vindicated when, within ten
years, Madison Square became the most fashionable hotel
district in the city (home to the Albemarle, the St. James,
the Hoffman House, the Victoria, the Brunswick, and the
Gilsey Hotels). In 1876, New York’s finest restaurant, Delmonico’s, moved from Fifth Avenue and Fourteenth Street
to the northwest corner of Madison Square.
In 1873, Madison Square also became a center of popular entertainment and spectator sports. P. T. Barnum that
year constructed the world’s first three-ring circus arena,
christened the Great Roman Hippodrome. It was widely
rumored that participants in its raucous circus acts and
sporting events—which included Roman-style chariot
races—were killed on a regular basis. Despite Barnum’s
denials, the New York Times protested that “several people
have been killed there.” But “considering the popular thirst
for excitement,” the Times editorialized, “it is possible that
several may not be reckoned too many [by Mr. Barnum].”
In 1879, William Kissam Vanderbilt took control of Barnum’s arena and rechristened it Madison Square Garden.
The most fashionable hotels abandoned the area in the
1890s, moving north along Central Park. When Metropolitan Life built its first headquarters on the southeast corner
of the square in 1893, it marked the beginning of the
square’s transformation into a business district. Other office buildings soon followed. Today, some of the city’s
finest architectural achievements in commercial buildings
can be seen bordering Madison Square.
Now turn your attention to the park itself. In its southwest corner stands a prominent bronze statue of William
H. Seward, former New York governor and U.S. secretary
of state. Seward is probably best known for having orchestrated the purchase of Alaska from Russia for $7 million,
Madison Square Park | FOUR SQUARES 143

dubbed “Seward’s folly” at the time. Soon after the unveiling of this statue in 1876, a rumor began that its sculptor,
Randolph Rogers, originally cast the figure as a statue of
Abraham Lincoln issuing the Emancipation Proclamation.
When commissioned for the William Seward project, however, Rogers removed Lincoln’s head, replaced it with Seward’s, and transformed the document in the figure’s left
hand from the Emancipation Proclamation into the deed to
Alaska!
There is some truth to this story. Rogers sculpted a
nearly identical statue of Lincoln holding the Emancipation Proclamation a few years earlier, which stands today
in Fairmont Park, Philadelphia. Although he did not make
this statue from the exact same cast as the Lincoln statue
(the poses are ever-so-slightly different), he may nonetheless be said to be guilty of self-plagiarism. Both statues are
proportionately the same, wearing the same clothing,
seated in the same chair, with a quill pen in the figure’s right
hand while displaying a document in the left.
Walk back toward the intersection of Twenty-third Street
and Madison Avenue. Walk north along Madison Avenue
towards Twenty-fifth Street.
On the southeast corner of the square, across from the
Metropolitan Life Tower, stands a statue of former New
York senator Roscoe Conkling (created in 1893 by John
Quincy Adams Ward). Like William Seward, Conkling
was a powerful figure in the Republican Party for many
years and an unsuccessful aspirant to the presidency. Conkling died from exposure a few days after being caught in
the Great Blizzard of 1888. Stubbornly refusing to pay an
exorbitant cab fare, Conkling attempted to walk in the
driving snow from his downtown office to the Manhattan
Club at Madison Square. He blindly stumbled into a snow-
FOUR SQUARES | Madison Square Park
144
➢

drift while crossing Union Square Park and remained
trapped there for several hours. He never recovered from
the effects of the ordeal and died a few weeks later.
Along the east side of Madison Square is a wealth of
splendid architecture. Across from the Met Life Tower is
the North Building of the Metropolitan Life Insurance
Company (Harvey Wiley Corbett and D. Everett Waid,
1932). This Art Deco skyscraper has been praised for its elegant, angled setbacks and high-vaulted entrances. It
stands on the former site of the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church, designed by Stanford White in 1906. The
white-marble church, which resembled a Greek temple,
was demolished a mere thirteen years after its construction,
due in large part to the dwindling residential population of
the neighborhood. Many considered it White’s most beautiful building.
Directly across East Twenty-fifth Street stands the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court.
Designed by James Brown in 1900, this classical-style masterpiece of white marble is bedecked with statuary. Standing atop the building’s facade are the great lawgivers of
history, including Zoroaster, Solon, Louis IX, Manu, and
Justinian (facing East Twenty-fifth Street) and Confucius
and Moses (facing the park). A statue of Mohammed originally stood next to Zoroaster, but it was removed and destroyed in 1955 at the request of the city’s Muslim community, which pointed out that Islam forbids images of the
Prophet. The front steps of the courthouse are flanked by
statuary symbols of Wisdom and Force.
Return to the park and walk to the Admiral Farragut
Monument.
One of the finest memorials in the city, the Admiral Farragut Monument (1880) is a collaboration between Augustus
Madison Square Park | FOUR SQUARES 145
➢

Saint-Gaudens and Stanford White. The bronze figure of
Farragut was done by Saint-Gaudens while the base and relief sculpture were done by White. The hero of New Orleans and Mobile Bay, David Glasgow Farragut was a
much-beloved Civil War figure. Appropriately defiant,
Saint-Gaudens’s Farragut stares ahead with the same fearlessness as the man who famously ordered at Mobile Bay,
“Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead!” White’s relief depicts two female figures, symbolizing Loyalty and Courage, who look on in admiration as wild sea currents swirl
around them.
A statue of the twenty-first president, Chester A.
Arthur (1829–1886), stands in the northeast corner of the
park (George Bissell, 1898). Known as the “Gentleman
Boss,” Arthur controlled thousands of political appointments as Collector of the Port of New York. Elected vice
president in 1880, he ascended to the presidency in 1881
after the assassination of James Garfield. Though he had
epitomized the corruption of machine politics, Arthur
shocked the Republican Party machine when he championed civil-service reform as president. New York Republicans viewed this political turnabout as treachery to the system to which Arthur owed all of his political success. His
former friend and patron Roscoe Conkling was particularly taken aback. During his presidency, Arthur kept secret that he was suffering from a fatal kidney disease, and
he died soon after his term ended at his nearby brownstone
home on East Twenty-fifth Street.
Walk to Twenty-sixth Street and Madison Avenue, the
northeast corner of the park.
On the southeast corner of Madison Avenue and Twentyfifth Street used to stand a lavish six-story mansion of red
brick and white marble with a handsome mansard roof.
FOUR SQUARES | Madison Square Park
146
➢

Built by Leonard Jerome in 1859, the mansion was the most
striking residential home ever to stand on Madison Square.
In this home, the future mother of Winston Churchill,
Jerome’s daughter Jennie, spent much of her youth before
she married Lord Randolph Churchill and moved to
Britain. Sadly, the mansion was demolished in 1967 to make
way for the characterless glass-and-steel skyscraper that
stands on the site today.
Merchandise Mart (Emery Roth & Sons, 1973) makes
little contribution to its physical surroundings except to
completely block all southern sight lines to Cass Gilbert’s
much superior New York Life Insurance Building (1928)
next door. Capped by a brilliant gilded pyramid, the latter
limestone skyscraper is adorned with dozens of gargoyles
that punctuate its many dramatic setbacks.
This lot has a storied past. On the site of the present-day
New York Life Building once stood, successively, the original playing field of the Knickerbocker Base Ball Club, the
Harlem Railroad Station, P. T. Barnum’s Great Roman
Hippodrome, the original Madison Square Garden, and
Stanford White’s second Madison Square Garden.
One of White’s greatest achievements, the second
Madison Square Garden (1891) was a $3 million Moorishstyle building capped by an ornately decorated 249-foot
tower. It housed an eight thousand-seat auditorium, a theater, a concert hall, a roof garden, and the city’s largest
restaurant. The most talked-about architectural feature of
the building, however, was Augustus Saint-Gaudens’s
gilded Diana, perched atop the large tower. Diana’s brazen
nudity scandalized members of New York’s genteel society, who felt it improper for a female nude to be displayed
in such a public location. Soon after its unveiling, one popular magazine observed that Madison Square Park had suddenly become “thronged with club men armed with field
glasses.”
Madison Square Park | FOUR SQUARES 147

Ironically, it was here, at one of his most notable masterpieces, that Stanford White met his tragic demise. A frequenter of the Madison Square Garden’s Roof Garden theater, White also kept an apartment for himself within the
main tower (which was convenient for his legendary liaisons with showgirls who performed there). On the night
of June 25, 1906, White attended a performance of Mamzelle Champagne at the Roof Garden theater, as did Harry
K. Thaw and his wife, former showgirl Evelyn Nesbit.
Thaw had become obsessed with his wife’s sexual past and,
in particular, her previous relationship with the notorious
playboy White. During the performance of the musical,
the New York Times reported, Thaw suddenly “passed between a number of tables, and, in full view of the players
and of scores of persons, shot White through the head . . .
after firing three shots and looking at White to make sure
that he was stone dead, Thaw uttered a curse and added:
‘You’ll never go out with that woman again.’”
The story, revealed after Thaw’s arrest, captured the
public’s attention. Details of White and Nesbit’s kinky relationship came to light in the sensational murder trial that
followed. At the verdict, Thaw was found innocent for reasons of insanity. Aspects of this sordid affair have been depicted in the films Ragtime and The Girl in the Red Velvet
Swing. For many years after his death, White’s architectural achievements were denigrated and his name regarded
with embarrassment by New Yorkers, which may have
aided in the destruction of many of his greatest buildings.
Madison Square Garden met the wrecking ball in 1925.
Samuel Ruggles once predicted: “Our spaces will remain
forever imperishable. Buildings, towers, palaces may
molder and crumble beneath the touch of time, but space
. . . glorious, open space will remain to bless the city forever.” Time so far has proven him correct. Though the
FOUR SQUARES | Madison Square Park
148

buildings around them have changed remarkably, these
four city squares, carefully laid out in the 1840s, have survived as valued spaces that continue to enrich New York’s
urban landscape. These public spaces, through the generations, have remained imperishable.
Madison Square Park | FOUR SQUARES 149
