Chapter 7: Walking Tour 1 — Historic Lower Manhattan

I
n the pages ahead, you supply the feet and the eyes, and I
supply the commentary. I’ve picked three neighborhood walks
that will envelop you in the sweep of the city’s history,
architecture . . . and gossip. The first of them visits Lower Manhattan,
the oldest area of New York City, full of historical resonance. The
second, a Harlem tour, touches on Revolutionary War history, along
with 20th-century issues. The third roams around Greenwich Village,
for centuries a haven for outcasts and artists. I’m willing to bet that
one of these itineraries will be the highlight of your visit (it’s a fine
exercise for natives, too).

WALKING TOUR 1:   HISTORIC LOWER MANHATTAN
GETTING         Take subway 4 or 5 to Battery Park; walk from there into Battery
THERE:          Park and toward the river.
START:          Battery Park: Stand at a spot where you can see the river.
FINISH:         The 9/11 Memorial
TIME:           11⁄2 to 2 hr.
BEST TIMES:     Weekdays during the daytime.

Not only is this the most historic part of the city—New York reached no
farther than Wall Street for its first 100 years—it also affords the best
overview of architectural styles in the city. Buildings range from jazzy Art
Deco structures, to pseudo-Greek temples, to the soaring glass rectangles of
the “International Style” heyday, one rubbing up against the other like
guests at a fantastic costume party where Martha Washington cha-chas
uninhibitedly with George Soros. All the sites inhabit a compact, eminently
walkable area.
More importantly, Lower Manhattan is the area of the city that has seen
the most tragedy, having endured terrible fires, not one but four terrorist

attacks over the years (I describe them below), and a cruel occupation by
the British during the Revolutionary War that left the city in rubble. The
scars of these events, the weight of the tears shed, and the lives lost give this
area a resonance and presence unlike those found in most other areas of the
United States.

1 Battery Park

Look out at the river. It’s the reason this great city was built. When Henry
Hudson and his crew of 16 sailed up it in 1609, mistakenly thinking
they’d find Asia at its mouth, little did they know they were setting into
motion a chain of events that would still be shaping lives over 400 years
later. Hudson’s reports about the trading possibilities of the area
(particularly for valuable animal pelts), plus his amazement at the great
natural harbor here, spurred the Dutch to create settlements in the area.
They guessed, rightly it turned out, that the harbor of New York would be
the linchpin that would connect Europe (via the Atlantic Ocean) with the
interior of this vast and wealthy continent (via the Hudson River). Later,
after the building of the Erie Canal, which connected the Hudson with the
Great Lakes, NYC became the most powerful city in the nation.
Walk toward the circular stone building known as:
2 Castle Clinton
Go inside if the building is open. Though it doesn’t look like much now,
this circular structure (it was taller in some earlier incarnations) has, over
the years, been at the center of New York life. In 1807, the West Battery,
as it was then called, was built as a fort on a landfill island in the water
off Manhattan to ward off British invasions (it never saw action, however
—the Brits attacked Washington, D.C., instead, during the War of 1812).
In 1823, the federal government ceded the site—renamed Castle Clinton
in 1817, in honor of Mayor De Witt Clinton—to the city, and it became
an extremely popular entertainment center called Castle Gardens (the
“Swedish Nightingale,” Jenny Lind, was a headliner here in 1850). In
1855, the space was transformed once more, into the city’s first
immigrant processing center. Over eight million new arrivals, a full two-
thirds of those who came to the United States at this time, spent their first
hours in the United States here registering their names with the
government, exchanging money, and getting information on jobs, medical
care, and lodgings. By 1890, the vast number of immigrants—and the
growing problem of outsiders scamming them—necessitated a move to a
larger and more easily patrolled offshore space, Ellis Island. You can see
Ellis Island from here, to the right of the Statue of Liberty. Its main hall
reaches into the sky with four little spires.

But back to Castle Clinton: The famed architectural team of McKim,
Mead, and White then stepped in and transformed the site into the
nation’s first aquarium, visited by about 90 million people until it was
moved in 1941 to Coney Island. After the site stood empty for many
years, the National Parks Service took it over and restored the Castle
Clinton of the original fort.
Walk around Castle Clinton, past the ferry terminal, and head inland (northeast) toward
the tall buildings. Soon you’ll come upon:

Sculptures on this flagpole show the Dutch “buying” Manhattan from indigenous people in 1626.

3 Large Flagpole
At its base is a bas relief sculpture depicting the historic scene of Dutch
official Peter Minuit “buying” Manhattan from Native American residents
in 1626 in order to consolidate the Dutch colony in one easily defended
spot.

Just how the “sale” of the island went down is still a matter of
controversy. Most likely the “sellers” were the Canarsie tribe who,
according to a letter by Dutch merchant Peter Schagen, let the island go
for 60 guilders (the equivalent of $24). But did the Indians know they
were selling the island, or did they think that they were simply accepting
shiny trinkets as part of a welcome ceremony? And were the Canarsie
even in a position to sell it, as it had long been a communal hunting
ground used by a number of tribes? We’ll never know the truth of the
matter or even if it happened on this spot, but this is the one place in
Manhattan where the most infamous real estate deal in history is
memorialized.
As for Peter Minuit, he was recalled from his post in Manhattan in 1631
(much to his dismay) but returned on behalf of the Swedish government
in 1638 to set up a rival “New Sweden” colony on the Delaware River.
Walk farther inland to the plaza in front of the:
4 National Museum of the American Indian
You are now standing at the foot of Broadway, the famous thoroughfare
that leads all the way to the top of Manhattan, 13 miles away. The
original Dutch fort stood in this exact place. But what you see in front of
you is a building of just as much significance. Designed by Cass Gilbert,
this was one of the most important structures in the city when it was built
—the Alexander Hamilton U.S. Customs House. Before 1913, when the
federal government instituted the personal income tax, the federal
government’s revenue came almost entirely from customs on goods
imported into the States. And a full 75% of this revenue came from the
Port of New York, where it was processed in this appropriately grand
Beaux Arts colossus, completed in 1907 and comprising over 450,000
square feet of interior space.

Now home to the National Museum of the American Indian, the ornate Alexander Hamilton U.S. Customs
House once presided over the Port of New York.

It’s a wedding cake of an edifice, with dozens of bright white sculptures
adorning the gray granite facade. Daniel Chester French was the sculptor
—he also did the moving sculpture of Lincoln at the Lincoln Memorial in
Washington, D.C.—and his choice of symbols could be used as a treatise
on the prejudices of Victorian-era America. The four women seated at the
front represent the four “great” continents of the world. From left to right
as you look at them, they are Asia; the Americas (South America, barely
present, is tellingly represented by the Aztec-like structure that North
America has her foot on); Europe; and Africa. America and Europe look
full of vigor and purpose, but Asia has her eyes closed (perhaps in
meditation?), and Africa—in a metaphor for her lack of vision and
power?—is in a deep slumber. America is sheltering a new immigrant
who crouches to her left, and the immigrant is pushing forward a wheel
with wings on it, those of the Roman god Mercury, the divine overseer of
commerce (a comment, some think, on the essential role immigrants were
playing in the expanding economy).

At the top of the building are 12 more figures, meant to represent the
great trading nations of history: Greece, Rome, Phoenicia, Genoa, Venice,
Spain, Holland, Portugal, Denmark, England, France, and Belgium. Why
Belgium, you ask? The official story is that during World War I,
“vandals” carved belgium across the shield of the figure that had
originally been “Germany.” No explanation has ever been given on how
vandals could surreptitiously make such a big change to one of the most
visible and heavily guarded buildings in the city.
If you have the time, and are here during opening hours, go inside the
building for a peek at the WPA murals in the rotunda (depicting the great
conquistadors—ironic, as the building now houses the National Museum
of the American Indian ; see p. 177); the staircase on the right as you
enter (meant to evoke the look of the inside of a nautilus shell); and, in
what is now the study center of the museum, the elaborate, imposing rows
of teller windows where merchants would pay their Customs taxes. Entry
to the museum is free. Whether you linger will depend on what the
current exhibitions hold. There’s no permanent exhibition here.
Turn around and walk into:
5 Bowling Green Park
This was the city’s first official park (est. 1733). Had you been a soldier
during the British Colonial era, you would have been stationed at the fort
that once stood here, Fort George, and likely you’d have passed your
leisure time lawn bowling where the park now stands (hence the name
Bowling Green Park).
On July 9, 1776, the Declaration of Independence was read aloud (near
City Hall) and a small battalion of agitated colonists marched here to
behead the statue of King George that stood in the center of the park. It
had been erected just 5 years previously by many of these same men, in
gratitude for the king’s part in repealing the odious Stamp Act (the one
that provoked the “no taxation without representation” movement).
Though it can’t be proven, legend has it that the lead statue was then
melted down and used for cannon balls and bullets in the war against the
British. The fence that rings the park is the original, one of the few
colonial structures of any sort left in Manhattan (when it was first erected,

its spokes had royal crowns at their tips; these, too, were destroyed by the
colonists).
Before you go to the center of the park, look up at the great skyscrapers
that now shadow it. On your left, the building with the Egyptian motif (5
Broadway) was the headquarters of the White Star shipping line. It is here
that distraught relatives came to learn the fate of their loved ones after the
sinking of the Titanic. (There’s a famous photo of a stricken Jacob Astor
exiting the building after learning that his son had perished.) Across the
street, to your right at 26 Broadway, is the former headquarters of
Standard Oil, the company that made John D. Rockefeller his millions.
Depending on where you’re standing, you may be able to see the
representation of an elaborate oil lamp at the top.
Walk to the uptown end of the park to view Charging Bull. In 1989, a
recession inspired artist Arturo Di Modica to create the sculpture as a
symbol of bull markets to come. The city hadn’t asked for this work of
boosterism, though: Di Modica trucked it over to Wall Street in the dead
of night and dumped it below a giant Christmas tree in front of the N.Y.
Stock Exchange. The 7,000-pound statue proved so popular the city
decided to let the “gift” stay, though not in its original spot.

The Charging Bull sculpture in Bowling Green Park is a popular Financial District photo op spot.

Walk out of the park, going toward the museum and then walking on the side of the
museum on Whitehall St. until you reach Bridge St. Turn onto it and walk to Broad St.
Take a right, and in front of you will be:
6 Fraunces Tavern
The bad news first: This is not what Fraunces Tavern actually looked like,
but a hopeful reconstruction completed in 1904 and based on the
architectural styles of the period (about 40% of the building is original).
Nonetheless, it was here that the Sons of Liberty met on dozens of
occasions to discuss plans for evicting the British. Once the
Revolutionary War was over, Fraunces Tavern was the place where
George Washington delivered his famous “Farewell to the Troops” and
where Alexander Hamilton set up his first Office of the Treasury.

On a more sobering note, in 1975 Fraunces Tavern was bombed by the
Armed Forces Puerto Rican National Liberation Front. Four people were
killed and dozens injured. The choice of this site for the bombing had
dual reasons: Not only is it a symbol of American ideals, it is one of the
few important historic buildings in New York that has a Caribbean
connection, as Samuel Fraunces was an immigrant from the West Indies.
Look behind you, diagonally across the street, to see the:
7 Goldman Sachs Building
Directly across the street from the tavern is the headquarters of Goldman
Sachs, the massive glass-and-brownstone skyscraper that cuts Stone
Street in two. When it was being constructed, crews found the
foundations of old Governor Lovelace’s Tavern, another colonial-era
watering hole, and briefly seat of the colonial government. In a
compromise with local archaeologists, part of the site was left open with
a glass viewing pane atop it. If you walk around the perimeter of the
skyscraper in the same direction that you’ve been going, you should be
able to see these excavations through glass panels in the sidewalk (they’re
at the end of the rows of benches, one under the colonnade, one in the
open air). Take a moment to read the plaques and gaze down.
By the way, this street is known as Pearl because it was once the beachy
edge of the island, and it was where residents went to look for oysters.
They were one of the most common foods served in New Amsterdam;
some biologists have estimated that New York’s waters once contained as
much as half the entire world’s supply of oysters.

George Washington delivered his famous “Farewell to the Troops” at the colonial-era Fraunces Tavern.

Continue to walk northeast, curving around the Goldman Sachs building until you spot:
8 Stone Street
Here you’ll have a remarkably accurate snapshot of what the city looked
like in about 1837. This narrow winding street (it’s the next street from
Pearl St.) was the first to be paved in New Amsterdam and the only street
that is thought to still be where the Dutch colonists originally placed it.
All of the buildings were constructed in the period immediately following
the great fire of 1835, which devastated the city, wiping out 20 square city
blocks. Many blamed the volunteer firefighters of the time who, working
in rival squads for cash payment, spent more time fighting one another
than fighting the flames (Martin Scorsese’s 2002 film Gangs of New York
dramatically re-creates a similar firefighter battle).
The buildings we see today are classic Greek Revival structures of
straight up-and-down brick with granite bases. They were built as

counting houses and warehouses for local merchants. 57 Stone St., you’ll
notice, has a very Dutch steplike gable, added in 1908 by architect C. P.
H. Gilbert as a nostalgic nod to New Amsterdam.
Continue to the middle of the street and then step to the left onto:
9 Mill Lane
Mill Lane has the distinction of being the shortest street on Manhattan
(and yes, there was once a mill here). Folk tradition had it that it was here
that Peter Stuyvesant, the Dutch Director-General of New Amsterdam,
signed a treaty of surrender when the British invaded. Thanks to recently
uncovered documents, we know that historic act actually happened at
Stuyvesant’s farm, in what is today the East Village. Stuyvesant
surrendered unwillingly, having torn to pieces the first letter sent by the
British warship commander. City leaders then pieced the letter
painstakingly back together. Upon seeing the favorable terms it presented
the colonists (they would be allowed to keep their land and businesses),
93 leading citizens—including Stuyvesant’s 17-year-old son, a traitorous
young fogey—demanded Stuyvesant surrender the colony to the British.
Stuyvesant did so but mourned the loss of the colony for the rest of his
life.
Take a Break
Grab some lunch or a pint at Ulysses (95 Pearl St.; 11am–4am). There are both indoor
and outdoor tables, and a carvery at lunchtime.
At the end of Pearl St. lies:
10 Hanover Square
One of the only places in New York City to retain its “royalist” title after
the American Revolution, it was named for the House of Hanover, from
which the era’s British monarchy was descended. Once the center of the
social and political life of the city, this was where the colony’s first
newspaper was published. The cotton exchange dominated one corner.
When he was still considered a respectable citizen, notorious pirate
Captain Kidd lived here in bourgeois splendor with his wife (they were
known for their grand dinner parties). India House, on the west side of the
square, is a perfectly preserved example of a brownstone banking house
from the 1850s.

Continue walking to the uptown point of the triangle that is Hanover Square and hook a
left onto Hanover St. You’re now entering the “canyons of Wall Street,” so named
because the skyscrapers are so close together that the sidewalk gets little light. Walk
until you come to:

Built circa 1850, India House represents Hanover Square’s 19th-century heyday.

11 Wall Street
You are now standing at what was the boundary of the city during Dutch
Colonial times. If you had been alive then, you’d be staring at a 9-foot-
high wooden wall erected to keep out British invaders, who, it was
thought (wrongly), would be more likely to invade by land than by sea. If
you walk to 74 Wall St. you’ll be standing in the heart of what was once
the United States’ largest slave market, a bastion of inhumanity that held
more auctions than any other in the U.S. The sale of humans began here
in 1711, and was not fully outlawed in New York until 1827, making it
one of the last two northern states to do so. (There’s a small plaque about

the market at Water and Wall sts., but most scholars think it was actually
here, not there.)
Take a left and walk to:
12 40 Wall St.
Here is New York’s greatest monument to thwarted ambitions. Architect
H. Craig Severance had a dream: He wanted to build the tallest building
in the world, taller than the Woolworth Building (which held the record
from 1917–30). Problem was, his former partner and archrival William
Van Alen had the same aspirations, and in the summer of 1929, at the
height of the bubble that preceded Black Tuesday (the great stock market
crash), they began a “race to the top,” Severance at 40 Wall St. and Van
Alen at the Chrysler Building (p. 208). In a record 11 months, Severance
completed this building for the Bank of Manhattan at 40 Wall St., certain
that the Chrysler Building was completed and his structure would be the
tallest. But once Severance finished construction, Van Alen administered
the coup de grâce that he’d been hiding in the elevator shaft of his
building: the Chrysler Building’s iconic Art Deco spire, which added an
unbeatable 125 feet onto the building. I can only imagine that Severance
felt some small measure of satisfaction when the Chrysler’s title was
snatched from it 1 short year later by the Empire State Building. Take a
moment to gaze up at 40 Wall St.; it’s still an impressive achievement and
a beautiful building, with all of the ziggurat-like step-backs (cascading
layers) of the prototypical late ’20s skyscraper. Those setbacks were
added to allow more light to reach the street below—a change you’ll feel
after having walked through the “canyons.”
Keep walking in the same direction until you get to the corner of Wall St. and Broad St.
Our next stop is:
13 Federal Hall
The most historically significant piece of land in the city, Federal Hall is a
quintessential Greek Revival edifice, a modified version of the Parthenon
(can’t get much more Greek than that!), completed in 1842. Note the
statue of George Washington; it was here, perhaps on the very spot where
the statue now stands, that George Washington took the oath of office to
become president (though not in this actual building, but in an earlier one

located on this spot). That momentous occasion would be enough to
secure its place in history, but matters just begin there. In this former
British City Hall (transformed into “Federal Hall” when the Brits quit the
city), the famous 1735 Zenger Trial, which helped secure freedom of the
press, was held; in 1765, the pre-Revolutionary Stamp Act Congress met
to rail against “taxation without representation”; and after the war, the
new nation’s first Congress met here to draw up the Bill of Rights. Head
inside to see the magnificent rotunda, one of the loveliest public spaces in
the city. Admission is free.
Note the austere, somewhat anonymous-looking building across the
street from the hall; it was the headquarters of banker J. P. Morgan (the
window of his former office is above the flagpole). If you look closely at
the side of the building that faces Federal Hall, you’ll notice that it is
pocked with small indentations. These are the scars of the Financial
District’s first terrorist attack, which occurred in 1920. One bright and
sunny morning (isn’t it odd that these events always seem to occur on
beautiful days?), a horse and carriage loaded with explosives parked here.
Moments later a huge explosion shook the street, killing 31 people and
wounding scores more. The blast was so powerful that all that was ever
found of the horse was a horseshoe. The police used this piece of
evidence to trace the blacksmith who made it; he had vague recollections
of shoeing the horse of an Italian man, and on this scanty piece of
evidence the police (and press) decided that the blast must have been the
work of Italian anarchists. No one was ever charged with the crime.

The neoclassical facade of the New York Stock Exchange.

Next, walk toward:
14 The New York Stock Exchange
You are now gazing at the most famous (some would say infamous)
financial institution in the world. The building’s towering columns,
crowded ornamental pediment, and huge flag trumpet louder than any
opening bell that this is a place of incomparable might and prestige (it’s a
much more imposing building than the government’s plainer Federal Hall
across the street). In front of the Stock Exchange is a scraggly
buttonwood tree, meant to invoke the buttonwood that New York’s first
traders stood under in 1792 when they met to begin brokering the
Revolutionary War debt—the first stock market in America. Also in front
is the bronze statue of a fierce young girl, fists on hips—Fearless Girl,
she’s called. In March of 2017 she was set in a face-off with the Charging
Bull statue in Bowling Green (stop 5 on this tour) as a statement on the

need for more women working in finance. The bull’s sculptor loudly
objected to her presence, but she was such a popular photo op, the city
moved her here in 2018.
Continue crosstown on Wall St. toward Broadway until you arrive at:
15 1 Wall St.
Take a moment to gaze at this absolutely stunning Art Deco building,
once one of the priciest addresses in the city. The beautifully fluted,
curtainlike limestone of the facade; the spider-web pattern of the
cathedral window above the entry; and the sumptuous, soaring lobby
remind us of a time when such excess and exquisite workmanship were
the norm for places of business (which were, in the heady times before
the Stock Exchange crash, conceived as temples of commerce).
Cross the street to:
16 Trinity Church
For a full description of the history and architecture of Trinity Church, go
to p. 183. Do wander the graveyard here; it has the remains of Alexander
Hamilton and other notables.
Exit the graveyard and look uptown on Broadway, as you are now in the:
17 Canyon of Heroes
Look down as you amble along at the brass plates with names and dates
listing the ticker-tape parades that have been held along this swatch of
Broadway. Had you been here on one of those occasions in the 1930s or
’40s, the crowds around you would have been shoulder-to-shoulder, and
above your head, hundreds would have been standing at the windows,
showering the street with the long paper ribbons of stock market
quotations that spewed from their machines, marking the dance of the
stock market. Read the plates. The catalogue of names is an interesting
retread of American history and political alliances; along with athletes,
astronauts, and presidents, you’ll find parades for the American hostages
released from Iran (1982), pianist Van Cliburn (1958), and the
controversial President Sukarno of Indonesia (1956).

The Gothic Revival nave of Trinity Church.

Walk uptown on Broadway and turn left on Liberty St.:
18 Zuccotti Park
There’s not much to see anymore, but this private 1-block-long park is
where the “Occupy Wall Street” movement started in September of 2011,
bringing the concept of the power of the 1% into modern political
discourse. Activists occupied the park for almost 2 months before being
forced out on November 15 by the police.
Continue walking on Liberty St. to Church St. You’ll pass the Oculus (p. 23). Follow the
signs to:
19 The 9/11 Memorial and Museum
Be sure to reserve advance tickets online so that you can skip some of the
lines at this sobering museum. If you don’t have time for the museum, be
sure to walk around the 8-acre 9/11 Memorial Plaza, which is centered on
the 1-acre footprints of both towers. For more information, see p. 168.
