Chapter 2: City Layout & NYC Neighborhoods in Brief

CITY LAYOUT
Lots of people travel to New York, plop themselves down into Times
Square, and never go anywhere else. They seem to fear venturing into
neighborhoods that exist for purposes other than tourism.
You don’t have to be among them. By devoting just a few minutes to
learning the basic geography of New York and its distinctive neighborhoods,
you can immensely enhance your enjoyment of this multifaceted city. And
once you absorb the highly logical organization of New York’s
transportation system, you’ll find that you can zip from place to place with
minimal fuss.

The Grid Plan of Manhattan
The city is composed of five boroughs on four different pieces of land, only
one of which is on the North American continent! When people talk about
“New York City,” however, most are referring to the borough of Manhattan,
which is a narrow island between New Jersey and Long Island, bordered by
the Hudson and East rivers.
Finding your way around Manhattan is easier than in almost any other
city because of the careful plan that was adopted for laying out the city’s
avenues and streets. In the areas above 14th Street, the city fathers imposed
a strict grid upon Manhattan, leveling hills and tearing down existing homes
to create straight, evenly spaced thoroughfares in all but a few places. The
grid consists of numbered streets and avenues that cross each other at right
angles. If you can count up to 100, you can get around this surprisingly
compact island.
Streets in Manhattan are numbered and run from east to west. So if
you’re on 23rd Street and wish to get to 42nd Street, you simply go 19
blocks north. To get from 80th Street to 75th Street, walk 5 blocks south.
The avenues of Manhattan run north to south, with some bearing
numbers and others names (which does complicate the picture, but only a
bit). The numbering goes from east to west, with First Avenue being close
to the East River and Twelfth Avenue on the far west side of the island near
the Hudson River. Interspersed between these numbered avenues on the east
side are several named avenues, including Park (the uptown name for
Fourth Ave.), Lexington, and Madison. On the west side above 59th Street,
Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth avenues turn into Central Park West, Columbus
Avenue, and Amsterdam Avenue, respectively.

Manhattan’s orderly street grid has a few exceptions. In this aerial shot, you can see how Broadway cuts its own
diagonal path across the grid, from the Financial District all the way to the top of Manhattan.

The exceptions to the grid rule (all found below 14th St.) are the
Financial District, Chinatown, Little Italy, the Lower East Side, Greenwich
Village, SoHo, and TriBeCa. These southern parts of Manhattan were the
first to be settled, and therefore follow a haphazard non-system of streets
and alleys that curve and twist, sometimes doubling back on themselves
(most famously in Greenwich Village, where W. 4th St. goes rogue, angling
north to cross W. 10th, 11th, 12th, and 13th sts.). Because most of these

southern-section streets bear names rather than numbers (Delancey St., Wall
St., Church St.), orienting yourself can be tricky. It’s important to carry a
good map and ask for directions when necessary. Even native New Yorkers
can get lost down there.
New York City Neighborhoods in Brief It never fails to
amaze. I’m strolling along a pleasant street of small
brownstones; I come to the corner, and suddenly, the
landscape morphs. I’m a small ant in a canyon of
skyscrapers, or else I’m a visitor to India, surrounded by
cumin-scented restaurants and men with strong accents
beckoning me into their curry joints. New York is a city of
multiple personalities, and they can shift on a dime,
within the space of 1 block going from elegant to seedy,
from industrial to chic, from ethnic to all-American.
It’s this quicksilver quality, this constant metamorphosis, that endows even a short stroll
in New York with real excitement. I urge you to spend at least part of your vacation simply
ambling around, window-shopping, eavesdropping on passing conversations, and
exploring places beyond the heavily touristed areas.
Here’s what you’ll find in the various—and strikingly different—neighborhoods of New
York City.

DOWNTOWN

The Financial District
Best for: Museums, historic sites, architecture, and access to Ellis Island, the Statue of
Liberty, and the Brooklyn Bridge What you won’t find: Highly populated streets after
nightfall, theaters Parameters of the neighborhood: Everything south of Chambers St.
This is where New York City—then New Amsterdam—was born. The area packs the same
historic punch as colonial sections of Boston and Philadelphia. It was on Wall Street that
George Washington took the oath of office as America’s first president. It was here, at
Fraunces Tavern, that the Sons of Liberty gathered to plot the overthrow of the British. It
was at Castle Clinton and then Ellis Island that millions of immigrants flooded the city in
the 19th and 20th centuries to get their first glimpse of a “promised land.” The great
financial movers and shakers also stalked the area (and continue to do so today), and a
visit to these “canyons of greed” at the beginning of the day or at 5pm, when those men
and women in suits and trader’s smocks pour onto the streets, is an exciting sight. As
recent history has overshadowed other sights, for many visitors this has simply become
the place to pay respects at the 9/11 Memorial and Museum. Interestingly, many former
office buildings have transformed into apartments in the past 5 years, meaning there’s far
more life on the streets outside of business hours today than there was pre-pandemic.

Chinatown (& Little Italy)
Best for: Affordable dining and shopping What you won’t find: Top museums, streets
without gridlock, theaters, much nightlife Parameters of the neighborhood: Chinatown
is roughly bordered by Broome St. to the north, Allen St. to the east, Worth St. to the
south, and Lafayette St. to the west At points, Chinatown takes on aspects of Shanghai or
Beijing: the dense crowds on the streets, the awnings with Chinese characters, the
pinging sound of Chinese conversation everywhere. It’s a fun, truly transporting area to
visit and one that’s been voraciously swallowing up other neighborhoods—Little Italy, the
Jewish Lower East Side—for the past few decades. In fact, except for 2 blocks of Mulberry
Street (from Canal to Broome), strung with colored lights, Little Italy has ceased to exist
and is really only a tourist-trapping shadow of its former self. There are a handful of
worthwhile places to shop for Italian food, eat gelato, or get Italian coffee, but very few
real Italian Americans around anymore. For great, cheap eats (and shopping), stick with
Asian restaurants and marts, for the most part.

Chinatown’s vibrant street life includes outdoor card games in Columbus Park.

TriBeCa, Nolita & SoHo
Best for: Dining, bars, star sightings, architecture, shopping What you won’t find:
Cutting-edge galleries (they’re now mostly in Chelsea), museums Parameters of the
neighborhood: It’s all in the names. SoHo means “south of Houston Street.” This
fashionable neighborhood extends down to Canal St., between Sixth Ave. to the west
and Lafayette St. (1 block east of Broadway) to the east. Nolita means “north of Little
Italy,” referring to Mott St., Mulberry St., and Elizabeth St. north of Kenmare St. TriBeCa
is the Triangle Below Canal St., consisting of all the blocks south of Canal St. and north of
Chambers St., between Broadway and the Hudson River.
Now that we’ve gotten that out of the way, we’re left with the harder task of figuring out
why the ultra-rich are so attracted to this area of former factories and tenements. They
certainly wouldn’t have wanted to work or live here back in the 19th and early 20th
centuries, but these formerly industrial areas draw a lot of boldfaced names today. And

with these arrivistes has come a welcome wagon of hot restaurants, boutiques, spas, and
boîtes. Which means simply wandering these often-cobblestoned streets, by the cast-iron
buildings (SoHo has the most of any area in the world), can be a hoot.

The Lower East Side & East Village
Best for: Dining, bars, dance and music clubs, innovative theaters, local designer-clothing
shops, cheeky art galleries

Free
New
York
City
Tours
If you’d like to tour a specific neighborhood with an expert guide, contact Big Apple
Greeter (www.bigapplegreeter.org; 212/669-8159). For 25 years this non-profit
group has been pairing volunteers with visitors for free and highly personal looks at
the city. The guides are not expected to be able to spout history or talk in detail about
the architecture of the places you’ll be visiting. Instead, they introduce tourists to the
city they know and love deeply, taking them to areas that few outsiders see. The 4-
hour tours are for individuals and couples (the largest group they accept is five
people) and are hugely popular, so book 4 weeks in advance of arrival (or more),
because many would-be participants are turned away.

What you won’t find: Many hotels, museums (with the exception of the very fine
Tenement Museum, the International Center for Photography, and the New Museum of
Contemporary Art) Parameters of the neighborhood: Between Houston and Canal sts.
east of the Bowery For millions, these areas were once the portal to America. In fact, the
buildings you see on the Lower East Side were built expressly to house the teeming
masses of immigrants who flooded into New York between roughly 1840 and 1930. At the
turn of the last century, this was the most densely populated area in the world, with a
dozen people to an apartment and pushcarts jamming the streets. While there are some
remnants of that life in the old-world fabric and luggage stores along Orchard Street,
these areas are mostly known today for bars, lounges, art galleries, and music clubs. It’s in
these two neighborhoods that you’re most likely to find young designers opening their
own tiny stores and protégés of the town’s great chefs trying out their own first
restaurants. I may be prejudiced because I live in the East Village, but I find it one of the
most vibrant areas of Manhattan, though many blocks have lost their gritty edges thanks
to ever-rising real estate prices.

Greenwich Village
Best for: Strolling, dining, historic sites, lovely architecture, specialty food shops, theater,
live music clubs, star sightings What you won’t find: Museums, many hotels Parameters
of the neighborhood: From Broadway west to the Hudson River, bordered by Houston
St. to the south and 14th St. to the north Greenwich Village has always been where the
city’s outsiders and oddballs have found a haven. In Dutch Colonial times, it was farmland
set outside the walls of the city. At the turn of the 20th century, the area was a bohemian
enclave where artists of all sorts (Mark Twain, Edgar Allan Poe, Eugene O’Neill, and
Winslow Homer, to name a few) could find cheap lodging and companionship. In the
1950s, it was at the center of the Beat movement; in the ’60s and ’70s, the area around
Christopher Street became the hub of a burgeoning gay rights movement (in the ’80s, it
was a hotbed of AIDS-related activism).
Today, high real estate prices have dulled the Village’s edge, and you’re more likely to
see dads with strollers than long-haired poets walking these streets. And that dad might
be Anderson Cooper, one of the many celebs who now call the tree-shaded brownstones
of the Village home sweet home. But the charms of the area are still intact, as is the
illusion that you’ve entered another city altogether. Very few buildings in the
neighborhood reach 10 stories, and small shops elbow out chain stores. It’s a wonderful
place to simply come and get lost. See our walking tour (p. 322).

The Meatpacking District & Chelsea
Best for: Art galleries, nightlife, shopping, the High Line, gay bars, bars What you won’t
find: Theaters, museums (other than the Whitney) Parameters of the neighborhood:
Chelsea lies roughly west of Sixth Ave. from 14th St. to 30th St.; the Meatpacking District extends
south to 12th St. west of Greenwich Ave.
Manhattan’s Chelsea neighborhood is today what SoHo was 10 years ago, and what
Greenwich Village was 20 years ago, meaning that if you want to go art gallery hopping,
this is where to head. The so-called Meatpacking District, named for the slaughterhouses
that once filled the area west of Greenwich Avenue, has become an extremely popular
nightlife destination (and a shopping mini-mecca for its handful of super-trendy stores). It’s
NYC’s adult Disneyland, filled with late-night clubs, bars, and restaurants that are
unhindered by the city’s zoning laws (since there are no schools or churches in this part of
town). Three final reasons to come here: the fab Whitney Museum (p. 191); the High
Line park, a marvel of urban reclamation (p. 262); and Little Island (p. 263), a custom-
built pleasure isle in the Hudson.

The Flatiron District, Union Square & Gramercy Park Best for:
Dining, hotels, historic sites, architecture, off-Broadway theater,
shopping, bars What you won’t find: Museums (with the exception
of Fotografiska).
Parameters of the neighborhood: The Flatiron District runs south from 23rd St. to 14th
St., between Broadway and Sixth Ave.; Union Square is the hub of the district from 14th
St. to 18th St.; the Gramercy Park neighborhood lies between 16th and 23rd sts., from
Park Ave. S to Second Ave.

Chelsea’s High Line park has plenty of seating where pedestrians can park themselves and people-watch.

As you meander through these three bustling, adjoining (and overlapping) areas, you’re
likely to see brown street signs proclaiming ladies mile. It was on this stretch, mostly on
Broadway and Park Avenue South, that the first wave of department stores transformed
the lives of New Yorkers in the 1850s. Instead of hopping from a dry-goods shop for
fabric to a milliner for hats to a cobbler for shoes, women from all over the city came here
to outfit themselves and their homes in stores that had everything they needed under one
roof. Notice the large plate-glass windows on many facades, another department store
innovation. Above, the windows are much smaller and point to a second element of the
“Ladies Mile”: brothels. When the stores closed for the day, the establishments upstairs
opened. And where there’s prostitution, theater often follows. The area around Union
Square was New York’s first show district and has become an important off-Broadway
theater district again in recent years. The dining scene is also hot here.
For the best strolling, head directly to the Gramercy Park area, named for the only
privately owned park in the city (the keys go to those apartment owners whose windows
overlook the park). Around the park, a number of beautifully preserved historic homes
and clubs include the wisteria-clad home of former Mayor James Harper (4 Gramercy Park
S), the Players Club (16 Gramercy Park S; its members included Edwin Booth and Mark
Twain), and the National Arts Club (15 Gramercy Park S, a hangout for Woodrow Wilson
and Theodore Dreiser).

MIDTOWN

Hudson Yards
Best for: Shopping, dining, and performance art What you won’t find: Museums, hotels
(with one exception), real NYC street life Parameters of the neighborhood: From 30th
to 35th sts. and Tenth Ave. to the river Gotham’s newest neighborhood looks more like
Dallas than New York City, due to its gleaming centerpiece mall and the proportions and
placement of its skyscrapers. Still, a few attractions make it worth a visit, foremost among
them The Shed (p. 345), a spectacular new arts center.

Times Square & Midtown West
Best for: Theaters and entertainment of all sorts, the Museum of Modern Art, Rockefeller
Center, Macy’s What you won’t find: Serenity Parameters of the neighborhood: From
35th St. to 59th St. west from Fifth Ave. to the Hudson River Midtown West, a vast area,
encompasses several famous places: Madison Square Garden, the Garment District,
Rockefeller Center, the Theater District, and Times Square. It’s the area most people think
of when they think of New York, and the reason why so many visitors say with a smirk,
“Well, it’s a nice place to visit, but I couldn’t ever live there.” And because they’re basing
their judgments on crowded, loud, pushy midtown, they’re absolutely right: It’s unlivable .
. . which is why so few New Yorkers actually live in this area. In certain parts of midtown
there’s no residential housing whatsoever, and it’s only the tourists who attempt to get a
good night’s sleep in this bustling neighborhood.

Midtown East & Murray Hill
Best for: Great architecture, shopping (and window-shopping), historic sites, the United
Nations, the Empire State Building What you won’t find: Museums, nightlife (again, with
some exceptions) Parameters of the neighborhood: East from Fifth Ave. to the East
River, north from 34th St. to 57th St.
In the 1950s, Madison, Park, and Lexington avenues started to sprout skyscrapers and
were soon rivaling the Wall Street area for office space. That’s primarily what you’ll find
here: people in suits, looming glass towers, and lots of traffic. Among all that are some
spectacular architectural sights like Grand Central Station (p. 212), St. Patrick’s
Cathedral (p. 216), the Chrysler Building (p. 208), and the Seagram Building (52nd and
Park Ave.). Go closer to the East River and the area becomes largely residential, with little
to recommend it to visitors beyond Bloomingdale’s and the United Nations (p. 218). A
tremendously popular stretch of Fifth Avenue, from 57th Street down to the Empire State
Building at 34th Street, offers some of the best window-shopping on the planet.

Lying between the Upper East Side and Upper West Side, Central Park provides an inviting green escape for
those neighborhoods.

UPTOWN

Upper East Side
Best for: Museums, architecture, window-shopping, Central Park What you won’t find:
Fine dining (although I list some exceptions to that), theater, music clubs Parameters of
the neighborhood: Starts at 59th St. and encompasses the area east of Central Park
10021 is the richest zip code in the world, and it belongs to the Upper East Side; in
particular, the swank swath of pavement that runs from 61st to 80th streets. Also known as
“The Gold Coast” and “Millionaire’s Mile,” this is the stomping grounds for New York’s
high society: the Prada-clad women and old-money men who sit on the boards of the
neighborhood museums, go to cocktail parties, and endow scholarships for kicks. Their
mansions and marble-faced townhouses make for nifty sightseeing for those interested in
architecture, and the shops along Madison Avenue offer a peek into the extravagant
fashions adopted by the 1% and the top designers who serve them.
Museums also play a key role on the Upper East Side; there’s a greater concentration of
top-flight museums here than anywhere else in the country, with the exception of the Mall
in Washington, D.C. You’ll want to spend at least 1 day exploring Museum Mile—the
Metropolitan (p. 224), Guggenheim (p. 229), Cooper Hewitt (p. 219), and more are all
in the area.

Upper West Side
Best for: Museums (the American Museum of Natural History and the New-York Historical
Society), Central Park, kid-friendly restaurants, classical music and dance at Lincoln Center
and elsewhere What you won’t find: Great shopping (with some exceptions), edge
Parameters of the neighborhood: Starts at 59th St. and encompasses everything west
of Central Park In some ways, the Upper West Side has the most suburban vibe of any of
Manhattan’s neighborhoods. National chain stores line the major thoroughfares and the
sidewalks swarm with strollers. It’s a popular area for families thanks to its proximity to
Central Park, the American Museum of Natural History, and the Children’s Museum of
Manhattan. It’s still an extremely pleasant place to visit with good, if chain-oriented,
shopping; a handful of top-notch museums; New York’s famous performing arts hub,
Lincoln Center; and, of course, access to the glories of Central Park.

Harlem
Best for: Dining, bars, clubs, historic sites What you won’t find: Theaters, museums
(except for the Museo del Barrio) Parameters of the neighborhood: Harlem proper
stretches from river to river, beginning at 125th St. on the west side, 96th St. on the east
side, and 110th St. north of Central Park. East of Fifth Ave., Spanish Harlem (El Barrio)
runs between E. 100th and E. 125th sts.
Perhaps the most rapidly transforming neighborhood in the city, Harlem is safer and
cleaner than it’s been in decades . . . but may be losing some of its intrinsic character. A
largely African-American neighborhood since the 1920s—and home to some of the
greatest Black writers, politicians, and artists of the 20th century—the neighborhood is
now drawing an increasing number of non-Black residents, lured here by lower real estate
prices and the beauty of a brownstone-lined community. My recommendation: Visit here
soon before the authentic soul and Caribbean joints disappear, the gospel churches lose
their swing, and the rhythm of the streets changes its beat. There’s much to see, including
dozens of well-preserved Beaux Arts brownstones, the Apollo Theater, and a hopping bar
scene. See walking tour, p. 315.

THE OUTER BOROUGHS

Brooklyn
Best for: Museums, parks, lovely architecture, innovative galleries, dining, the city’s
hottest club and bar scene, great views of Manhattan What you won’t find: You find
pretty much all the same types of attractions in Brooklyn as you will in Manhattan. It
deserves a visit!
With 2.6 million residents (according to the last census), Brooklyn is the most populous
borough of the city, and at 71 square miles, it’s also the largest. It’s very difficult to pin
down Brooklyn’s personality, as it’s just too darn big to be summarized in a nutshell.
The two most affluent neighborhoods are Brooklyn Heights, which is right off the
Brooklyn Bridge, boasting spectacular views of Manhattan; and Park Slope, the area
surrounding Prospect Park, Frederick Law Olmsted’s other great work of landscape
architecture (after Central Park). Both are stellar strolling areas, filled with lovely Beaux
Arts brownstone buildings (Brooklyn Heights was the first neighborhood in the city to be
landmarked). Not long ago, the New York Times discovered that apartments in these
neighborhoods, for the first time, were selling for more than apartments in many areas of
Manhattan.
The borough’s artists tend to live in Red Hook, Greenpoint, Gowanus, Williamsburg
(though many are getting priced out here), and a few holdouts still in DUMBO (the area
“Down Under the Manhattan Bridge Overpass”). You can pop by all for afternoons of
gallery- or artist-studio-hopping. Williamsburg has a split personality. Part of it houses
one of the largest Hasidic Jewish communities in the world. Walk the streets peopled by
this sect and you may feel as if you’ve stepped back into an old country shtetl (an illusion
only somewhat ruined by the incongruous but ever-present cellphones). The other half is
hipster heaven, a neighborhood of art galleries, bustling boîtes, and soigné boutiques.
Rumor has it that men who move here must sign a pledge to grow a beard within 3
months of signing their lease.
Eastern Europe also makes an appearance in Brighton Beach, which has the largest
expat Ukrainian and Russian community in the world. It’s not the friendliest area, but
fascinating to visit nonetheless, with stores selling endless rows of nesting dolls and Lenin
T-shirts, and small-scale nightclubs that out-glitz and out-crass Vegas. Just up the shore
from Brighton Beach, famed Coney Island (p. 243) still holds an amusement park, though
one with less panache than in its heyday.
Among the touristic highlights of the borough are the views from the Brooklyn Heights
promenade and the new Domino Park; Peter Luger, an iconic steakhouse in
Williamsburg; shows at the Brooklyn Academy of Music; and in Park Slope, a
constellation of sights including the Brooklyn Museum, the Brooklyn Botanical
Gardens, and Prospect Park.

The Bronx
Best for: Baseball, Italian restaurants, zoos, and gardens What you won’t find:
Museums, nightlife, other types of noteworthy food, hotels, theaters I may be
condemned for this assessment, but to my mind there are only four reasons a tourist
should even think of going to the Bronx: Yankee Stadium (p. 375), the Bronx Zoo (p.
237), the New York Botanical Garden (p. 238), and the Italian restaurants and stores of
Arthur Avenue (p. 162). If you have no interest in any of these sights or facilities, you can
skip this giant borough without too much regret.

Queens
Best for: Museums, ethnic dining, affordable hotels What you won’t find: Theaters,
great shopping, top architecture

As Williamsburg, Brooklyn, has morphed into a hipster haven, cafe life has blossomed.

Archie Bunker no longer lives in Queens. In fact, the grouchy, bigoted xenophobe at the
center of the famed 1970s sitcom All in the Family probably wouldn’t recognize the
borough today. In just the past 50 years it’s gone from being a somewhat insulated
community of Irish and Italian Americans to the most international community in the
United States. A single afternoon in Queens can make a visitor feel like a globe-trotter,
which gives Queens a special appeal, despite the dreary, industrial look of much of it.
Whether you’re downing samosas or shopping for saris in very Indian Jackson Heights,
breaking plates at a Greek restaurant in Astoria, or buying miracle water and tacos at a
Mexican botanica in Corona, there’s much to taste, smell, and experience.
Museums are another big draw, and the borough now rivals Brooklyn for its cultural
attractions, boasting four great ones: the Museum of the Moving Image, P.S. 1 Museum
of Contemporary Art, Isamu Noguchi Galleries, and the Louis Armstrong House.

Staten Island
Best for: Views of Manhattan from the ferry, outlet shopping What you won’t find:
Notable museums, nightlife, hotels, theaters, interesting architecture And I’ll again be
blunt: Except for the fun and free ferry ride here, and the outlet mall near the ferry
terminal, there’s little reason for tourists to visit. Yes, there are a handful of cultural and
historic sites, but none that are more compelling than those in the other boroughs. And a
mall is a mall is a mall is a mall . . .
