Chapter 7: Walking Tour 2 — Harlem

WALKING TOUR 2:   HARLEM
GETTING         Take the 2 or 3 subway to 125th St.
THERE:
START:          Walk downtown to 120th St. and Malcolm X Blvd. (also known
as Lenox Ave.).
FINISH:         The Apollo Theater, 253 W. 125th St.
TIME:           1 hr.

BEST TIMES:     Daylight hours

More than in any other place in the city, you need a strong imagination and
social sense to really enjoy touring Harlem. The tragic fact is that much of
what made this area unique, lively, and . . . well, Harlem, during the fabled
Jazz Era (aka the Harlem Renaissance), crumbled beneath the wrecking ball
decades ago. What you now see—wide avenues, rows of brownstones,
elegant apartment buildings—are somewhat an accident of history, the
physical face of an area that housed a people but wasn’t necessarily “of”
that people (I’ll explain below). Despite all this, Harlem remains the
African-American capital of the United States (sometimes called the
“capital for Africans throughout the world”), a one-of-a-kind area with
much to recommend it. Architect Zevilla Jackson Preston best sums up its
appeal in the book HarlemWorld, in which she writes, “Ultimately it is the
energy on the street, the beat on the street—all of the beautiful Black people
on the streets—that make the experience unique.”
Harlem was settled by a number of different groups over the years—
Dutch farmers first, followed by their British counterparts, then poor Irish
and Italian immigrants. But development only took off in the years just
prior to 1904, when the city’s first subway line opened, a 91⁄2-mile snaking
tunnel connecting Lower Manhattan with points as far north as 145th Street.
In anticipation of this event, an unprecedented housing boom hit the
neighborhood, with developers slapping up Victorian row house after row
house for the crowds of upwardly mobile immigrants—middle-class Jews
and Germans, primarily—they were certain would soon flood this newly
commutable neighborhood. What they didn’t anticipate were recessions and
panics in 1893, 1907, and 1910, which deflated the housing market and
badly affected the development of large numbers of homes on the Upper
West Side.

Handsome Greek Revival town houses line Striver’s Row, on West 138th and 139th streets.

Left with hundreds of unrentable homes, property owners soon began
doing what nobody else had done in the history of the United States: renting
or selling brand-new, often beautifully appointed buildings to the race that
had, until that point, always made do with the tumble-down ghetto housing
no other group would accept. In 1905, pioneering real estate agent Philip
Payton persuaded a white landlord to rent him 31 W. 133rd St. so he could
re-lease it to African Americans. The landlord accepted the offer because
Payton promised to pay far more than the going rate, a substantial $5 more
per tenant per month (a lot of money in those days). Several other white
landlords panicked and bought the building in order to evict the Black
tenants, but by then it was too late. Payton had the funding to buy several
other buildings, and Black migration into the area began in earnest. What
you see in Harlem today are homes and businesses that were not created by
or for African Americans. These lovely buildings, however, did allow for an

unprecedented standard of living and security, primarily in the 1920s, ’30s,
and ’40s, for African Americans.
Another thing you won’t see in Harlem today are the Jazz Era nightclubs
and theaters for which the area was famed. Tragically, those historic sites
were torn down. But we will visit places where the great figures of Harlem,
men and women such as Langston Hughes, Malcolm X, Mother Hale, and
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., lived, worked, and made history.
A note about this tour: Harlem is by far the largest neighborhood in
Manhattan, stretching from approximately 116th Street all the way up to the
river. There’s no way to see it all in one walk, but this tour gives you a taste
of the area’s history from different eras. I’d urge you to go back and see
such historic gems as Striver’s Row, Sugar Hill, and the home of Alexander
Hamilton.

1 Mt. Olivet Baptist Church
Stand across the street (120th St. and Malcolm X Blvd., aka Lenox Ave.)
so that you can get a better look at this prominent Harlem Church (over
the years, presidential candidate Howard Dean and the late Venezuelan
President Hugo Chavez have addressed the congregation). If you look
closely, you’ll notice something that one doesn’t usually see on the facade
of a church: several Stars of David. This church epitomizes the
neighborhood’s transformation over the years; it was built (in 1907) to be
the neighborhood’s first synagogue. The architect, the first Jewish
architect licensed in New York State, based its design on that of the
Second Temple in Jerusalem, which had just been excavated, making
worldwide headlines. Remember the name Louis Blumstein, a prominent
member of this congregation, as he’ll reappear later in this walking tour.
Walk uptown on Malcolm X Blvd., turn left on 122nd St., and walk to 152 W. 122nd St.,
which is:
2 Hale House
We jump forward now a century to 1969 when an act of kindness changed
the lives of thousands of children. A young woman named Lorraine Hale
was driving on 146th Street when she saw a drugged-out mother nodding
off on the street, her 2-month-old baby almost slipping from her arms.

Ms. Hale got out of the car and told the mother she needed to get
treatment and that she could leave the baby with her own mother—Clara
McBride Hale—while she got sober. The next day the drug-addicted
mother did just that, and soon hundreds of babies were being left with
“Mother Hale,” who pioneered methods of treating babies born with
addictions (and also took in a lot of HIV-positive babies).

This all happened during the 1960s, ’70s, and ’80s, a period of steep
decline for Harlem, a time when many landlords stopped maintaining and
even abandoned the buildings in the neighborhood (in 1960, a census
showed only 50% of the housing in Harlem to be deemed sound, as
opposed to 85% elsewhere in the city). Harlem became synonymous with
urban decay, and Hale House, though a controversial institution later, was
one of its few rays of hope. You can read more about the house and its
mission on the plaque at the door.
Walk back to Malcolm X Blvd., cross the street, and walk east on 122nd St. until you get
to:
3 4-16 W. 122nd St.

This is not a famous building, but a very beautiful one and a good
example of the kind of talent that was enlisted to build Harlem’s
brownstones when the neighborhood was first being developed. This one
is by architect William Tuthill, who went on to design Carnegie Hall later
in his career. As in many Gotham brownstones, the main entrance is on
the second, not the ground, floor. Why? It’s a tradition left over from
when the Dutch settled Manhattan. A people from a sea-level land, prone
to flooding, it was their tradition to place the more important rooms above
ground level, locating the kitchen and servants quarters below.
Look toward the park at the east end of the street. It used to be called:
4 Mount Morris Park
Named for General Roger Morris, this park was created in honor of the
very first American victory in the Revolutionary War. It was in the
vicinity of where you’re standing now, on September 16, 1776, that
George Washington engaged in what he called a “brisk little skirmish”
with the Redcoats. Just 1 month earlier, the largest British expeditionary
fleet in history had sailed into New York Harbor, bringing with it 21,000
troops, a full 40% of all the men serving in the Royal Navy at that time.
In quick order, these trained soldiers slaughtered approximately 2,800
American militiamen at the Battle of Brooklyn, forcing Washington to
escape Brooklyn under cover of night and hightail it to the northern
reaches of Manhattan. At the small battle on this site, called the Battle of
Washington Heights, enemy buglers taunted the colonists by playing the
call that traditionally ended a foxhunt. Enraged, Washington called for
reinforcements and drove the Redcoats back to what is now the Upper
West Side. It was the first time his soldiers had won an engagement and
did much to boost morale. Many years later, in 1969, the park hosted the
outdoor Harlem Cultural Festival—sometimes called “the Black
Woodstock”—celebrated in the 2021 Oscar-winning documentary
Summer of Soul. In 1973 the park was renamed Marcus Garvey Park, in
honor of the founder of the Universal Negro Improvement Association.

In Marcus Garvey Park (formerly Mount Morris Park), this cast-iron tower was built in 1857 as a fire lookout.

Walk back to Malcolm X Blvd. and walk uptown to:
5 55 W. 125th St.
Former President Bill Clinton had his first office after his presidency on
the top floor of this high-rise building. He decided to move to Harlem
after a public outcry over the taxpayer-supported rent on his proposed
Carnegie Hill office space (a whopping $850,000 per year). Alas, he’s no
longer headquartered here, but it was an appropriate choice: Harlem is
one of the Business Empowerment Zones his administration created, and
you’ll see all around you signs of the prosperity that policy engendered.
Walk east to Fifth Ave., turn uptown, and walk to 127th St. Turn east and walk to 20 E.
127th St.:
6 The Former Home of Poet Langston Hughes
Hughes bought this brownstone in 1947, likely with the royalties he
received for writing the libretto to the Broadway musical Street Scene.
His was an open house, with other writers, musicians, and friends from

the neighborhood dropping by at all hours. He was particularly known for
his kindness to the children of the neighborhood; he called the garden in
front of his house “The Children’s Garden” and let the little ones plant
whatever they wanted to there. It was in this house that he wrote his
famous book-length poem, Montage for a Dream Deferred.
Walk back to Fifth Ave. and continue uptown to the corner of 128th St. Here, you’ll see:
7 Collyer Park
Are you a fan of the TV show Hoarders? This pretty pocket park marks
the site where the most famous hoarders of the pre-television age once
lived, a pair of reclusive brothers who occupied their home here from the
1880s until their deaths in 1947. Though rumors swirled about their
compulsive behavior, nobody knew the extent of their hoarding until both
were found dead in their home, surrounded by 140 tons of stuff—books,
musical instruments, towering stacks of newspapers, baby carriages,
guns, furniture, and all manner of junk, all set with booby traps to ward
off outsiders. It took over a year to clear out the house, which was
eventually razed—it was rotting on its foundations.
Walk back to Malcolm X Blvd. and walk downtown to 125th St. Turn right (west) and
proceed on to:
8 The Corner of Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard and
125th Street
Abuzz with history, this intersection is one of the most important in
Harlem. Look over first at the windswept northeast corner, where the
statue of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Harlem’s first African-American
congressman, stands. This is also the spot where Malcolm X spent many
hours lecturing to Harlem residents on behalf of the Nation of Islam. His
message—“We are Blacks first and everything else second”—was so
powerful, and he was such an effective orator, that before he left the NOI
that organization had nearly half a million members (it dwindled rapidly
after he resigned). His controversial message, which rejected non-
violence and condemned integration as cultural suicide, went directly
against the goals of the NAACP, the largest civil rights organization of the
time.

NYC’s first African-American congressman, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., is commemorated with a statue on 125th
Street, Harlem’s main thoroughfare.

Now, look across the street at the tall white building with geometric
patterns climbing up its facade, the former Hotel Theresa. If your
olfactory glands have any imagination, you may detect a hint of Cuban
cigar smoke in the air. In 1960, a young Fidel Castro was scheduled to
speak at the United Nations, but no hotel in town would take him and his
contingent. After he threatened to set up camp on the lawn of the United
Nations, the government ordered city hotels to accommodate him, but
Castro got into an argument with the midtown hotel he’d picked, the
Shelburne Hotel. After a conversation with Malcolm X, he moved up here
to the Hotel Theresa—a dramatic gesture Castro hoped would show his
solidarity with Black Americans (and perhaps encourage a few to join the
Communist Party). Repeated clashes between pro- and anti-Castro forces

outside the hotel kept busy the 258 police officers assigned to guard him.
On his second day at the Theresa, Nikita Khrushchev came to visit; his
police contingent plus Castro’s created the greatest show of force Harlem
had ever witnessed (to this day, it hasn’t been matched).
Four years later, when Malcolm X broke with the Nation of Islam to
found his own Organization of Afro-American Unity (open to people of
all religions), he held his press conference at the Theresa and soon
afterward moved his offices here. When he was assassinated in 1965, just
1 year later, this is where crowds gathered to mourn, until they were
dispersed by the police.
Walk farther west until you get to 230 W. 125th St., the former:
9 Blumstein’s Department Store
When it opened its doors in 1900, this was the neighborhood’s largest and
most exclusive store, built at a cost of $1 million (notice the beautifully
worked copper ornamentation on the facade, a mix of Art Deco and
Spanish Renaissance in its patterning). And yes, it was owned by Louis
Blumstein, whom we discussed at the beginning of this tour. Although the
vast majority of its clientele was African American, Blumstein’s refused
to hire any Black store clerks (a particularly maddening policy in the
Great Depression, when jobs were scarce). In 1934, the Urban League
began a campaign, spearheaded by Reverends John H. Johnson and Adam
Clayton Powell, Jr., to boycott and picket the store until it changed its
hiring practices. The action lasted 2 months, with picketers carrying signs
with the simple but effective request don’t buy where you can’t
work. Blumstein’s finally relented, hiring 34 African-American women
as clerks. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. often spoke of this strike in his
speeches as an example of the power of non-violent protest.
In 1958, Dr. King himself was at the center of history at Blumstein’s. He
was seated at a table signing copies of his book Strides Towards Freedom
when a Black woman named Izola Ware Curry got to the front of the line.
After asking, “Are you Martin Luther King?” she pulled a letter opener
out of the book she was carrying. Shouting “You Communist, you
Communist!” she stabbed him in the chest. Dr. King was rushed to
Harlem Hospital with the blade still in (had it been removed, he would
have bled to death) and underwent surgery. The next morning, the New

York Times reported that had King sneezed, he would have died, as the
blade was touching his aorta. From his hospital bed, King issued a letter
of forgiveness to Wade, who was committed to an insane asylum for the
act (she had had a long history of mental instability).
Cross the street, and you’ll see the marquee of:
10 The Apollo Theater
For years, 125th Street was known as the “Great Black Way,” in
comparison to Broadway’s “Great White Way.” This was the theater
district of Harlem. Only a few of these great show palaces still exist, but
right in front of us is the most famous and influential: the Apollo Theater
(253 W. 125th St.). A whites-only burlesque house until 1934, it changed
its policy and its lineup, becoming a music hall in January of that year
and introducing the legendary “Amateur Night” a few months later.
