Chapter 5: Exploring — Uptown (Upper East & West Side)

UPTOWN

Upper East Side
Cooper Hewitt National Design Museum                   MUSEUM The Cooper
Hewitt today is the museum equivalent of Steve Jobs. As the design division
of the Smithsonian, it has always been a forward-thinking institution since
its founding in 1897. But after a recent full renovation, it’s taken its mission
to explore the “impact of design on everyday life” to another level with its
use of technology, turning the museumgoer from simple viewer into on-the-
spot designer. Let me explain: When visitors enter this handsome museum
(set in a 1902 mansion built for tycoon Andrew Carnegie), they are loaned a
whiz-bang electronic stylus/pen to use throughout the visit. Visitors can
press the “X”-marked end of the tool to the wall text to save what they’re
seeing to a customized website, to learn more about these objects and
design later at home (your ticket comes with a personal URL, meaning you
don’t have to give up your email address or any other personal info—no
privacy worries). It sounds gimmicky, I know, but I for one delighted in
revisiting my favorites on my personal computer. The other side of the
gadget works as a pen, which visitors use at large electronic drafting tables
throughout the museum. In a wallpaper room, for example, what you design
at the table (sometimes with the help of historic samples stored in the
table’s computer) can be projected onto the walls all around you. It’s great
fun for kids, though I must say I saw as many adults scribbling away at the
tables as youngsters. There’s much to inspire them: The renovation added
60% more exhibition space, which it fills with wondrous objects from its
collection, everything from a psychedelic Bob Dylan poster to a
contemporary shoulder implant that looks like a crocheted snowflake (it
moves inside the body with the flexibility of a sweater) to a 1.2-million-
year-old scraping tool. Exhibitions are themed and always changing, so hit
the website to see what’ll be there when you arrive.

Design comes to life at the Cooper Hewitt museum: In the Immersion Room, museumgoers can craft their own
“wallpaper” to be projected on the walls.

2 E. 91st St. (at Fifth Ave.). cooperhewitt.org. 212/849-8400. Admission $18 adults, $12
seniors, $10 persons with disabilities, $9 students, free for ages 18 and under; $2 discount
online. Pay-what-you-wish 5-6pm. Daily 10am–6pm. Closed Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Subway: 6 to 86th St.; 4, 5 to 96th St.
Frick Madison          MUSEUM History’s wealthy sleazeballs have been
getting their comeuppance of late. The slave traders, labor exploiters,
womanizers, and polluters who made fortunes by being ruthless and then
tried to repair their reputations by leaving large bequests to cultural
institutions have had their names removed from buildings and their statues
stashed in storage. The exceptions are those who created their own temples
of culture and learning, like Henry Clay Frick, the union-busting
industrialist whose sins include partial responsibility for the deadly
Johnstown Flood of 1889. For decades, New York City’s beloved Frick
Collection has been housed in the robber baron’s ornate neoclassical

mansion at 70th Street and Fifth Avenue on Manhattan’s Upper East Side.
In addition to seeing the excellent art and furnishings, one of the fascinating
aspects of touring the museum was imagining the lifestyle of the tycoon
before his death in 1919. A long-overdue renovation, however, begun in late
2020, will shutter the mansion for at least 3 years, with the collection
moved temporarily a few blocks north, to the original building of the
Whitney Museum of American Art. With its relocation, the Frick experience
becomes less about the man and his mansion and more about the art and
artists in the collection . . . which may be more appropriate.

Communing with Rembrandt at the Frick Madison.

Before you visit, download the Bloomberg Connects app to listen to
curators Aimee Ng’s and Xavier Salomon’s fascinating commentary on the
artists’ lives, painting techniques, and other intriguing backstories (like
Ingres’s purposeful anatomical errors in his portrait of Comtesse
d’Haussonville and how Rembrandt’s financial woes influenced his art).

There’s commentary for almost every work on display, so you won’t find
audio tour–goers all clustered around the same handful of exhibits—a
blessing! Also, because there is more interior room here than at the original
mansion, the curators have been able to do something rare in museum land
—surface the entire collection, and devote entire rooms to just one or two
works of art. The layout underscores which pieces are considered the
Frick’s stars, allowing visitors to give them the time and attention they
deserve. Among those star pieces are 3 of only 34 works Jan Vermeer is
known to have painted, plus seminal pieces by Bellini, El Greco, Hans
Holbein, John Constable, and J. M. W. Turner, among others.
945 Madison Ave. (at 75th St.). frick.org.   212/288-0700. Admission $22 adults, $17
seniors/students; pay-what-you-wish Thurs 4–6pm. Children ages 9 and under not admitted.
Thurs–Sun 10am–6pm. Closed all major holidays. Subway: 6 to 77th St.
The Jewish Museum MUSEUM The “modest” goal of this intriguing
museum is to explore 4,000 years of Jewish culture through art.
Surprisingly, it succeeds much of the time. Its two-story permanent
exhibition (which starts on the fourth floor) gently guides viewers from the
biblical era, with its clashes over such issues as animal sacrifice and the role
of the Temple (Jesus wasn’t the only one up in arms over that), through the
Diaspora, when the Israelites, forced out of their home by successive
conquerors, became “wandering Jews,” spreading to every part of the
known world. The modern section brings the exhibition up to today, with
only the briefest mention of the Holocaust (if that’s what interests you,
you’ll be better served by the Museum of Jewish Heritage downtown; see p.
176). The story is told through a mixed marriage, so to speak, of nearly 800
exquisite artifacts and works of art, and by a variety of storytelling devices,
including a free audio tour, interactive computer programs, videos,
television clips, and wall texts. What finally emerges is a portrait of a
people who have not only managed to survive against the steepest odds but
have become magnificently diverse in the process. In fact, the second half of
the exhibit could be seen as a survey of world art styles as seen through
Jewish eyes, making the museum of interest to a wide audience. The fourth
floor also houses a nifty playroom for kids. The first and second floors’
galleries present changing exhibits, such as past blockbuster shows on
musician Leonard Cohen, artist Marc Chagall, and fashion designer Isaac
Mizrahi. There are also two handsome gift shops.

1109 Fifth Ave. (at 92nd St.). thejewishmuseum.org. 212/423-3200. Admission $18 adults,
$12 seniors, $8 students, free for kids 18 and under; free for all Sat. Thurs 11am–8pm; Fri
11am–4pm; Sat–Mon 11am–6pm. Subway: 4, 5, 6 to 86th St.; 6 to 96th St.
Metropolitan Museum of Art               ART MUSEUM The giant among
New York museums both figuratively and literally: At 1.6 million square
feet, it’s not just the biggest museum in the city, it’s the largest one in this
hemisphere. And I’d argue it competes in stature with the Louvre in Paris,
the Prado in Madrid, the Uffizi in Florence, and the British Museum in
London. Whatever your interests in art—and even if you usually have no
interest in art—you will find something here to astonish you, to enlighten
and enrich your life. I solemnly promise. No, really, I do.

The Metropolitan Museum is like an immense palace of fine art. Advance planning can help you find the
artworks you most want to see without experiencing museum overload.

The Met was founded fairly late, as great museums go, conceived in 1870
by a group of wealthy businessmen and artists. A decade later, Calvert
Vaux, one of the architects of Central Park, was brought in to create the first
red-brick building on this site (you can see that facade still—it’s the side
wall of the European Sculpture Court). A little over a decade later, an
expansion was necessary, so famed architect Richard Morris Hunt was
tapped to create the majestic, neoclassical Indiana-limestone edifice you see

today, awing the visitors who climb its mountain of steps and walk past its
redwood-height pillars. Never a static institution, the museum and its
collection have continued to grow, with the Met currently owning more than
3 million works of art spanning 5,000 years.

Don’t try to see everything at the Metropolitan Museum of Art—choose a couple of departments to savor in
depth.

Obviously, there’s no way to see it all in one, two, or even five visits. You
must choose carefully among the 18 curatorial departments and decide what
interests you most. On view are masterworks from nearly all the world’s
cultures—from Egyptian mummies to ancient Greek statuary to Islamic
carvings to Renaissance paintings to Native American masks to 20th-
century decorative arts. One way to focus your time is to take one of the
hour-long scholarly Highlight tours—free with admission and offered five
times a day—led by volunteer docents. These enthusiastic art lovers are a
treasure in and of themselves, highly trained and well-spoken. They’ll run
you all over the museum, pointing out and expounding upon the various

gems of the collection, offering a quick taste of the museum’s highlights so
that you can come back yourself and feast upon what really interests you.
If I had to pick the top five highlights, I’d select:      The European
paintings collection on the second floor (encompassing some 700 works)
with such jewels as Velazquez’s truer-than-life portrait of Juan de Pareja
(the slave whom the painter respected enough—you can see it in the
painting—to set free); El Greco’s brooding landscape of Toledo; 20
Rembrandts including Aristotle Contemplating the Bust of Homer (three
great Greeks in one painting—notice the pendant of Alexander the Great
hanging from his shirt); five light-kissed Vermeers; a roomful of van Goghs;
and works by Manet, Monet, de Goya, Breughel, Van Eyck, and every other
master you read about in your college art-history course.
The period rooms, which re-create dozens of important chambers,
including Louis XIV’s state bedroom in Versailles; an Arts and Crafts
living room from Frank Lloyd Wright; and the stunning Cubiculum
from Boscoreale, a perfectly preserved, brilliantly colorful room from
a villa near Pompeii that was buried when Mount Vesuvius erupted in
a.d. 79. Whenever I visit these rooms I’m reminded of the terrific
children’s novel From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil E.
Frankweiler, in which the protagonists slept each night in a historic
bed. Share it with your tweens and they’ll be dying to come here.
The American Collection, the most comprehensive in the world,
featuring masterworks by Sargent, Homer, Tiffany, Leutze (his
sentimental but rippingly fun Washington Crossing the Delaware),
and many more.
The Egyptian Collection includes some pieces discovered by the
Met’s own teams of archaeologists, such as the miniature figures
found in a tomb in Thebes that show in intricate detail what daily life
for a wealthy Egyptian was like. There’s also elaborate statuary;
mummy cases; jewelry; wall paintings; and the Temple of Dendur, an
actual temple to the goddess Isis (ca. 15 b.c.) that was saved from the
rising waters of the Nile after the construction of the Aswan Dam.
The hidden Hall of Art from Japan, with its famed Iris Screens
(reproduced on many Metropolitan Museum products), as well as

architectural-looking suits of armor, delicate woodcuts, and dazzling
kimonos. To my mind, this is one of the most ravishingly beautiful
sections of the museum.
Along with all the art, the Met has half a dozen cafes and restaurants, fab
gift shops and bookstores, and tremendously engaging art and culture
programs for children of all ages (mostly on weekends; see website for
info). Its offshoot museum, the Cloisters (p. 234) allows for free entry the
same day you visit the Met—but that seems to me like too much museum
time in one day, frankly.
Fifth Ave. (at 82nd St.). metmuseum.org. 212/535-7710. Admission for non–NY State
residents $30 adults, $22 seniors, $17 students, free for ages 11 and under. NY Staters pay
what they like (ID required). Sun−Tues and Thurs 10am−5pm; Fri−Sat 10am−9pm. Subway:
4, 5, 6 to 86th St.

The
Best
Times
to
Visit
the
Met
On Friday and Saturday evenings, the Met remains open late not only for art viewing
but also for cocktails on the roof and in the Great Hall Balcony Bar (4–8:30pm).
Indoors, classical music from a string ensemble accompanies the tippling. A slate of
after-hours programs (gallery talks, walking tours, family programs) is also offered. The
restaurant at Petrie Court Café and Wine Bar stays open until 10:30pm (last
reservation at 8:30pm), and dinner is usually accompanied by piano music. Best of all,
the crowds dwindle after dark—in the galleries, if not near the bars.

Museum of the City of New York               MUSEUM Thanks to a 2016
overhaul, this century-old museum (founded in 1923) is finally making
good on the promise of its name. Today, it offers visitors a textured,
dramatic, suavely interactive look at the improbable tale of a tiny, obscure
Dutch colony that blossomed—and burned, and conned, and fought—into a
world capital. Start your visit in the basement, where an absorbing 30-
minute film (narrated by Stanley Tucci) outlines the story. Next stop should

be ground floor, where one gallery traces Gotham’s history from Native
American days through the 1900s, displaying artifacts of all sorts,
accompanied by electronic panels offering biographies of New Yorkers both
well-known and obscure—everyone from Alexander Hamilton to a
murdered prostitute—that illuminate different strands of the story. The
panels, with their interactive maps, reproduced paintings and drawings,
newspaper clippings, graphs, and more, are hugely absorbing (on my last
visit I looked up, and an hour had passed). Its twin gallery traces the yarn
from 1901 through today with the same panache. Also on this floor: the
Future City Lab, an exhibit that allows visitors to try to solve the city’s
problems with sustainability, population density, et cetera, on individual
tablets that are later screened for all to see (kids will love this room).
Upstairs are changing exhibits, a famed dollhouse, galleries with Gilded
Age frippery, and an excellent permanent exhibition on activism in NYC.
1220 Fifth Ave. (at 103rd St.). mcny.org. 212/534-1672. Suggested admission $20 adults,
$14 seniors/students, free for ages 19 and under. Thurs 10am–9pm; Fri–Mon 10am–5pm.
Closed Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year’s Day. Subway: 6 to 103rd St.
Neue Galerie New York ART MUSEUM Most notable for its jewel-
toned paintings by Gustav Klimt (including the famed Woman in Gold), its
“Didn’t I sit on that in the ’70s?” Bauhaus furniture, and its collection of
drawings by such Teutonic masters as Dix, Schiele, and Breuer, the Neue
Galerie offers a swift but effective overview of German and Austrian arts
and design. Because some of these drawings are a bit racy, children 11 and
under are not admitted, and ages 16 and younger must be accompanied by
an adult. Also on-site: a transporting Viennese cafe (p. 147), a theater for
lectures and films, and a pricey gift shop. Note: There’s often a line outside
for entrance to the cafe. If you’re just going to the museum, you can head
right in.

The Neue Galerie New York focuses on German and Austrian art, with several fine works by Gustav Klimt.

1048 Fifth Ave. (at 86th St.). neuegalerie.org. 212/628-6200. Admission $25 adults, $16
seniors, $12 students; free admission 1st Fri of month 4−7pm. No children 12 and under.
Thurs–Mon 11am–5pm. Subway: 4, 5, 6 to 86th St.
Solomon           R.       Guggenheim           Museum                  ART
MUSEUM/ARCHITECTURE New York is the city of the rectangle, of the
sharp right angle. Our streets form a grid, our buildings are boxy and
regular. Until you get to the Guggenheim, that is. Frank Lloyd Wright’s
delirious spiral of a museum sits among the towers of Fifth Avenue like a
steroidal peacock among guinea hens. Architectural critic Herbert
Muschamp described the look best when he wrote, “What else but a
building brought back from a dream would be windowless, have walls and
floors that tilt and twist, begin on the top floor, and spiral in towards the
center like an enigma?” Visiting this 1959 masterpiece and trudging up the
ramps of curving halls transforms the standard museum experience into a
profound journey (and sometimes a battle against vertigo), no matter what
art is displayed. Early critics dismissed the museum (Newsweek’s insipid
review was headlined “Museum or Cupcake?”), but I think today even the
most jaded visitor will feel the power of the place, the symbolic weight of
infinite circle upon circle. (And to answer the question nobody ever voices

aloud: No, there haven’t been any suicide jumps from over the low-slung
rails, nor has anyone ever accidentally fallen to their death.) Beyond the
architecture, the museum is popular, thanks to its curators’ skill at mounting
blockbuster retrospectives on top contemporary artists (like Robert
Mapplethorpe, Cecilia Vicuña, and Gillian Wearing) and topics that
combine art with history and in some cases sociology—shows on
contemporary Middle Eastern and North African art, Aztec culture, the
photography of motorcycles, to mention just a few that created headlines in
past years. Permanent gallery space is also given to the stars of the
Guggenheim’s collection, towering figures such as Chagall, Brancusi,
Mondrian, Miró, Kandinsky, and other modernists.

The centerpiece of the Guggenheim Museum: an atrium with a huge spiral ramp.

1071 Fifth Ave. (at 89th St.). guggenheim.org. 212/423-3500. Admission $25 adults, $18
seniors/students, free for kids 11 and under; pay-what-you-wish Sat 6–8pm. Sun–Mon and
Wed–Fri 11am–6pm; Sat 11am–8pm. Subway: 4, 5, 6 to 86th St.

Upper West Side
American Folk Art Museum ART MUSEUM Self-taught artists are
the focus of this small museum, and their stories (told in wonderful detail
by the wall text) illuminate the art in invigorating ways. You’ll see works
from the 18th century to the present, and the breadth and variety of the art
can be quite stunning. Most popular objects are likely the quilts, though I
prefer the sculptures. The book-and-gift shop is terrific, filled with one-of-a-
kind pieces.
2 Lincoln Square (Columbus Ave., at 66th St.). folkartmuseum.org.   212/595-9533. Free
admission. Tues–Sun 11:30am–6pm. Subway: 1 to 66th St.
American           Museum           of       Natural        History
MUSEUM/PLANETARIUM Since 1869, this institution has served as both
the country’s preeminent private scientific research facility and its top
museum for paleontology, zoology, anthropology, and, in recent years,
astronomy. It’s this constant flow of energy and insight between the
research side and the curatorial side that has kept the museum fiercely vital,
fresh, and unique. Just a few years ago, for example, scientists concluded
that dinosaurs had not dragged their tails as had long been thought but
waved them in the air as they walked. The curators responded, painstakingly
dismantling the museum’s famed dino skeletons and reassembling them
with tails erect. Then, in a brilliant stroke, they placed one skeleton atop a
section of a Texas riverbed where they had found fossilized dino footprints
(sans tail-dragging marks), giving museumgoers a peephole into how
scientific theories emerge.

The American Museum of Natural History’s new Gilder Center for Science, Education and Innovation adds a
number of interactive exhibits in a dazzling modern building.

This double spotlight on the science itself and on how science is “made”
is one of the pleasures of a visit here, with many exhibits focused on current
“educated guesses” and the scientists who are making them. An
extraordinarily interactive museum, it challenges visitors to figure out
which theories make the most sense via computer stations, wall text, videos,
soundscapes, and, of course, the artifacts themselves. That effort became
even more cutting-edge in 2023, when the $431-million Richard Gilder
Center for Science, Education and Innovation opened, transforming the
museum-going experience. It houses 12% of the museum’s collections in a
new 230,000-square-foot structure including an insectarium, a permanent
butterfly vivarium, open storage exhibits showing the span of the museum’s
collections, and a 360-degree-view Invisible Worlds Theater, a
mesmerizing high-tech show about the networks that underlie all life (it’s

hard to describe, but a real wowzer of an experience). Be sure to enter the
museum through this new center: The dazzling, contemporary architecture
of its lobby mimics curving Southwestern American canyons, a sinuous
look created by spraying structural concrete directly onto rebar.

Perennial AMNH favorites: The fourth-floor dinosaur rooms.
