Chapter 5: Exploring — Parks & Gardens

One of Central Park’s loveliest features, Bow Bridge arches over the lake just west of Bethesda Terrace, near
West 72nd Street. To get an up-close view from the water, you can rent a rowboat from the Boathouse nearby.

PARKS & GARDENS
Central Park
Manhattan’s 843-acre green oasis is the yin to the city’s neon, concrete, and
office tower yang. It serves as the city’s backyard, its concert hall, its
daytime pick-up bar, and, in the summer, when dozens don bathing suits to

soak up the rays, its green beach. The marvel of the park, besides its size (a
full 6% of the total area of Manhattan), is its ability to provide just the right
sort of experience for the myriad of very different personalities who think
of it as their own. I think it’s that chameleon-like quality that makes it such
an interesting place for visitors to tour. Seeing it from an outsider’s
perspective, it’s much easier to recognize that the park is a great mirage and
paradox.
Because, let’s face it, very little here is natural. Every tree, every shrub,
every lake, and most of the rolling hills were designed, planted, or blasted
into existence by landscape architects Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert
Vaux back in the 1850s, and their efforts still shape our experiences today.
These two geniuses took a 21⁄2-mile tract of swampland, farms, and
suburban towns and created an Arcadia that had no resemblance whatever to
what had come before. Underneath the park, 95 miles of drainage pipes
were installed, many to fill and periodically empty the four lakes that were
created; at ground level the site was transformed using six million bricks,
65,000 cubic tons of gravel, 26,000 trees, and 250,000 shrubs. Even the dirt
was imported; the natural topsoil was so poor that 500,000 cubic feet of
topsoil was shipped in from New Jersey. As Olmsted once wrote, “Every
foot of the park, every tree and bush, every arch, roadway and walk, has
been fixed where it is with a purpose.”
And what was that purpose? No less than the health of the city. Those
who rallied for its creation felt that it was crucial to create a place where
New Yorkers could blow off steam and get away from the stresses of urban
life. Moreover, Olmsted wanted to create a park that would be a bridge
between classes. “There need to be places and time for re-unions,” Olmsted
wrote, “[where] the rich and the poor, the cultivated and the self-made, shall
be attracted together and encouraged to assimilate.” Though that didn’t
happen when the park was first finished—it was too far from the homes of
poor New Yorkers for them to visit it—that ideal was realized when the city
itself began to wrap around the park, making it finally a true central park.
In your own strolls around the park, you’ll encounter three different types
of landscapes: pastoral vistas such as the Sheep Meadow, which are meant
to evoke a cultivated countryside; primitive portions where dense
forestation shuts out any view of the city; and promenade zones, which
were once used by the city’s aristocracy as an extension of their parlors, a

place to strut and be seen. I’ve created a brief list of highlights that includes
all three, but feel free to ignore the list altogether and just wander the
curving paths of the park, exploring its hidden nooks, surprise vistas, ball
fields, and playgrounds. There’s no right way to see or do this park.

ORIENTATION & GETTING THERE The park runs from 59th Street (also known
as Central Park South) at the south end to 110th Street at the north end, and
from Fifth Avenue on the east side to Central Park West (the continuation of

Eighth Ave.) on the west side. A 6-mile rolling road, Central Park Drive,
circles the park, with separate designated lanes for bikers, joggers, and in-
line skaters. A number of transverse (crosstown) roads cross the park at
major points—at 65th, 79th, 86th, and 97th streets—but they’re built down
a level, largely out of view, to minimize intrusion. Several subway stops
serve the park; which one you take depends on where you want to go. To
reach the southernmost entrance on the west side, take an A, B, C, D, or 1 to
59th Street/Columbus Circle. To reach the southeast corner entrance, take
the N or R to Fifth Avenue. There’s now an app, Central Park Entire, that
will guide you around Central Park and comes complete with GPS should
you get lost and need to find a nearby exit. Both Android- and iPhone-
compatible, it’s created by the Park Service and downloadable from the App
Store.

CENTRAL PARK HIGHLIGHTS BELVEDERE CASTLE AND THE
DELACORTE THEATER      FOLLY/THEATER OLMSTED AND
VAUX’S “FOLLY” (OR FANTASY BUILDING), THIS TURRETED
CASTLE SITS ATOP THE SECOND-HIGHEST ELEVATION IN THE
PARK. INSIDE IS A NATURE OBSERVATORY WITH GOOD
RAINY-DAY ACTIVITIES FOR CHILDREN. IN FRONT OF THE
CASTLE IS THE DELACORTE THEATER , WHERE THE FAMED
SHAKESPEARE IN THE PARK (P. 344) IS PERFORMED, A STAR-
STUDDED AND FREE EVENING OF THEATER STAGED IN THE
SUMMER MONTHS ONLY. IF YOU DECIDE TO TAKE IN A
SHOW, KNOW THAT YOU COULD END UP SPENDING 4 OR
MORE HOURS STANDING ON LINE TO GET TICKETS; THEY’RE
PASSED OUT AT 1PM IN FRONT OF THE THEATER, BUT
DEPENDING ON THE SHOW’S POPULARITY, CROWDS
GENERALLY SHOW UP HOURS BEFORE THAT, AND EVEN
CAMP OVERNIGHT AT THE GATE TO THE PARK. FROM
BELVEDERE, YOU’LL ALSO LOOK DOWN ON THE GREAT
LAWN, WHICH HAS GONE THROUGH A NUMBER OF
INCARNATIONS, FIRST AS A RESERVOIR AND LATER IN THE
1930S AS “HOOVERVILLE,” THE SHANTYTOWN WHERE
HUNDREDS OF HOMELESS FAMILIES LIVED OUT THE
DEPRESSION. TODAY IT’S LAID OUT IN BALLFIELDS AND

OFTEN USED AS A CONCERT SPACE: SIMON AND
GARFUNKEL REUNITED HERE IN THE 1980S IN A WIDELY
TELEVISED CONCERT.
Enter the park at either 72nd or 79th St. For info on Shakespeare in the Park:
publictheater.org. 212/539-8500. Free admission.

Central Park has many prime picnic and lounging spots, like this one on the Great Lawn.

Playgrounds,
Carriages &
Bird-
Watching
A word on playgrounds: With a few exceptions, most of Central Park’s 22
playgrounds are located on the rim of the park near the entrances. They tend to pop
up every 5 blocks or so, with some of the more elaborate playgrounds located on the
south end of the park (conceived as the children’s side of the park because it was
nearer to where lower-income families lived at the time of the park’s opening).
Horse-drawn carriage rides: At the entrance to the park at 59th Street and Central
Park South, you’ll see a line of horse-drawn carriages waiting to take passengers on a
ride through the park or along certain of the city’s streets. A ride is about $50 for 20
minutes (plus tip), but I suggest skipping it. Not only are the horses sad-looking, the
“tour” you’ll get is likely to be filled with misinformation.
Wildlife in the park: Bird-watchers from all over the city flock to the park for the
variety of species it hosts, the most coveted sightings being of the endangered red-
tailed hawks that make their nest on Woody Allen’s Fifth Avenue building (at Fifth Ave.
and 74th St.).

The Carousel CAROUSEL A Victorian spinner, this is most children’s
favorite park stop (it certainly was my daughters’). Though it’s not the
original carousel (the first burned down in the 1950s), it’s a beaut, built on
Coney Island in 1908, and featuring some of the tallest merry-go-round
horses in the U.S. It’s also a much more humane carousel than the original,
which was rotated by a blind mule and horse toiling in the basement.
At approximately 65th St., in the center of the park. centralpark.com. $3.50 per ride. Daily
10am–6pm.
Central Park Zoo/Tisch Children’s Zoo               ZOO Because of its small
size, the zoo is at its best with its displays of smaller animals. The indoor
multilevel Tropic Zone is a real highlight, its steamy rainforest home to
everything from black-and-white colobus monkeys to Emerald tree boa
constrictors to a leaf-cutter ant farm; look for the poison-dart-frog exhibit,
which is very cool. So is the large penguin enclosure in the Polar Circle,
which is better than the one at San Diego’s SeaWorld. Despite their pool
and piles of ice, however, the polar bears still look sad. The zoo is good for
short attention spans; you can cover the entire thing in under an hour. It’s
also very kid-friendly, with lots of well-written and illustrated placards that

older kids can understand. For the littlest ones, the nearby Tisch Children’s
Zoo has goats, llamas, potbellied pigs, and more in a petting zoo and
playground that’s a real blast for the 5-and-under set. Note: Admission to
the immersive 4-D theater is $6 extra, but it’s a worthwhile show.
830 Fifth Ave. (at 64th St., just inside Central Park). centralparkzoo.com. 212/439-6500.
Admission $14 adults, $11 seniors, $9 children 3–12, free for ages 2 and under; $6 more for
4-D theater. Nov–Mar daily 10am–4:30pm; Apr–Oct daily 10am–5pm (until 5:30pm Sat–Sun
and holidays). Last entrance 30 min. before closing. Subway: N, R to Fifth Ave.; 6 to 68th St.
Cleopatra’s Needle MONUMENT This handsome obelisk was a gift
to the United States from Egypt in 1881, in recognition of the help this
country gave in the construction of the Suez Canal. Transporting the 200-
ton pillar took 38 days from Alexandria to New York by ship, and then
another 144 just to get it from the Hudson River to Central Park. It
originally stood at the Temple of the Sun in Heliopolis, and is believed to
have been erected in 1600 b.c. The Romans moved it in the 12th century to
the front of a temple built by Cleopatra, hence the name. A plaque at the
base translates the hieroglyphics.
Near the back of the Metropolitan Museum at roughly 83rd St.
Conservatory Garden            GARDEN The park’s only formal gardens are
simply stunning, which may be why this is a favorite spot for wedding
photographers. Walk around and you’ll notice that each of the garden’s
three sections has a different ambience; one is meant to mimic the gardens
of France, another those of Italy, and the third pays tribute to Britain’s
blossoms.
Enter at Fifth Ave. and 105th St.
Conservatory Water             POND Here’s the model boat pond where
Stuart Little had his fabled race. You can rent a model boat to float around
(via remote control), take a look at the Hans Christian Andersen statue
(where storytelling takes place on weekends in summer), or visit the Alice
in Wonderland statue, an artistic jungle gym for the city’s youth.
Enter at 79th St. on Fifth Ave.; the pond is directly uptown of the entrance, down a hill.
The Dairy ARCHITECTURE/TOURS Completed in 1871, this frou-
frou–laden Gothic structure was an actual dairy set up to give city children
access to fresh milk. Today it serves as the park’s visitor center, so it’s a
good place to stop to pick up maps. Most of the Central Park Conservancy’s
free tours start from this point; see below for info on their scheduling.

At roughly 65th St., closer to Fifth Ave. Go to www.centralparknyc.org/tours for tour info.
The Mall, Bethesda Terrace & the Loeb Boathouse                          PARK
LAND In their original plans for the park, Olmsted and Vaux called the area
known today as the Mall “the Promenade,” and intended for it to be an
“open air hall of reception.” Today when you visit you’ll be greeted by a
grand elm–lined walkway bedecked with statues. At its uptown end is an
underused band shell, and west of that is one of the park’s premier party
places: an unofficial rollerblading rink where regulars dance-skate for hours
each weekend to blasting disco music. It’s quite a scene. At the uptown end
of the mall (just across the road), Bethesda Terrace is, without a doubt, the
architectural heart of the park. You’re likely to see a bride or two here, as
many use this extraordinarily lovely area as a backdrop for wedding
photographs. If you approach it from the Mall, you’ll come to two massive
posts on either side of the stairs, carved with symbols representing day and
night (the side with the witch on a broom is “night”). Take a look as well at
the carvings on the stairs down to the fountain area; they represent the four
seasons, and no two are alike. Bethesda Fountain commemorates the
opening of the Croton Aqueduct, which finally solved New York’s water
problems in 1842 (the fountain was finished in 1864). Sculpted by Emma
Stebbins, the first woman to receive this type of commission from the city,
the statue represents the angel Bethesda. She blesses the water with one
hand, carrying a lily—the symbol of purity—in the other. Added to the park
in 1874, Loeb Boathouse is where you rent the boats that you see bobbing
on the lake. It’s also a fine place to eat, with a decent fast-food counter and
a good restaurant (get reservations). Carrie and Mr. Big, of Sex and the City,
fell into the water together at the end of a disastrous date on the dock that
pushes out from the cafe.
At approximately 74th St. off Park Dr. www.thecentralparkboathouse.com. 212/517-2233.
Boat rentals Apr–Nov $20 first hr., $5 every 15 min. thereafter; cash payment only. A gondola
with singing oarsman can be reserved in advance for $50 per half-hour.
Sheep Meadow          MEADOW The premier see-and-be-seen spot for
New York’s teenagers, who turn this expanse of grass into a sunbathing
party come spring and summer. They’re following a long tradition: This is
where New York’s hippie “be-in,” a day of non-political grooviness created
by Abbie Hoffman, took place in 1967. The meadow got its name in 1864
when park commissioners set sheep to graze here in an attempt to stop the

First Division of the NY National Guard from using the meadow as a
parade ground (it didn’t work). In 1934, the sheep were exiled to Prospect
Park in Brooklyn.
Between 64th and 68th sts., toward the West Side.
Strawberry Fields MEMORIAL A memorial to John Lennon, who was
shot to death in front of the Dakota apartment house (1 W. 72nd St.) just
across the street from here. A mosaic spells out “Imagine” on the ground;
many come here to play music and leave flowers.

Wollman Rink, at the south end of Central Park, is a magical setting for winter ice skating.

Enter at 72nd St. and Central Park West and follow the crowds.
Wollman Rink         SKATING RINK A wonderfully scenic place to skate,
you may remember it from the movies Home Alone 2, Serendipity, and Love
Story. In the summer and spring months, the rink hosts varied events, from
concerts to “sip and paint” classes.

Enter at Central Park S, across from the Plaza Hotel. wollmanrinknyc.com. Open for skating
late Oct–Apr Mon−Tues 10am−2:30pm, Wed−Thurs 10am−10pm, Fri−Sat 10am−11pm, Sun
10am−9pm.
The places I list above are just a few of the wonders of the park; there are
many others. And many may feel familiar to American visitors: Central
Park was and remains the most influential piece of landscape architecture in
the United States, and many parks around the country were directly copied
from this one.
Other Parks in New York City
Battery Park          PARK At the southernmost tip of Manhattan, Battery
Park has been growing kudzu-like for the past several decades. It’s now a
string of eclectic park spaces hugging the waterfront from just above the
original Battery Park (where the Statue of Liberty ferry terminal is located)
all the way up to Chambers Street (21 acres in all). At the downtown-most
park are a number of stirring war monuments and the Seaglass Carousel
(daily 10am–10pm; $6/ride), which dips and swoops riders around on
massive plexiglass fish. Walking uptown from the original battery, you’ll
encounter expansive lawns, a riverside promenade that runs the length of
the park, terrific playgrounds, and a yacht marina. My favorite parts are the
South Cove (on the Esplanade between First and Third places), an artfully
varied collection of quays, bridges, and meandering walkways with great
river views; and the Irish Hunger Memorial, a grassy outcropping direct
from Ireland, complete with a real Irish stone fence.
From State St. to New York Harbor. thebattery.org.   212/344-3491. Subway: R to Whitehall
St.; 1 to South Ferry; 4, 5 to Bowling Green.
Brooklyn Bridge Park             PARK Many visitors who walk over the
Brooklyn Bridge from Manhattan find the urge to linger in this handsome
85-acre waterfront park. Once an industrial area, it’s home to a spectacular
1922 carousel (surrounded by a pavilion by contemporary star architect
Jean Nouvel); the bouncy and architecturally significant Squibb Park
Bridge; and several dozen play spaces including basketball, volleyball,
handball, bocce, and shuffleboard courts as well as terrific playgrounds for
the little ones. Free guided tours are periodically offered, and events of all
sorts make this an exciting place in the warm weather months (see website

for more info). Do I need to mention that the views of Manhattan are killer
from here?
East River waterfront from Manhattan Bridge to Brooklyn Bridge. brooklynbridgepark.org.
Subway: A, C to High St.; F to York St.; R to Court St.; 2, 3, 4, 5 to Borough Hall.
Bryant Park PARK Just behind the New York Public Library, this park
is a welcome respite from the endless high-rises and crushing crowds of
midtown, a 4-acre lawn surrounded by benches, statuary, and London
planetree–shaded promenades (like the Tuileries Gardens in Paris). It’s
notable for its extensive programs of public concerts, movies, even free
juggling classes every good weather day at noon. Worthwhile free park
tours are offered every other Wednesday at 11am. From roughly May
through October, the Sixth Avenue end of the park is set up as a stage,
where Broadway performers often give concerts, free movies are shown on
summer Monday nights, and other events are held. In winter a small “pond”
is set up for free ice-skating. On the 40th Street side is the elegant little
merry-go-round Le Carrousel ($4/ride; June–Dec daily 11am–8pm; Jan
11am–7pm; Feb 11am–6pm; Mar–May 11am–7pm). A good spot for a
picnic, Bryant Park has a bunch of chain restos across the street, including
salad nirvana Chop’t. There are pricey, so-so restaurants on the north side
of the park (go for drinks, not dinner).
Behind the New York Public Library, at Sixth Ave. (btw. 40th and 42nd sts.). bryantpark.org.
Subway: B, D, F, Q to 42nd St.; 7 to Fifth Ave.
Domino Park             PARK/HISTORIC SITE Who knew “adaptive reuse”
could be this sexy? The only private park on this list (but open to the
public), Domino Park sits on a quarter acre of riverside property once
owned by the Domino Sugar Refinery. In adapting the land, designer Lisa
Switkin (of the firm behind the High Line; see p. 262) protected that
landmarked structure, making the hulking factory a spooky centerpiece of
the park, and re-using other industrial artifacts found here to wonderful
effect. That includes a gantry, basically a massive platform that holds two
cranes, painted the same shade of turquoise that once lined the refinery’s
walls; it’s now an elevated walkway affording spectacular Manhattan views.
In front of it is a playground that looks like a minirefinery, a volleyball court
flanked by old syrup tanks, and a grove of metal corkscrews the height of
family Christmas trees (they were once used to stir syrup). Notably, one of
the city’s only open-air riverfront restaurants is here, as is top pizzeria

Roberta’s (p. 127, just outside the park), along with a brewery and an ice-
cream parlor. If this had been publicly funded, we doubt there’d be this
many for-profit eateries here, and it makes the park especially attractive for
sunset drinks or dinner.

Brooklyn’s Domino Park has creatively adapted relics of an old sugar refinery.

In Williamsburg, Brooklyn, on the river, btw. S. 5th and Grand sts. dominopark.com. Daily
6am–1am. Subway: G to Metropolitan Ave.; L to Bedford St.
Governors Island        PARK/HISTORIC SITE Situated a half-mile south
of Manhattan, the 172-acre Governors Island was for many years a Coast
Guard installation. Before that, it was an army post for nearly 200 years and
played a part in the Revolutionary War. In April 2010, New York City took
over. Because it had been a military base for so long, few New Yorkers,

much less tourists, had visited Governors Island. But that has changed.
Much of Governors Island is now a public park, and 22 acres are a national
monument, centered around two 1812-era fortresses. In 2016, new parkland
crowned by four man-made hills opened, giving visitors even more stellar
views of Manhattan. The island is open to visitors year-round, with
transportation via either the NYC ferry’s yellow line from Brooklyn (go to
ferry.nyc for a map of docks) or the Trust for Governor’s Island ferries,
which depart from the Battery Maritime Building adjacent to the Staten
Island Ferry in lower Manhattan. On the island, you can walk or bicycle in a
car-free environment and attend activities from jazz concerts to pop-up
museum exhibits. There’s a fun slide park for kids, and glamping options in
warm weather months for those who’d like an overnight stay.
govisland.com.     212/440-2200. Free admission. Ferries depart from Battery Maritime
Bldg. (next to Staten Island Ferry terminal); in Brooklyn ferries depart from Pier 6, at foot of
Atlantic Ave.; check website for schedules. Late May-Oct Fri–Sun. Subway: 1 to South Ferry;
4, 5 to Bowling Green.
High Line        PARK For years, a secret, untamed garden hovered above
the cityscape of Chelsea and Hell’s Kitchen. Formed from the wild grass,
flower, and weed seeds that randomly blew onto the tracks of a 11⁄2-mile
abandoned elevated railway, it became a hidden-in-plain-sight oasis for
those New Yorkers brave (and limber) enough to scale the trestles. When the
city started planning to tear down the historic rail structure (constructed
1929−34), a movement was born to save it and create a “grand public
promenade,” with easy access from the street. Opened in 2009, it’s
beautifully landscaped (in many places with the “weeds” that once grew
there naturally, replanted in areas where they wouldn’t destroy the rest of
the plants), with benches and gourmet food vendors galore, and a unique
vantage for viewing surrounding buildings and the streets below—it’s
become THE place to head for a stroll on a balmy summer evening.

Elevated High Line park wends its landscaped way from Chelsea to West Midtown.

From Gansevoort St. to W. 34th St. (btw. 10th and 12th aves.). thehighline.org. 212/500-
6035. June–Sept 7am–11pm; Apr–May and Oct–Nov 7am–10pm; Dec–Mar 7am–7pm.
Subway: A, C, E, L to 14th St.; 7 to Hudson Yards.
Hudson River Park           PARK This 500-acre park runs for 4 miles,
transforming once industrial waterfront into a variety of parks and
playspaces. They include Sheep Meadow–like expanses of grass, marvelous
landscaping, terrific views of the Hudson River, innovative playgrounds
(including a science-based one that opened in 2023), public art installations,
and more. This is an ideal place to bring the kids for a sunny afternoon,
especially to one of the park’s pride and joys: a custom-designed 36-
passenger carousel with all the hand-carved animals indigenous to the
greater New York City area (it’s at Pier 62, near 23rd St.). The free skate
park and minigolf course are also fun. More piers are in the process of

being transformed and opened to the public as we write this: truly an urban
miracle.
Enter between N. Moore and 56th sts. on the far west side. hudsonriverpark.org.
212/627-2020. Carousel $3.50/ride (children under 42 in. tall must be accompanied by
adult); daily 11am–6pm, weather permitting. Minigolf $10, $5 for ages 12 and under; daily
10am–9pm, warm weather only. Skate park 8am−dusk.
Little Island        PARK Gotham’s newest park seems to float like a watery
mirage in the Hudson River. The engineering and architecture by Thomas
Featherwick (of Vessel; see p. 199) is stupendous, with a set of 132 concrete
“tulips,” all of differing heights, emerging from the water and connecting to
form the base of the isle. On top of that Seuss-like structure, hills were
built, and amphitheaters, and eateries, all connected by a network of
sinuously winding paths, stairs, and boulder scrambles. Landscaping
superstar Signe Nielson was in charge of the greenery, and she spared no
expense—it’s been reported she spent $5 million to cover the island with
some 35 species of trees, 65 species of shrubs, and 270 varieties of
perennials, grasses, vines, and bulbs. Many were chosen for their appeal to
bees and birds, as it’s hoped this will be a sanctuary for those critters. Like
Domino Park (p. 260), the structure is open to the public but is a private
enterprise: It’s a gift to the city from media mogul Barry Diller, who spent
$260 million for its construction and has pledged to supply money for its
upkeep into the foreseeable future. The park is the hilly green yin to the
city’s flat and gray yang—it’s a bewitching new addition to Gotham. Note:
In warm weather months, advance reservations are needed to get onto the
island between noon and midnight. Entry is always free, and if you visit
before noon, or between mid-September and mid-May, you can just stroll
over without reservations.

One of Manhattan’s newest parks, Little Island (at left) rises above the Hudson River on fanciful concrete posts.

The Little
Red
Lighthouse
Also known as Jeffrey’s Hook Lighthouse, this historic beaut located under the George
Washington Bridge in Fort Washington Park on the Hudson River was the inspiration
for the 1942 children’s book classic, The Little Red Lighthouse and The Great Gray
Bridge, by Hildegarde Swift and Lynd Ward. Built in New Jersey in 1880 and
reconstructed and moved to its current spot in 1921, it was operational until 1947. The
lighthouse was to be removed in 1951, but because of its popularity there was a
public outcry and it was saved. It’s now a New York City landmark and on the National
Register of Historic Places. It’s a fun place for the kids to explore and a scenic picnic
spot in nice weather. It’s sporadically open to the public, with guided tours (for more
info go to www.historichousetrust.org) from spring through fall. We suggest biking
there on the sheltered path up the Hudson (it’s easy enough for families).

Hudson River between 13th and 14th sts. littleisland.org. Subway: A, C, E, L to 14th St.
Prospect Park            PARK Designed by Frederick Law Olmsted and
Calvert Vaux after their success with Central Park, this 562-acre expanse of
woodland, meadows, and ponds is considered by many to be their
masterpiece and the pièce de résistance of Brooklyn. The best approach is
from Grand Army Plaza, presided over by the monumental Soldiers’ and
Sailors’ Memorial Arch (1892) honoring Union veterans. For the best
view of the lush landscape, follow the path to Meadowport Arch and
proceed through to the Long Meadow, following the path that loops around
it (it’s about an hour’s walk). Other park highlights include the 1857
Italianate mansion Litchfield Villa on Prospect Park West; the Friends’
Cemetery Quaker burial ground (where Montgomery Clift is eternally
prone—sorry, it’s fenced off to browsers); the wonderful 1906 Beaux Arts
boathouse; a 1912 carousel, with white wooden horses salvaged from a
famous Coney Island merry-go-round (Apr–Oct Thurs–Sun; rides $2.50);
and Lefferts Homestead Children’s Historic House Museum ( 718/789-
2822), a 1783 Dutch farmhouse with a museum of period furniture and
exhibits geared toward kids (hours vary by season; see website below for
details). On the east side is the Prospect Park Zoo (prospectparkzoo.com;
718/399-7339), a modern children’s zoo where kids can walk among

wallabies, explore a prairie-dog town, and more (admission $10 adults, $8
seniors, $7 children 3-12; Apr-Oct daily 10am-4:30pm, Nov-Mar Mon–Fri
10am-5pm, Sat–Sun 10am-5:30pm).
At Grand Army Plaza, bounded by Prospect Park W, Parkside Ave. and Flatbush Ave.,
Brooklyn. prospectpark.org. 718/965-8951 (general info). Subway: 2, 3 to Grand Army
Plaza (walk down Plaza St. W 3 blocks to Prospect Park W) or Eastern Pkwy./Brooklyn
Museum.

A neoclassical gem built in 1906, the boathouse on the lake in Prospect Park contains an Audubon Society
nature center.

Riverside Park        PARK Another masterwork by landscapers Olmsted
and Vaux (the visionaries behind Central Park and Prospect Park). As its
name suggests, Riverside Park has always had one advantage over Central
Park: glorious river views. Many of its garden-laced promenades make the
most of these vistas, as does the lovely boat basin and rotunda area at 79th
Street (a hopping bar enlivens evenings at the boat basin). As in Central
Park, there is a smattering of playgrounds; there’s also a skate park with

assorted ramps and half-pipes; and a handful of monuments, including
Grant’s Tomb (at 122nd St.; daily 9am−5pm), the largest mausoleum in the
United States at 8,100 square feet. (And the answer to who’s buried in
Grant’s tomb is: No one. Ulysses S. Grant and his wife are not buried; their
sarcophagi lie above ground.) From 72nd to 158th St. along the Hudson
River. nycgovparks.org/parks/riversidepark.
Tompkins Square Park           PARK This would be my pick for the city’s
funkiest green space. It’s seen its share of political protests—in 1988 a
standoff between the police and the homeless people living here culminated
in 5 days of rioting and charges of police brutality—but today it’s better
known for the very free expression it gives home to. The yearly Dance
Parade ends here with a smorgasbord of dancing of all sorts (go to
www.danceparade.org for more on that); live music is also a fixture on
weekends. Best is the daily sidewalk catwalk of pierced, tattooed, fashion-
forward locals. Incorporated as a park in 1878, Tompkins Square has a
number of meditative green spaces, playgrounds, a swimming pool, and a
smattering of undistinguished monuments. It used to have a band shell
where an early version of the Grateful Dead made their East Coast debut,
but that has since been torn down.
Located btw. aves. A and B, btw. 7th and 10th sts. Subway: L to First Ave.
Union Square Park PARK/MARKET The spirit of the 1960s is still
very much alive here, though Union Square Park’s tradition of political
activism goes back to the first Labor Day Parade in 1882, which ended in
the park. Since that time, it has become soapbox central, a place where
orators come on a daily basis to blast whatever current administration is in
power, weighing in on all the big topics of the day. A statue of Gandhi, a
gift of the Indian people, calmly watches over these proceedings, a fresh
wreath of flowers always draped about his neck. Along with the political
folk, Union Square hosts the finest greenmarket in the city (on the western
side of the park) every Monday, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday. Most
days you’ll find about 40 vendors hawking locally grown produce, organic
wines, flowers, artisan cheeses, even honey from a rooftop in Brooklyn. It’s
a lot of fun to visit. Two playgrounds, a dog run, and a very fine equestrian
statue of George Washington are also on-site.
14th to 17th sts. (btw. Park Ave. S and Broadway). nycgovparks.org/parks/unionsquarepark.
Subway: 4, 5, 6, L, N, Q, R to 14th St./Union Square.

Washington Square Park             PARK This park is nothing if not tuneful
and has long been a place for amateur musicians to gather in groups,
lugging along instruments for impromptu concerts each weekend (and many
weeknights when the weather is nice). The round fountain in the center of
the park serves as a stage for a dozen or so regular comedians, acrobats, and
dancers who are good enough to draw crowds of 100 people or more.
Entertaining as well are the intense chess matches played from noon to
sundown on the park’s southwest corner (the regulars are real sharks).
Children will enjoy the two playgrounds on the park’s north side. For
history buffs, there’s much to mull over here—see the full story in our
walking tour of Greenwich Village (p. 322).

Pass-the-hat concerts are a long-standing tradition in leafy Washington Square Park.
