Chapter 5: Exploring — The Outer Boroughs

THE OUTER BOROUGHS

The Bronx
Note: See p. 162 about exploring Arthur Avenue, a much more authentic
Italian American enclave than Manhattan’s Little Italy.
Bronx Zoo         ZOO If you count number of animals as well as acreage,
the Bronx Zoo is the largest zoo in the United States, an innovative,
unbeatably entertaining place to spend the day. But with over 4,000 animals
and 24 exhibits, it requires strategy to see what you want without
meltdowns from the younger set. When I visit with kids, I most often make
a direct path first to the Congo Gorilla Forest, a remarkable exhibit of
silverback gorillas that begins with a short film. Once the film is over,
curtains dramatically part to reveal floor-to-ceiling windows, with cavorting
gorillas galore (unlike other animals at the zoo, the gorillas are always
awake if you visit in the daytime; along with the adults, there always seem
to be half-a-dozen baby gorillas in sight as well). From here we hop over to
the nearby “bug carousel” or the butterfly exhibit (a tent with thousands of
beautiful butterflies fluttering about your head), or to lunch at Flamingo
Park. Then we blow off steam at the children’s zoo—with all the usual farm
animals, plus a spider-web jungle gym and a prairie dog park where
children crawl into tunnels and pop their heads up right next to the critters.
Dozens of other animals, a fun monorail ride, feeding shows, and more
keep you entertained. Tip: To beat the crowds, try to visit on a weekday or a
nice winter’s day. In summer, come early, before the heat sends the animals
back into their enclosures. Expect to spend an entire day here—you’ll need
it.

The Congo Gorilla Forest is a crowd-favorite exhibit at the Bronx Zoo.

Getting there: The BxM11 express bus, which makes stops on Madison
Avenue, will take you directly to the zoo. By subway, take the no. 2 train to
Pelham Parkway and then walk west to the Bronxdale entrance. For info on
both, go to bronxzoo.com/visitor-info/getting-here.
Fordham Rd. and Bronx River Pkwy. bronxzoo.com. 718/367-1010. Admission $27 adults,
$25 seniors, $19 ages 3–12; pay-what-you-wish Wed year-round. Experience Everything
ticket (additional $15 adults, $12 for others) adds access to all extra-charge exhibits. Apr–
Oct daily 10am–5pm (until 5:30pm Sat–Sun and holidays); Nov–Mar daily 10am–4:30pm.
Transportation: See “Getting There,” above.
New York Botanical Garden             GARDEN An equal to the Brooklyn
Botanic Garden (p. 239) in both scope and interest, the New York Botanical
Garden boasts the world’s largest Victorian greenhouse; a “home
gardening” section with classes and demonstrations for all the green thumbs
out there; a children’s garden and play center; and a 50-acre native forest. If

there’s any difference between the two gardens—they’re both wonderful,
and both world-class—the wealth of hands-on programming just may give
this place the edge. That being said, NYBG is now far pricier to visit than
the Brooklyn Botanic Garden (the two used to be equivalently priced).
Getting there: Take Metro-North (www.mta.info/mnr; 212/532-4900)
from Grand Central Terminal to the New York Botanical Garden station, a
20-minute ride. By subway, take the D or 4 train to Bedford Park, then take
bus Bx26 or walk southeast on Bedford Park Boulevard for 8 long blocks.
200th St. and Kazimiroff Blvd. nybg.org.    718/817-8700. Admission $35 adults, $31
seniors/students, $15 ages 2–12. NYC residents grounds-only pass $15 adults, $7
seniors/students, $4 ages 2–12. Tues–Sun 10am–6pm (Jan–Feb until 5pm). Transportation:
See “Getting There,” above.

At the heart of the New York Botanical Garden is the world’s largest Victorian-era greenhouse.

Brooklyn
Brooklyn Botanic Garden GARDEN Right down the street from the
Brooklyn Museum (see below), the Brooklyn Botanic Garden is not only
one of those necessary green safety valves, it’s also quite an innovative
garden in many ways. It was the first in the world to have a “children’s
garden,” allowing local kids to develop green thumbs (it’s still here, along
with a fun play area for youngsters). There’s also a “fragrance garden” for
sight-impaired visitors, where everyone is encouraged to sniff and touch the
plants; and an authentic Japanese garden, complete with a large pond,
pagodas, and plants from that area of Asia. The best time of year to visit is
spring, when the gardens’ many cherry trees are in bloom, though there are
seasonal displays, both outdoors and in the on-site greenhouses, year-round.
900 Washington Ave. (at Eastern Pkwy.). bbg.org. 718/623-7200. Admission $18 adults,
$12 seniors/students (free for seniors Fri), free for ages 11 and under. Combo tickets
available with Brooklyn Museum (see below). Mar–Aug Tues–Thurs 8am–7:40pm, Fri–Sun
8am–6pm (May–Aug Tues–Thurs until 8pm); Sept–Feb Tues–Sun 10am–4:30pm. Subway: Q
to Prospect Park; 2, 3 to Eastern Pkwy./Brooklyn Museum.

The Brooklyn Museum has one of the world’s finest Egyptian collections.

Brooklyn Museum           ART MUSEUM Though not as big as the
Metropolitan Museum (what is?), this “mini-Met”—it covers almost all eras
of history in its holdings—is a superb museum on its own terms. Its
Egyptian Collection, while not as extensive as the Met’s, arguably has
more masterpieces. (When an ancient Egyptian piece comes up at auction,

dealers often ask, “Is it Brooklyn quality?”—the Brooklyn Museum’s
collection being the benchmark for this sort of artifact.) Among the
collection’s many wonders are a tiny 5,000-year-old, pre-dynastic terra cotta
sculpture of a woman, which curators have nicknamed “Birdwoman” for
her beaklike face, one of very few intact sculptures from this long-ago era.
The Cartonnage of Nespanetjerenpere is another highlight, a mummy case
that looks like it was swiped from the set of Revenge of the Mummy, its
colors electrically bright and unfaded. I highly recommend renting the
audio tour for this gallery, as it will explain how these works were created,
what the symbolism means, and what they reveal about life in ancient
Egypt. Second most popular among the museum’s offerings are the
Decorative Arts Galleries (fourth floor), which re-create important rooms
from different eras of American history, including John D. Rockefeller’s
“Moorish Smoking Room,” an over-the-top Victorian version of the Middle
East, every bit of space lavishly carved, gilded, inlaid, or embroidered. Also
worth a look: the museum’s American Collection (works by such masters
as Albert Bierstadt, Thomas Eakins, Winslow Homer, and Georgia
O’Keeffe); the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art (permanent
and rotating exhibitions of art made by women, including Judy Chicago’s
The Dinner Party); and whatever special exhibitions are taking place
(they’re often stellar). One final thing the Brooklyn does better than the
Met: party. The first Saturday of each month, the museum hires DJs and
performers of all sorts and throws a “First Saturday” fiesta free to the public
from 5 to 11pm.
200 Eastern Pkwy. (at Washington Ave.). brooklynmuseum.org. 718/638-5000. Suggested
admission $16 adults, $10 seniors/students, free for ages 11 and under; free to all first Sat of
month. Wed–Sun 11am–6pm. Subway: 2, 3 to Eastern Pkwy./Brooklyn Museum.
Brooklyn Navy Yard HISTORIC SITE At its peak usage during World
War II, when it employed some 70,000 men and women, the Brooklyn
Navy Yard was the biggest industrial complex in U.S. history—no other site
has yet to top that employment figure. But its importance to America began
far before then, during the American Revolution, when the British docked
their infamous prison ships here; conditions aboard them were so atrocious
that more than 11,500 Americans perished here, more than the combined
number of U.S. casualties in all the battles of the American Revolution.
(Most of their bodies were simply dumped overboard into the water, making

these waters the largest Revolutionary graveyard in the States.) Today this
300-acre property is owned by the city of New York, which maintains its
historic working dry docks. It also rents out space to dozens of
manufacturers and artisans, including the company that builds the sets for
Saturday Night Live; the soundstage where The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel is
filmed; Nanette Lepore fashions; and Crye Precision, which designs and
manufactures protective vests and helmets for the U.S. military. You’ll learn
all of this and more at the excellent (and free!) on-site museum, which
displays historic artifacts and offers several well-crafted videos and oral
histories (those dealing with the women who worked here during World
War II are especially moving). Outsiders are not allowed to walk around the
Navy Yards, however, except as part of a tour, so I recommend pairing a
visit to the museum with one of the excellent 2-hour tours run by Turnstile
(p. 270). Most tours are devoted to the Yard’s history, though a few times a
month, midweek Turnstile tours visit the manufacturers and soundstages of
today’s Navy Yard. Since the site is so large, most tours involve a bus,
though you will get off the bus often, for a closer look.
East River waterfront (btw. Williamsburg and Manhattan bridges; most entrances off
Flushing Ave.). Museum at Building 77, 141 Flushing Ave. brooklynnavyyard.org. 718/907-
5900. Ferry to Brooklyn Navy Yard. Subway: B, D, N, Q, R, W to DeKalb Ave. (see website
for shuttle info from subway).
City Reliquary        MUSEUM A tiny museum that seems to take its
aesthetic from flea markets, City Reliquary illustrates strands of NYC’s tale
through oddball collections of seltzer bottles, Statue of Liberty figurines,
and paintings of Jackie Robinson, among other artifacts. Touring here is a
fun 30 minutes, but if you’re not nearby you can skip it without regret.
370 Metropolitan Ave. (at Havemeyer St.), Williamsburg. cityreliquary.org. 718/782-4842.
Admission $7 adults, $5 seniors/students. Sat–Sun noon–6pm. Subway: G to Metropolitan
Ave.
Coney Island            ICON/BEACH/AMUSEMENT PARK Honky-tonk
paradise, Coney Island has been rescued from extinction a few times (first
from developers and most recently from severe Hurricane Sandy damage).
Parts of it are given over to brand-new amusement parks and rides, but it’s
still possible to try some of the classic attractions from times past, including
the Wonder Wheel (a Ferris wheel with gliding compartments) and the
Cyclone (a huge wooden roller coaster, one of the scariest you’ll ever ride,

because you’ll do so knowing that nearly a dozen people have been killed
on it over the years). If you visit in summer, don’t skip the Coney Island
Circus Side Show (formerly known as “The Freak Show”; $12 adults, $8
kids), which features a “human pincushion,” a snake charmer, a man who
hammers nails up his nose, and other odd performers. It’s one of the last
shows of its kind in the U.S., and though it sounds unsavory, it’s G-rated.
Then there’s the beach itself, a motley swatch of sand where gaggles of
Brooklynites gather in summer to pitch umbrellas, practice kung fu, blast
music, picnic, and swim. It’s a fascinating social scene, with many different
ethnic groups represented. Note: Luna Park recently expanded to add a darn
good ropes-and-zipline course, perfect for active tweens and teens.

Generations of Coney Island visitors have ridden the Wonder Wheel, a giant Ferris wheel with rocking
compartments.

coneyisland.com. Subway: D, F, N, Q to Coney Island–Stillwell Ave.

Green-Wood Cemetery              HISTORIC SITE As you wander through
New York City, you’ll notice a number of streets named for the important
Gothamites you’ll also encounter at Green-Wood. The “first families” of the
city were all interred here, as were such notables as DeWitt Clinton (a
presidential candidate who was the mastermind behind the Erie Canal),
Leonard Bernstein (composer of Broadway’s West Side Story), and artists
Louis Comfort Tiffany and Jean Michel Basquiat. Heck, even pets were
buried here . . . until the funeral of a devoted horse convinced the
cemetery’s staff to stop the practice in 1870 (the cemetery itself was
founded in 1837). It’s not hard to understand why New Yorkers would pick
Green-Wood for their eternal rest: Set on the highest point of Brooklyn, it’s
a stunning place, considered an arboretum as well as a cemetery for the
7,000 or so trees that grow here. The monuments are equally beautiful,
hand-carved in dozens of different styles, from Tiffany-glass-adorned
mausoleums to bronze and marble statuary. A final lure: The staff here,
determined to prove that cemeteries can be fun, host a myriad of events,
from excellent trolley and walking tours to nighttime concerts in the
catacombs, as well as lectures, “death cafes” (free-form guided discussion
groups about what happens after we pass), and even history happy hours at
sunset, where people learn the stories behind the tombs with cocktails in
hand.
Main entrance Fifth Ave. at 25th St., Sunset Park. green-wood.com. 718/210-3080. Free
admission. Daily 8am–6pm. Trolley and/or walking tours Sat-Sun 1pm (advance reservations
required).

Smartly rehabbed Industry City offers lots of shops, eateries, and activities.

Industry City ENTERTAINMENT COMPLEX Distinctively Brooklyn
entertainment, shopping, and dining experiences are the draw here. There’s
a roller disco rink, outdoor minigolf (weather permitting), an evening
cooking school, art installations, an old-fashioned game arcade, concerts
with local bands, and a lecture/seminar series. Shopping enters the equation
with massive discount outlets for West Elm, RH (formerly Restoration
Hardware), Design Within Reach, and ABC Carpet & Home (p. 295),
along with smaller quintessentially Brooklyn clothing and gift boutiques.
Rounding out the offerings are two food halls (one entirely devoted to
Japanese fare, the other holding Brooklyn’s much-snarked-about “all
avocado” restaurant), as well as a beer brewery, the city’s first sake brewery,
and a distillery for ginger liqueurs (it’s also a liquor store and bar serving
only brands created in New York State). It’s all a lot of fun. The 16-building
complex was first developed by Irving T. Bush in the 1890s as a multi-use
manufacturing and warehouse site. By the 1970s, much of it had become
derelict, but then, as happened in the SoHo and Dumbo areas, it was

rehabbed by artists. Alas, just as in those two neighborhoods, private
developers priced out the artists, and most have had to move to cheaper
spaces.

Sharks swim over visitors’ heads in the Ocean Wonders exhibit at the New York Aquarium, which got a full
makeover after it was damaged in Hurricane Sandy.

Btw. 33rd St. and 41st St., from Gowanus Expressway to waterfront. industrycity.com.
Subway: D, N, R, W to 36th St.
New York Aquarium AQUARIUM In 2012, the surge from Hurricane
Sandy effectively swamped the New York Aquarium. Its sea lions and most
of the other aquatic critters were able to surf the storm unhurt, but the
buildings were heavily damaged, new construction was put on hold, and
visitors were only able to see 40% of the facilities. That changed in the
summer of 2018, when the whiz-bang Ocean Wonders center opened.
Dedicated to sharks and the Grand-Canyon-deep underwater “Hudson
Canyon” (just 40 miles off the city’s coastline), this new center doubled the

amount to see and do at the aquarium. Along with great whites, leopard
sharks, giant rays, endangered Atlantic sturgeons, and other sea life in
massive walk-through tanks, it holds dozens of educational-but-not-preachy
interactive exhibits on sustainable seafood, ocean trash, and the importance
of sharks to the ecosystem. On its roof, adults can relax at an open-air cafe
while their kids explore touch tanks just steps from the tables. In addition to
Ocean Wonders, there’s a sea lion show; outdoor pools for black-footed
penguins, seals, and sea otters; the Playquarium, a new-in-2022 kelp-
forest-themed play space for visitors age 8 and under; and Conservation
Hall, which displays massive Amazonian river fish and other sea life.
502 Surf Ave. (at W. 8th St.), Coney Island. nyaquarium.com.        718/265-FISH [3474].
Weekend admission $30 adults, $28 seniors, $26 children, most weekday entry fees $5 less.
June–Aug daily 10am–6pm; Apr-May and Sept-Oct daily 10am-5pm; Nov–Mar daily 10am–
4:30pm; last entry 1 hr. before closing. Subway: F, Q to W. 8th St.
New York Transit Museum MUSEUM Best for kids and train nuts,
this underground museum (yes, it’s in a former subway station) covers the
storied history of the NYC subway system. The museum houses a number
of handsome vintage subway cars, turnstiles, and mosaics that used to adorn
the stations.
Boerum Place and Schermerhorn St., downtown Brooklyn. nytransitmuseum.org. 718/694-
1600. Admission $10 adults, $5 seniors and ages 2–17 (free for seniors Wed). Thurs–Sun
10am–4pm. Subway: A, C to Hoyt St.; F to Jay St.; M, R to Court St.; 2, 3, 4, 5 to Borough
Hall.

Queens
Isamu Noguchi Garden Museum ART MUSEUM Utterly unique, it’s
the only museum in the nation to be founded by an artist in his lifetime,
dedicated to his work and curated by him. Because Noguchi (1904–88) was
a genius in a number of fields—sculpture, architecture, ceramics, furniture
design—he was more than up to the task and created a space that is at once
balanced and (often) rapturously beautiful. On-site are also a small
cafe/bookstore and an updated Zen sculpture garden (one of the most serene
spots in the city). Gallery talks, held at 2pm each day, are helpful for those
not familiar with Noguchi’s work, as they illuminate the complex
engineering issues and intentions behind his large, sometimes slablike, non-
representational works.
9-01 33rd Rd. (at Vernon Blvd.), Long Island City. noguchi.org. 718/204-7088. Admission
$12 adults, $6 seniors/students. Wed–Sun noon–6pm. Subway: N to Broadway. Walk west
on Broadway to Vernon Blvd.; turn left on Vernon and go 2 blocks.
Louis        Armstrong         House       Museum                 HISTORIC
HOME/MUSEUMThe visitor experience here is as gracious, warm, and
intriguing as the man himself, thanks to the marvelous guides (all ex-
musicians and jazz historians) who lead visitors through the home every
hour on the hour. The only house that this traveling musician ever owned, it
was perfectly preserved after his wife Lucille died in 1983 (Armstrong
himself passed away in 1971) and opened to the public in 2003. There’s an
eerie sense that someone still lives here—you may find yourself expecting
Satchmo to emerge from the kitchen, turn on the stereo, and tell a joke. In
the course of your tour, you’ll learn Louis’s rags-to-riches history (son of a
prostitute, learned to play trumpet in a juvenile detention center, made his
name in mobster-owned clubs). It’s a fairly modest two-story home, but he
and Lucille lavished it with every luxury, from custom-made 24-karat
bathroom fixtures to Baccarat chandeliers and a state-of-the-art audio
system. The highlight: tape recordings of everyday life that Armstrong
captured—your guide will play them as you wander through, allowing you
to hear the family and visiting musicians talking, laughing, and jamming
together.
34-56 107th St., Corona. louisarmstronghouse.org. 718/478-8274. Admission $15 adults,
$12 seniors/students/children, free for ages 3 and under. Tours on the hour, Thurs–Sat

11am–3pm. Subway: 7 to 103rd St./Corona Plaza. Walk north on 103rd St., turn right on 37th
Ave., turn left on 107th St.; the house is a 1⁄2-block north of 37th Ave.

Creative exhibits at the Museum of the Moving Image bring museumgoers deep into the worlds of TV, film, and
video games.

Museum of the Moving Image                MUSEUM For sheer unadulterated
fun, no museum in town can beat this one. The first museum anywhere to
look at TV, film, and video games together (a heretical concept when the
museum opened in 1988), it’s not simply an archive of past shows. Instead,
it explores the craft and technology behind these arts with startlingly
imaginative interactive exhibits, commissioned art works, video sequences,
and, of course, artifacts. Just how much fun is all this? Well, CitySearch
ranked it the best place in the city for a family outing, while Time Out
magazine called it the number-one place to go when you’re “baked”—if
that doesn’t hit all the bases, I don’t know what does. Start your visit with
the museum’s core exhibit, Behind the Screen, which explores the many
technical issues behind moving images, from explanations of how the eye is
tricked into seeing movement in rapidly repeating images, to the intricacies
of sound and film editing. You’ll have a chance to dub your own voice into
such classics as My Fair Lady, create original computer animation,

transmute the musical score of a famous film scene, and more. Several
times a day, working editors, animators, and educators demonstrate how
these techniques are used on actual productions. Other sections cover
design concerns, exploring how makeup, costumes, sets, and publicity stills
help create the image the director (or studio) is looking for. If you’ve been
harboring a secret yen to play Galaga just one more time, you’ll have your
chance in the playable video games exhibit. Next, you’ll likely want to take
in whatever blockbuster special exhibit is on; recent ones have covered TV
shows (Mad Men, The Walking Dead), the phenomenon of Internet cat
videos, and the dangerous artistry of deep fake videos. On the first floor, the
museum’s full-size movie theater screens feature films from around the
world, often followed by discussions with the artists involved, including
such big names as Glenn Close, Tim Burton, David Cronenberg, or Jennifer
Connelly. And at some time during your visit, take the elevator: It screens
custom-made GIFs by some of the top GIF-makers working today (yes, that
is a now a career path!). This part of Queens was where many early
American films were made—the 98,000-square-foot museum was built on
the grounds of Kaufman Astoria Studios. The overall experience illuminates
how far the art form has come in so brief a span of time, and just how
powerful the human imagination is.

The
International
Express
The no. 7 train—which originates in Manhattan at Times Square, makes three stops in
that borough, and then snakes, mostly above ground, through the heart of ethnic
Queens—is also popularly known as the International Express. Built by immigrants in
the early 1900s, the no. 7 IRT (Interborough Rapid Transit) brought those same
immigrants to homes on the outer fringes of New York City. That tradition has
continued as immigrants from around the world have settled close by the no. 7’s
elevated tracks. Get off in Sunnyside and see Romanian grocery stores and
restaurants; a few stops farther in Jackson Heights, you’ll see Indians in saris and Sikhs
in turbans; go all the way to Flushing and you’ll think you are in Chinatown. (You are—
Queen’s Chinatown is bigger than Manhattan’s.) In 1999, the Queens Council on the
Arts nominated the International Express for designation as a National Millennium
Trail, and that resulted in its selection as representative of the American immigrant
experience by the White House Millennium Council, the United States Department of
Transportation, and the Rails-to-Trails Conservancy.

35th Ave. at 37th St., Astoria. movingimage.us. 718/777-6800. Admission $20 adults, $12
seniors/students, $10 ages 5–18, free for ages 5 and under; free for all Thurs 2–6pm. Thurs
2–6pm; Fri 2–8pm; Sat–Sun noon–6pm. Subway: R, M to Steinway St.; N to 36th Ave.
P.S. 1 Contemporary Art Center              ART MUSEUM At this proving
ground for young artists, the work you’ll see will be challenging, right of
the moment, and sometimes downright wacky. “P.S. 1 is mythological,”
says former assistant director Brett Littman. “Wherever I go, people know
that there’s this crazy building in Long Island City where you see crazy art.
They come here to put a notch on their culture belt.” That “crazy building”
was once a public school (hence the name), and its somewhat decrepit
charm is part of the experience. Because it’s not a fancy white box of a
space (like its sister institution the Museum of Modern Art), P.S. 1 allows
artists to create full-blown, sometimes invasive, installations in the space.
(One summer several years ago, an artist blasted holes in the brick wall of a
gallery.) It uses all kinds of unusual spaces to house art, such as the
basement boiler room. The bulk of the work you’ll see here will be in
changing exhibits, as the museum does not collect art; visitors are usually
greeted with as many as 14 different shows in all parts of the building. As

I’ve said, some can be quite, well, bizarre. In its retrospective of New York
City art several years back, one framed sculpture turned out to be the actual
hand of the artist who was sitting on the other side of the wall, personifying
her art. Now if that’s not worth $10, I don’t know what is. A note for
summer visitors: On summer weekends, P.S. 1 throws rowdy, fun “beach
parties” (sand is dumped in the outdoor areas), complete with DJs, food,
and various games. Check the website before heading over.
22-25 Jackson Ave. (at 46th Ave.), Long Island City. ps1.org. 718/784-2084. Suggested
admission $10 adults, $5 seniors/students; free for NY residents. Thurs–Mon noon–6pm
(until 8pm Sat). Subway: E, M to 23rd St./Ely Ave. (walk 2 blocks south on Jackson Ave.); 7 to
45th Rd./Court House Square (walk 1 block south on Jackson Ave.).

With its miniature skyscrapers, painted rivers, and teeny bridges, the Panorama of the City of New York is a
mesmerizing exhibit at the Queens Museum.

Queens Museum MUSEUM Long before there was Google Earth,
there was the Panorama of the City of New York. A diorama of 9,335 square
feet, it was created for the 1964–65 World’s Fair with the help of

photographers who swooped in helicopters over the city, taking over 7,000
photos to capture every building in the five boroughs. The Panorama is still
a wonder today, and the heart of the Queens Museum. It was fully updated
in 1992, and subsequently, building owners can pay to have their newer
edifices added, which makes for some odd anomalies. I highly recommend
taking the museum’s free guided tour (offered several times a day) as the
docent does a masterful job of making the geography come alive, with
discussions of the city’s history and what on the map is wrong and right.
Other exhibits cover the museum building’s storied history: It was erected
for the 1939 World’s Fair and served as the site of the United Nations
during its first 5 years. There’s also a lovely exhibit of Tiffany lamps (a nod
to the fact that the Tiffany factory was in Corona, Queens) and changing art
exhibits.
Flushing Meadows Corona Park, Queens. queensmuseum.org.        718/592-9700. Free
admission. Wed–Fri noon–5pm; Sat–Sun 11am–5pm. Subway: 7 to Mets–Willets Point.

ESPECIALLY FOR KIDS

Museums
In addition to the museums specifically for kids detailed below, consider the
American Museum of Natural History                (p. 230), whose dinosaur
displays are guaranteed to wow both you and your children; the Museum of
the Moving Image          (p. 247), where you and the kids can learn how
movies are actually made (and play vintage video games); and the New
York Transit Museum (p. 246), where young ’uns can explore vintage
subway cars and other hands-on exhibits. Note that even museums that
would be considered more “adult,” like the Whitney (p. 191), the Museum
of Modern Art (p. 203), and the Metropolitan Museum of Art (p. 224),
now offer free activity books and/or audio tours for younger visitors, to help
engage them with the art.
“Game” places for slightly older kids can be good for blowing off steam,
like Escape the Room (several locations and varying rates;
escapetheroomnyc.com), in which groups are locked into a room and have 1
hour to solve riddles and find clues that will help them get out. It’s tons of
fun.
The Brooklyn Children’s Museum MUSEUM The very first museum
of its type in the nation, the Brooklyn Children’s Museum isn’t easy to get
to from Manhattan, but it rewards those who make the trek (there’s a shuttle
from the nearest subway stop many days of the week; check the museum’s
website). Inspired by the idea that children love to play at working, the
museum gives them a number of places in which to toil: a garden where
they can plant things and learn about botany, a pretend restaurant and
grocery store where they can “feed” their parents, a “building brainstorm”
area that teaches the basics of architecture and engineering with blocks and
other building toys, and more. For those who end up spending hours here (it
happens!), there’s an on-site cafe.
145 Brooklyn Ave. (at St. Marks Ave.). brooklynkids.org. 718/735-4400. Admission $13,
free for children 1 and under. Wed–Sun 10am–5pm. Subway: 3 to Kingston Ave.; A to
Nostrand Ave.; C to Kingston/Throop Ave.
Children’s Museum of Manhattan MUSEUM At this slick hands-on
attraction, changing exhibits highlight the kiddie zeitgeist of the moment:
Red Grooms, Maurice Sendak, and William Wegman’s dog art were just a
few recent exhibit themes. Those with toddlers should go directly to the

Child Development Center on the fourth floor, where kids can finger-paint
to their hearts’ delight, play with little stoves, and send rubber balls
rocketing down a twisted tube from a loft to the floor (there were days when
I never got past this room). Older children will want to take part in the
classes and special exhibits. Since these fill up fast, stop by the sign-up desk
right when you enter.
212 W. 83rd St. (btw. Broadway and Amsterdam Ave.). www.cmom.org. 212/721-1234.
Admission $15, $12 seniors, free for children 1 and under; free for all first Fri of month 5–
8pm. Tues–Sun 10am–5pm (Sat until 7pm). Subway: 1 to 86th St.
Museum of Illusions ATTRACTION You want to be in a group of three
or more for this attraction: Many of the photo ops are for two posers,
requiring another person to snap the shot. And that’s mostly what this
“museum” is about: taking funny photos to post on social media. Tweens
will love it . . . and parents will try unsuccessfully to engage them in
conversation about the science behind optical illusions. On weekends,
there’s often a line out the door, but this place really isn’t worth waiting for
(you can see the entire attraction in about 20 min., a disappointment at these
prices and after an hour-long line).
77 Eighth Ave. (at 14th St.). museumofillusions.com.       212/645–3230. Admission $24
adults, students/seniors $22, $20 ages 6–13, free for kids 5 and under. Mon–Thurs 10am–
11pm; Fri–Sat 10am–midnight. Subway: L, A, E, C to 14th St./Eighth Ave.
The Museum of Mathematics               MUSEUM When this museum first
debuted in 2012, I warned my children that if they didn’t behave, I’d take
them there. It was no punishment, however, when we finally went.
Creatively designed to bring math concepts to life, this little museum (it
takes about an hour to see it) has two floors of interactive displays that will
have your kids riding bikes with square wheels, re-creating Galileo’s
experiments, and doing all sorts of fun numbers games.
11 E. 26th St. (near Fifth Ave.). momath.org. 212/542-0566. Admission $25 adults, $20
seniors and children 2−12. Daily 10am−5pm. Subway: R to 23rd St.
New York City Fire Museum MUSEUM What kid can resist a big red
fire engine roaring by, or a room full of swooping red fire hats? You’ll see
both in abundance at the New York City Fire Museum, which has one of the
largest collections of firehouse memorabilia in the nation. It also has the

good sense to hand out a free scavenger-hunt map on arrival, which should
keep even the most restless of youngsters amused.
278 Spring St. (btw. Varick and Hudson sts.). nycfiremuseum.org.            212/691-1303.
Admission $10 adults, $8 seniors/students, $5 children. Wed–Sun 10am–5pm. Closed Easter,
Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s Day. Subway: C, E to Spring St.; 1 to Houston St.
New York Hall of Science MUSEUM Set in one of the few remaining
buildings from the 1964 World’s Fair, this museum is a big hit with science-
attuned youngsters, as most of its exhibits are hands-on and interactive. For
those who just want to blow off steam, there’s a minigolf park in good
weather and an excellent science-themed playground. The only negative for
most visitors—and it’s a serious one—is how remote it is from Manhattan
(it can take a good hour on the subway each way). Still, if you’ve been to
NYC with your kids a few times and want something new, this is definitely
a good option.
47-01 111th St., Corona, Queens. nysci.org. 718/699-0005. Admission $16 adults, $13
seniors and children 2–17 ($2 discount for online purchase). Wed–Sun 10am–5pm. Subway:
7 to 111th St.

Historic fire engines and firefighter gear entertain kids at the New York City Fire Museum.
