Chapter 5: Exploring — Especially for Kids

Planning
Tips for
the
Museum
of
Natural
History
Timing your visit: Because the museum is so popular with school groups, it can get
crowded, particularly midmorning. Also, since so many families head here, attendance
is often in inverse proportion to the weather: When it’s lovely outside, the crowds will
be sparse within. When it’s blustery or rainy . . . watch out. Weekdays tend to be less
crowded than weekends. Note that timed tickets are available starting 2 months
before the date of visit.
An overview tour: First-time visitors should consider taking one of the guided
introductory tours that begin at 15 minutes past the hour until 4:15pm. Led by highly
knowledgeable volunteer guides (they take classes for 6 months), tours vary by guide
and will hit different highlights of the museum.
Especially for kids: Families with children will want to visit the Discovery Room, an
educational center where kids can pretend to dig up dinosaur bones, do a scavenger
hunt, peer through microscopes, and more. Timed free tickets are given for admission
here, so be sure to grab one early in the day before they run out.

Central Park W. (btw. 77th and 81st sts.). amnh.org. 212/769-5100. Admission $28 adults,
$22 seniors/students, $16 ages 2–12; pay-what-you-wish for NY/NJ/CT residents w/ID.
Admission plus space show $28 adults, $23 seniors/students, $17 ages 2–12. Additional
charges for IMAX movies and some special exhibitions. Wed–Sun 10am–5:30pm. Closed
Thanksgiving and Christmas. Subway: B, C to 81st St.; 1 to 79th St.
Cathedral of St. John the Divine CATHEDRAL/ARCHITECTURE
Little-known fact: The largest cathedral in the world is not St. Peter’s in
Rome (which is technically not a cathedral but a basilica), it’s St. John the
Divine in upper Manhattan. Odder fact: Despite the popish name, it isn’t
Catholic, it’s Episcopalian. Oddest fact: Though construction began on the
cathedral in 1892, the building is yet to be completed, and many estimate
that it will take another 100 years for that to happen. All of which makes
this a fascinating building to visit. You’ll see a bit of how the ancient
cathedrals of Europe were erected—the 121,000-square-foot structure, a
blend of Romanesque and Gothic elements (thanks to the varying tastes of

the architects who worked on it over the past century), is being built without
steel, in the classic Gothic manner. (To that end, in 1979 a master
stonecutter was brought from England to train Harlem youths in the art of
traditional stonecutting.) There’s still much work to be done (including a lot
of fundraising!) but what is in place—and there’s a lot—is quite beautiful,
especially the Rose Window in the apse, the largest in North America. You
can explore the cathedral on your own or on the Public Tour, offered
Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays at 1pm (sometimes also at
11am); also inquire about the Vertical Tour (offered Fri and some Sat at
2pm), which takes you on a hike up an 11-flight circular staircase to the top,
for spectacular views.

The Cathedral of St. John the Divine doesn’t just look like a Gothic cathedral, it was built (and is still being
completed) using medieval techniques.

Services here tend to be among the most musical and progressive in the
city. I particularly recommend the New Year’s Eve service, featuring
original work from some of the best composers in town; the Halloween

concert; and the Blessing of the Animals (on the feast day of St. Francis of
Assisi, usually early Oct), a ceremony in which New Yorkers bring their
pets—ranging from puppies to pythons to thoroughbred horses—to be
blessed.
1047 Amsterdam Ave. (at 112th St.). stjohndivine.org.      212/316-7490. Admission $10
adults, $8 students/seniors. Highlights Tour $15 adults, $12 seniors/students. Vertical Tour
$20 adults, $18 seniors/students. Mon–Sat 9:30am–5pm; Sun noon–5pm. For worship
schedule, see website. Subway: B, C, 1 to Cathedral Pkwy.
Museum of Arts and Design MUSEUM It’s not easy to get a New
Yorker’s attention, but this museum does that consistently—it’s one of the
few museums in town where you’ll see more locals than visitors, drawn in
by creative, sometimes wacky, exhibitions on design. One, for example,
highlighted the pins worn by the late Secretary of State Madeleine Albright;
another used visitors’ sense of smell to delve into how perfumes are
created. On the top floor, artists in residence work at their crafts—furniture,
textiles, you name it—making the exhibits below feel that much more vital.
It also has one of the best gift stores in the city and a lovely top-floor
restaurant.
2 Columbus Circle. madmuseum.org. 212/299-7777. Admission $18 adults, $14 seniors,
$12 students, free for ages 18 and under; half price on Thurs. Tues–Sun 10am–6pm. Subway:
1, A, B, C, D to 59th St./Columbus Circle.
New-York Historical Society MUSEUM When you’re NYC’s oldest
museum (founded in 1804), your attic gets mighty full. In past years that
fourth-floor “attic” felt like a treasure hunt, its open storage units
overflowing with telling artifacts from the museum’s holdings—a Tiffany
lamp here, a pair of historic pistols there, the plaster model head created by
sculptor Daniel Chester French for Washington’s Lincoln Memorial in
another corner. Alas, the curators decided to tidy up, and in 2017 replaced
the open storage with three not-so-successful permanent galleries. The first
is a runway of sorts for Tiffany lamps, with too many similar ones on
display (they’re pretty, but it is overkill). Next is a large room with themed
glass cases of artifacts that illustrate—but don’t do enough to illuminate—
different facets of New York City life through the ages (“Childhood,” “Fire,”
and “Collecting” are three of these too-loosely-related exhibits). The third is
a center for women’s history, which has created several yawner exhibits
since its opening. On lower floors other permanent displays include

paintings from the Hudson Valley School, and Audubon drawings, making
the museum feel more dedicated to art than to history. Luckily, the powers-
that-be had the wisdom to keep the superb 18-minute film that welcomes
visitors to the museum. It is reason alone to come here, as are some, but not
all, of the temporary exhibits—recent offerings have covered life far beyond
the city, with one on how Title IX shaped sports in the U.S., another
showing how children’s books covered the Civil Rights Movement, and a
look at the life of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
170 Central Park W. (at 77th St.). nyhistory.org. 212/873-3400. Admission $22 adults, $17
seniors/military/educators, $13 students, $6 children 7–13, free for ages 6 and under, pay-
what-you-wish Fri 6–8pm. Wed–Sun 11am–5pm (Fri until 8pm). Subway: B, C to 81st St.; 1 to
79th St.

Medieval architectural fragments salvaged from Europe have been artfully assembled into galleries at the
Cloisters, like this re-created chapel.

ENJOYING THE gospel OF HARLEM
There are over 400 churches in Harlem. Some are large and ornate, while others are small,
one-room churches housed on ground floors of brownstones. And many of those churches,
large or small, feature fiery sermons and magnificent gospel services every Sunday. Gospel
tours (p. 269) of these churches have become big business, mainly drawing foreign visitors
who line up on Sunday mornings and pay handsomely. There’s something uncomfortably
voyeuristic about the scene, but the pastors and the churches that attract the crowds—and
their donations—aren’t complaining. If you want to skip the guided tour and go to services
on your own, here are several that are worth visiting: Abyssinian Baptist Church, 1230
Fifth Ave. at 104th St.; abyssinian.org; 212/862-7474
Canaan Baptist Church, 132 W. 116th St.; canaanbaptistcoc.com;            212/866-0301
First Corinthian Baptist Church, 1912 Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Blvd. at 116th St.;
fcbcsermons.com; 212/864-5976
Greater     Refuge       Temple,      2081     Adam      Clayton      Powell    Jr.     Blvd.;
www.greaterrefugetemple.org; 212/280-5268
Most services begin promptly at 11am; seating for non-members is on a first-come, first-
served basis. Make sure you arrive in plenty of time; there will most likely be a line. At
some churches, tour groups get preference over walk-ups; call in advance to find out that
particular church’s policy. Service lengths vary, but expect at least 2 hours and up to 3.
Most tours leave after the gospel choir and before the sermon—you’d think that would be
disrespectful, yet because this is a profitable venture for the churches, the faithful take it all
in stride.

Harlem & Upper Manhattan
The Cloisters         ART MUSEUM/ARCHITECTURE An offshoot of the
Metropolitan Museum (p. 224), the Cloisters is the only museum in the
United States devoted wholly to medieval art. And it shows its masterworks
in a setting that seems to have been airlifted, utterly intact, from some
remote corner of the Pyrenees, or from a castle-lined town in Bavaria.
Opened in 1934, the museum was, in fact, built in the United States, but
30% of its architectural elements—columns, pedestals, naves, doorframes,
exquisite stained-glass windows—were salvaged from medieval European
structures. It’s a stunning mirage—even the land across the river was bought
by patron John D. Rockefeller to thwart development and ensure that the
Cloisters’ views would forever have a medieval face. At its heart are four
cloisters, garden areas centered with a fountain and surrounded by covered
walkways of the type seen in every monastery and abbey in Europe. Off
these tranquil gardens lie galleries devoted to different periods of art and

architecture—a peak-ceilinged Gothic chapel here; a squat Romanesque
hall there—each housing treasures of that era.
Though you can see the entire museum in an hour or so, pay special
attention to the Unicorn Tapestries, one of only two full sets with a unicorn
theme in the world (the other is in Paris). These richly detailed tapestries
can be enjoyed on a number of levels: Many scholars see the unicorn as a
symbol of Christ, and the hunt to slay it as evocative of the Passion. Others
write that the work is a metaphor for courtly love, with the hunt itself
courtship, and the last tapestry of the unicorn trapped inside a wedding
ring–like fence symbolizing marriage (despite this captivity, the unicorn
does look happy). Whatever you decide, they are strikingly beautiful, an
evocative slice of the past when nobles only hunted in packs of six, and
unicorns were thought to be real (hence the long narwhal tooth in this room,
which medieval man thought came from unicorns). The other must-see
items are kept in the climate-controlled Campin Room (bring a sweater),
where you’ll view Robert de Campin’s breakthrough Merode altarpiece
(ca. 1425) which placed the Annunciation—the moment when an angel
informs the Virgin Mary that she will bear the child of God—in a secular
setting rather than a church. It’s also quite dramatic for its use of Jewish
objects, including a prayer shawl and a vase with Hebrew-looking lettering,
to establish Mary’s background. Nearby is the so-called Cloisters Cross,
one of only three known ivory crosses preserved from the 12th century—
and the most complex, at that, with over 90 figures and inscriptions
painstakingly carved into the walrus tusk ivory. I highly recommend timing
your tour to coincide with one of the curator-led gallery talks or garden
walks (usually held at 1pm).
North end of Fort Tryon Park. metmuseum.org/cloisters. 212/923-3700. Admission $30
adults, $22 seniors, $17 students, free for ages 11 and under; NY State residents pay-what-
you-wish (ID required). Admission includes same-day entrance to Metropolitan Museum (p.
224). Thurs–Tues 10am–5pm. Subway: A to 190th St., then 10-min. walk north along
Margaret Corbin Dr. Bus: M4 Madison Ave. (Fort Tryon Park/the Cloisters).
El Museo del Barrio MUSEUM This showplace for the art of Latin
America and the Caribbean owns hundreds of pre-Columbian pieces,
contemporary and modern paintings and sculptures, and, most significantly,
500 Santos de Palo, mostly from Puerto Rico. These hand-carved, wooden
saints are very beautiful and well worth a visit to see. The museum also

throws fun parties for every Latin and Caribbean holiday and hosts
changing exhibits.
1230 Fifth Ave. (at 104th St.). elmuseo.org. 212/831-7272. Suggested donation $9 adults,
$5 seniors/students, free for ages 12 and under. Thurs−Sun 11am–5pm. Subway: 6 to 103rd
St.
Morris Jumel Mansion             HISTORIC HOME The oldest house in
Manhattan, erected in 1765, this mansion was the site of two marquee
historic events. General George Washington requisitioned the house after
the disastrous Battle of Brooklyn and made it his campaign HQ for 4
weeks, much to the chagrin of the Loyalist Morris family (the owners).
Eliza Jumel, a later owner, married disgraced former Vice President Aaron
Burr in the parlor here. Their marriage was a disaster, ending a year later;
Burr passed away on the day the divorce was issued. Serious history fans
will enjoy a visit, which includes a look-see around a historic kitchen, some
original furnishings, and a lovely sunken garden. Others can skip this one.
