Chapter 5: Exploring — Top Sights & Downtown

that city’s top cultural draw, bringing acclaim, prestige, and millions of
dollars in tourist revenue (no, I do not exaggerate). These attractions—such
as the Tenement Museum, the Museum of the Moving Image, the Brooklyn
Museum—can add immensely to a New York City visit. It’s important
occasionally to step off the tourist treadmill (Empire State Building, Times
Square, Statue of Liberty) and try one of the so-called secondary sights. If
you have the time, visit at least one of the places you might never have
heard of before picking up this book.
How do you plan (and time) a satisfying itinerary? I’ve given you a slew
of suggestions in chapter 2 of this book. This chapter contains individual
sights grouped by area. I truly believe you’ll enjoy your visit more if you
don’t run yourself ragged, dashing around different parts of the city each
day. Instead, divide Manhattan into three sections (downtown, midtown, and
uptown) and create a daily plan that keeps you in one of those areas for a
full day, or in one of our fabulous boroughs (again for the day). You’ll see
more that way, you’ll have time to enjoy an unhurried meal, and you’ll find
the kinds of serendipitous sidewalk encounters that don’t happen when
you’re stressed out by subway connections, hop-on bus pickup schedules,
and attraction closing times.

NEW YORK CITY’S TOP SIGHTS
9/11 Memorial and Museum             (p. 168) American Museum of Natural History               (p.
230) Bronx Zoo        (p. 237) Brooklyn Bridge         (p. 171) Brooklyn Museum           (p. 240)
Cathedral of St. John the Divine         (p. 232) Central Park     (p. 252) The Cloisters         (p.
234) Cooper Hewitt National Design Museum                (p. 219) Ellis Island National Museum
of Immigration       (p. 172) Empire State Building          (p. 209) Frick Madison          (p.
222) Grand Central Terminal         (p. 212) Guggenheim Museum              (p. 229) Intrepid Sea,
Air & Space Museum          (p. 200) Metropolitan Museum of Art             (p. 224) The Morgan
Library & Museum        (p. 212) Museum of Modern Art           (p. 203) Museum of the Moving
Image       (p. 247) New York Public Library        (p. 215) One World Observatory             (p.
178) Rockefeller Center        (p. 205) Statue of Liberty      (p. 180) Summit One Vanderbilt
(p. 216) Times Square (p. 207) The Tenement Museum                   (p. 186) The United
Nations     (p. 218) Wall Street and the New York Stock Exchange (p. 185) The Whitney
Museum         (p. 191) Downtown Financial District/New York Harbor 9/11 Memorial and
Museum          HISTORIC SITE/MUSEUM For well over 2 millennia, humans have been
telling one another stories of the dangers of looking back at evil or death. Lot’s wife
turned to a pillar of salt because she dared glance over her shoulder into the maw of
destruction. Orpheus lost his beloved forever for the same reason: He turned around

before he’d reached the realm of light. And in a case of real life imitating iconic tales, on
September 11, 2001, those people who were on the streets surrounding the Twin
Towers when they fell had to run for their lives to escape the deadly debris cloud that
pursued them with unrelenting fury. “Don’t look back, just run,” one bystander yells to
another in one of the many moving videos at the 9/11 Memorial and Museum.

Visitors at the 9/11 Museum and Memorial in front of one of the steel beams that was part of the original
World Trade Center.

For over a decade it looked as if the survivors, politicians, and others who
had vowed to create this museum might not actually have the ability to look
back at that world-changing September day. Bickering over every element

of the design and contents of the museum caused endless delays and
became newspaper fodder; controversies seemed to erupt daily over such
issues as the high cost of entry to the museum, its portrayal of the Muslim
religion, even the fact that it had a gift shop. Yet despite all this, the 9/11
Museum has emerged as what may be one of the most important history
museums in the United States. Out of all the chaos and well-publicized
postponements comes an institution that seamlessly blends design and
content, transporting visitors back, in a very visceral way, to the day on
which four separate, airplane-fueled attacks killed close to 3,000 people
(the museum relates the stories not just of the Twin Towers but also of the
Pentagon attack and Flight 93).

Exhibits in the 9/11 Museum list the names of those lost in the World Trade Center attack.

After a thorough security check (make sure you allot 15 min. minimum
for that and the entry line), visitors descend down, down, down into this
underground museum. It’s a fitting metaphor not only for the escape route
that Twin Towers survivors had to take when fleeing by stair (a remnant of
the famous “survivors stair” is to the right of the museum’s staircase at one

point) but also for the darkness the attacks plunged the United States into.
At the bottom of the final staircase, to the left (oddly, as most visitors want
to turn right) is the museum’s beating heart: its history exhibition. A
masterful mix of video, audio clips from survivors, wall text, and poignant
artifacts—the burnt-edged papers that fluttered from the Towers, children’s
clothing recovered from Flight 93—the exhibit manages to bring to life the
personal stories of those who lived or died that day, while also explaining
some of the forces that led to the attacks. A thought-provoking section
explores the rise of Al Qaeda (you even see a brick from Bin Laden’s
Abbottabad compound). Lingering health issues that survivors and first
responders still struggle with are discussed, as is the issue of who, beyond
the attackers, should be held accountable. Museumgoers also see the
famous Ground Zero cross (a severed chunk of metal beams that
accidentally formed this Christian symbol), a squashed fire truck, and the
Memorial Room, which tells the story and shows the face of every person
who died on 9/11.
I, for one, am glad that the founders of the museum were finally able to
look back and to do so in such a clear-eyed, multifaceted way. I don’t know
if the museum has one overarching point to make, but it offers revelations at
every turn about our recent history and the men and women who shaped it.
And everywhere are boxes of tissues (refilled every hour, according to the
guard I spoke with), as the museum is ultimately quite an emotional
experience.

colonial-era SACRED GROUND
African Burial Ground Some 15,000 African slaves were buried in a Manhattan
graveyard in the 17th and 18th centuries, but their final resting places were lost to memory
until 1991 when construction workers stumbled upon human remains during renovations of
a federal building. The site is now considered one of the most important archeological
finds in the United States. In 2006, a handsome, symbol-laden National Monument
(operated by the National Parks Service) was dedicated by poet Maya Angelou and Mayor
Michael Bloomberg. Inside the small museum nearby are smartly crafted exhibits about the
lives of the city’s slaves, the laws surrounding slavery, and the history of the site. Ask the
on-site ranger to play the excellent 20-minute introductory film when you arrive; it’s only
played on request. A visit to the African Burial Ground and museum should take no more
than half an hour, but it’s a worthy pilgrimage, uncovering, as it does, a part of American
history that is too often brushed to the side.
Memorial at corner of Duane and Elk sts., museum at 290 Broadway. nps.gov/afbg.
212/637-2019. Free admission. Indoor exhibit and outdoor memorial Tues–Sat 10am–4pm,
advance reservations required. Subway: 4, 5, 6, R to City Hall; J to Chambers St.

Surrounding the museum is the 8-acre Memorial Plaza, which features
two reflecting pools and waterfalls, located in the 1-acre footprints of the
individual towers. Each reflecting pool is surrounded by a brass parapet
where the names of victims of both the 9/11 and February 1993 bombings
are engraved and arranged in order according to where they worked, close
to their co-workers or friends, or wherever their families thought they would
best be located.
Note: Tours of the museum do sell out in advance, so if you plan to take
one of those, book that and your ticket a few days ahead. The museum itself
rarely sells out, but purchasing timed entry in advance lets you skip one
line. “Early access” tours several times a week, starting at 8:15am, may be
worthwhile for those with limited time in the city.
Entrances at intersections of Liberty and Greenwich sts., Liberty and West sts., or West and
Fulton sts. 911memorial.org. 212/266-5211. Museum admission $29, $23 seniors and
students, $18 U.S. veterans, $17 children 7–12, free for children 6 and under; additional cost
for guided tour. Memorial park daily 10am–5pm; museum Wed–Mon 10am–5pm; last entry
11⁄2 hr. before museum closes. Subway: A, C, J, Z, 2, 3, 4, 5 to Fulton St.; 2, 3 to Park Place; E
to World Trade Center; R to Rector St.
Brooklyn Bridge         ICON/ARCHITECTURE New York has a grand
Gothic cathedral in St. Patrick’s (p. 216), but for many New Yorkers, the

city’s true cathedral, the point at which earth and water join and thrust
upwards toward the heavens, is the Brooklyn Bridge.
To fully appreciate its dazzle, you must walk the bridge. Start on the
Manhattan side and walk first to one of the great Gothic towers that hold up
the bridge’s cables. It took 7 years and massive heartbreak to build these
two structures. When architect (and immigrant) John A. Roebling was
surveying the area in 1869, just 2 weeks after the project had been
approved, a ferry accidentally rammed into the place where he was
standing, crushing his foot. He died of lockjaw 3 weeks later. His son
Washington took over and created a method of sending pneumatic caissons
—basically large, pressurized pine boxes into which compressed air was
pumped to keep the water out—down to the riverbed. This allowed six
workers at a time to descend and lay the foundation for these towers.
Because they didn’t have a good understanding of the effects of underwater
pressure on the human body (known to scuba divers as “the bends”), many
were killed or injured in the caissons, including Washington Roebling. In
1872, he had to be carried out of the chamber, partially paralyzed. He
remained an invalid for the rest of his life, and his wife Martha took over
directing the job, learning advanced mathematics in the process.
Washington watched the progress of the bridge through binoculars from his
apartment, and when the bridge was competed after 13 years, Grover
Cleveland (then president), the governor, and the mayor all came to his
home to personally thank him for his efforts.
Walk to the center of the bridge and take in the spectacular views of both
Brooklyn and Manhattan. When the bridge was built, its span—1,595 feet—
was the longest leap across an open space of any on Earth, and the first
bridge to connect Manhattan with any of the lands that surrounded it. Take a
look up at the cables; these, too, were an innovation, the first steel cables to
be used on a bridge (before then cables were iron). It took 2 years to string
the cables back and forth before work could begin building the suspension
bridge. The cables each contain 5,434 wires and weigh 870 tons. Take a
moment at the Brooklyn side to read the plaque on the construction of the
bridge.
When you depart the bridge, consider taking a stroll in either Brooklyn
Bridge Park (p. 260) or brownstone-heavy Brooklyn Heights, the first
neighborhood in the city to be landmarked.

To start in Manhattan, 4, 5, 6 to Brooklyn Bridge–City Hall. To start in Brooklyn, 2, 3 train to
Clark St.; or 2, 3, 4, 5, N, R to Court St.–Borough Hall.

Ellis Island National Museum of Immigration               HISTORIC SITE
The epicenter of the largest migration in human history, Ellis Island was in
near-continuous use from 1892 to 1954 as the point-of-entry processing

center for the majority of immigrants (including my grandmother) who
settled in the U.S. during those years. Over 12 million people passed
through its halls, sometimes as many as 12,000 in a single day. The stories
of these immigrants—what they were escaping, what they found once here,
and what they experienced in their short time in the purgatory that was Ellis
Island—are the core of the Ellis Island experience. But in 2015, Ellis Island
widened its focus to embrace the entire history of immigration to America;
it well deserves a repeat visit from those who’ve toured it before (more on
that below). First-time visitors, however, will want to concentrate on the
original exhibits, which remain the most emotionally resonant—for the
simple reason that they’re about Ellis Island itself. Learning about this
endlessly fascinating place while walking through its hallowed halls is a
powerful experience.
Start in the awe-inspiring second-floor Grand Hall (officially the
“Registry Hall”), with its massive white-tile vaulted ceiling (created by the
same firm that did the ceiling in Grand Central Station’s Oyster Bar; see p.
140), most likely larger than any church or temple these immigrants would
have attended in their home villages. Behind the Grand Hall lies a warren of
small rooms where immigrants were tested for mental competency, literacy,
and communicable diseases. How these tests were done—and the fear they
inspired—is chronicled in historical photos, wall text, and most poignantly
at listening stations (or over the free audio-tour headphones) on which you
hear actual immigrants share their memories of their time on the island. The
top floor chronicles the history of the processing facility itself. These
exhibits can be skipped if you’re short on time, but don’t miss the
“Treasures from Home” exhibit, also on this floor, which features 2,000 of
the possessions that were brought through Ellis. Somehow seeing the china
dolls, the precious wedding photos, the native costumes, and the letters
home brings the immigrant experience more vividly to life than any other
part of the museum.

The Grand Hall at Ellis Island greeted immigrants to America with a sense of majesty.

Many immigrants arrived at Ellis Island with all their worldly possessions in a few suitcases.

For those coming on a repeat visit, on the ground floor there are four new
exhibitions of note. Two of them expand the story of immigration to
America, to the era before Ellis Island opened (Journeys: The Peopling of
America) and to the period after World War II through today (The
Journey: New Eras of Immigration). Both are quite wall-text heavy,
which may frustrate some visitors. If you have to choose between them, I’d
pick “New Eras of Immigration,” as it features affecting videos profiling
recent immigrants, both legal and illegal. It also tells a story that’s rarely
discussed in a balanced fashion: the myriad surprising ways in which
immigration is reshaping today’s America. The highlight of the American
Stories exhibit is a set of interactive monitors that allow visitors to take an
actual, current citizenship test (I’m proud to say I got a perfect score).
Another experience recommended for repeat visitors is the Hard Hat Tour
, which takes visitors through the unrenovated—and haunting—Ellis

Island hospital. Some 10% of Ellis Island immigrants spent some time here,
often only to be shipped back to Europe, their only crime being ill. The
facility was closed for 60 years and it’s falling apart—hence the need for
hard hats. The only new items added are oversize archival photos of hospital
residents that French artist JR mounted onto the crumbling walls, broken
windows, and metal lockers—a moving tribute.
There’s also an on-site cafeteria, along with the American Family
History Center, which holds millions of records. Trained genealogists are
on-site to help visitors navigate the computer search; a session costs $7.
As one of the 40% of all Americans who had a relative come through
Ellis Island, I find it difficult to tour this museum without tearing up at some
point. I have no doubt that even visitors without such a direct connection
will find the journey through Ellis one of the most moving experiences of
their New York visit.
In New York Harbor; ferry departs from Battery Park. nps.gov/elis/index.htm or
www.statuecitycruises.com.      212/363-3200 (general info) or 877/LADY-TIX (523-9849;
ticket/ferry info). Free admission. Ferry ticket $24 adults, seniors $18, children 4–12 $12.
Hard Hat Tour, including ferry ticket $45, ages 13 and up only. Bundled tickets to 9/11
Memorial and Ellis/Liberty Island ferry also available. Included in CityPass (p. 184). Ferries
depart 9am–3:30pm Sept–May (until 5pm June–Aug). Ferries also depart from Liberty State
Park in New Jersey. For subway and ferry details, see Statue of Liberty, p. 180 (ferry stops at
both sights).
Federal Reserve Bank ICON Although you won’t see currency being
printed—that function was moved from this site to New Jersey in 1992—
you will likely see more lucre than you ever will again in your lifetime
when you descend 80 feet to the basement of this financial fortress, where a
gold vault right out of Mission: Impossible is housed. Down here, behind a
door that’s a good 5 feet thick, the Fed keeps $100,000 billion worth of gold
bars, a full 25% of all the gold reserves in the world, far more than is kept in
Fort Knox. Ninety-five percent of the gold stored here belongs to foreign
nations, who use this facility, embedded in the bedrock of Manhattan and
guarded by a small army of marksmen (they have their own on-site firing
range for practice), because it’s considered the safest place in the world for
this type of storage. I wish I could give you more details, but the security
here is so spandex-tight that my reporter’s notebook was confiscated at the
door. The gold is supplemented by precious coins (one worth $7 million) in
an exhibit in the lobby by the Numismatic Society in partnership with the

Fed. Also featured are brief videotapes detailing the work of the Fed, and an
interactive exhibit explaining what the massive, semi-governmental agency
does (it’s an interesting topic). The entire tour takes a bit less than an hour.

A quarter of all the gold reserves in the world can be viewed on a tour of the basement vault of the Federal
Reserve Bank.

Entrance at 44 Maiden Lane. ny.frb.org. 212/720-5000. Free admission. Everyone 16 and
over must present valid ID. No strollers allowed. Mon–Fri 1 and 2pm; reservations required;
book exactly 30 days in advance. Subway: 2, 3, 4, 5, A, C, J to Fulton St.
Hall des Lumières        GALLERY/SHOW The organization that created
the first Van Gogh light show is behind this permanent attraction, which
opened in a historic bank building in 2022. I have mixed feelings about
these types of entertainment; it seems counterintuitive to go to a high-tech
slide show about a famous artist when works by that artist can usually be
seen in person in NYC. But the first of the Hall’s offerings, a show on
Gustav Klimt, was so rapturously beautiful, with such finely choreographed
“reveals” and such perfect musical accompaniment, that I found myself

swept away. It was a centering, deeply pleasurable show to watch. Here’s
hoping its future offerings (they change every 3 months) are as well crafted.
49 Chambers St. (btw. Broadway and Centre St.). halldeslumieres.com. No phone. $30 (off
peak)–$35 (peak) adults, $15–$17 children, $28–$33 seniors. Sun–Wed 10am–7pm; Thurs–Sat
10am–10pm. Subway: 4, 5, 6, R, W to City Hall/Brooklyn Bridge.
Museum of Jewish Heritage—A Living Memorial to the
Holocaust MUSEUM It used to be an emotionally draining experience
to visit the Museum of Jewish Heritage, which deals in explicit fashion with
the Holocaust. But thanks to a recent overhaul of its core exhibit, the
museum today focuses far more on the personal stories of those whose lives
were upended (or ended altogether) by the Holocaust, including hopeful
stories of those who survived, often against all odds. They do so with
thousands of personal accounts, never-before-seen photos, compelling video
interviews with survivors, and striking artifacts—a breadloaf-size suitcase
that one family of four escaped to freedom with, or, more chilling, an
annotated edition of Mein Kampf that belonged to Heinrich Himmler. A
new-in-2023 exhibit “The Danish Escape” is suitable for children 9 and up,
as it tells the largely positive story of how the Danes saved much of their
Jewish population. The core exhibit is best for those 13 and over.
36 Battery Place (at 1st Place), Battery Park City. mjhnyc.org. 646/437-4200. Admission
$18 adults, $12 seniors and students; free admission Thurs 4–8pm. Sun, Wed, and Fri 10am–
5pm; Thurs 10am–8pm. Subway: 4, 5 to Bowling Green.

At Hall des Lumières, high-tech multimedia shows illuminate the works of iconic artists (shown here, the Gustav
Klimt exhibit).

National Museum of the American Indian, George Gustav Heye
Center MUSEUM A branch of the Smithsonian Institution, this museum
is notable primarily for the touring exhibits it hosts (and to be truthful,
while some have been impressive, others have been duds). Housed in the
magnificent Customs House, designed by architect Cass Gilbert (for more
on the edifice, see p. 305), the museum offers a robust program of
performances, lectures, and courses on Native American topics.
1 Bowling Green (btw. State and Whitehall sts.). americanindian.si.edu. 212/514-3700.
Free admission. Daily 10am–5pm. Closed Christmas. Subway: 4, 5 to Bowling Green; R to
Whitehall; 1 to South Ferry.
One World Observatory              VIEW I’m going to say what no polite
travel writer does: A big part of the allure of seeing the view from atop the
Western Hemisphere’s tallest building (at 1,776 ft.) is the knowledge that

you may be tempting fate by doing so. The skyscraper was built as a nose
thumb to the terrorists who had twice attacked the World Trade Center on
this same acre of ground. That may be why (according to the scuttlebutt) the
building’s office space is still not fully rented. But the observation deck is
popular because, along with the tremendous views, visitors can show their
patriotism by ascending to this eagle’s-eye perch. That point is brought
home when you head into the part of the lobby that shows the tunnel
developers dug into the bedrock—and kept purposefully rough-hewn, filling
it with signs (in lights) about the durability of the rock foundations and the
fact that the building contains 5.4 million cubic feet of concrete “making
this the strongest building ever constructed.” Is this meant to reassure
patrons or hype up the excitement? I’ll leave that to the cynics among you
to decide.

Atop the Western Hemisphere’s tallest building, One World Observatory offers dizzying downtown views.

The Observatory also lures customers with some pretty whiz-bang
features. Its elevators not only shoot passengers up 102 stories in an ear-
popping 47 seconds (they’re among the fastest elevators in the world), but

also have walls that turn into video “windows,” through which riders see a
computer-generated visual history of the city, from meadowlands to the
skyscrapers of today. (Be sure to look right to glimpse the Twin Towers, just
a brief blip in this 500-year timeline.) That being said, I think the designers
made an error in taking guests to the top level for the introductory video,
then having them go down two stories for the actual observatory, with its
360-degree views. We’ve all paid to see the view from the highest point in
the Americas, so why are we asked to descend to see it? Another
miscalculation: asking visitors to pay extra to look through a tablet at the
view. Save your money! The tablet is loaded with not-very-exciting videos,
plus text giving background information for only a handful of the buildings
you’ll see through the glass.
As for the marquee attraction, the view: On a clear day, one can see 50
miles in all directions through the 30-foot-tall windows. As a matter of
personal taste, I prefer the midtown observation decks, where you have
Manhattan all around you, making it more of a buzzing, visceral experience.
(At the city’s other observation decks, guests also can go outside—there’s
something thrilling about feeling the whoosh of the winds that high up.)
You can see our ranking of all the observation decks on p. 197.
Some notes: On-site are a bar/restaurant (One Dine) and a souvenir store.
As at the other observation decks in town, tickets are timed, which should
mean minimal waits (so don’t pay extra for VIP access).
1 World Trade (entrance on Vesey St. at West St.). oneworldobservatory.com. 844/696-
1776. Basic admission $38 adults, $36 seniors, $32 children. Daily 9am–9pm (hours/days
may be limited Jan–Mar). Subway: E to World Trade Center; A, C to Chambers St.; N, R to
Cortland St.; 4, 5 to Fulton St.
Skyscraper Museum MUSEUM Don’t dismiss this small museum: It’s
far more interesting than one would expect. An architecturally innovative
space in and of itself (notice how the shiny metals, ascending ramp, and
mirrored surfaces gives the smallish room its own skyscraper aspect), the
museum explores not only the structural feats behind these soaring
structures, but also the economic forces that shaped them and their
sociological impact.
39 Battery Place (Little West St. and 1st Place). skyscraper.org.   212/968-1961. Free
admission. Thurs–Sat noon–6pm. Subway: 4, 5 to Bowling Green.

South Street Seaport Museum HISTORIC SITE The top reason to
come here are for tours of the historic sailing vessels the museum has
moored off Pier 16 (it owns six, and some take visitors out on sails; consult
the website for a schedule). Other than that, the museum has been reduced
to a “ye olde printing shoppe,” some walking tours, and a small exhibit of
wall text and some artifacts.
207-209 Water St., 12 Fulton St., and Pier 16. southstreetseaportmuseum.org. 212/748-
8600. Free admission. Sat–Sun 11am–5pm. Subway: 2, 3, 4, 5 to Fulton St. (walk east, or
downslope, on Fulton St. to Water St.).

TICKET WEBSITES vs. booking direct
As with most things in life, cutting out the middleman will save you money. So, though it
may feel convenient to book all your museum and attraction tickets through a single app—
and there are several that allow visitors to book local attractions and tours this way—we
suggest you don’t.
Here’s why. Say you decided to visit the Statue of Liberty or Ellis Island. You need to
board a ferry to get to them, and the third-party apps that book that trip add on a booking
fee. How much extra will vary by vendor, but why pay it at all? Statue City Cruises, the
official concessionaire for the National Park Service (its website is listed on p. 182) has no
booking fees whatsoever. It just sells you the damn ticket. You’ll find the same holds true
for other major sites around town, which is why we’ve included the websites for every one
of them in this guide. Even worse, at the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island many websites
will sell you a tour of these sites despite the fact that only rangers are allowed to give tours
inside NY’s NPS sites. So, your tour could cost up to $80 per person, and will keep you
outside the main events (what’s exciting at both are the sights inside!) But what about
those companies that sell “priority access” for a bit extra, allowing their customers to get
on the “reserve line” rather than the regular one? When visitor numbers are down, as they
are, say, in deep winter (the off season), VIP lines are totally unnecessary—there just won’t
be many folks on the regular line. But even in high season, gaming the line in this way can
backfire. Many travelers are reporting in online chat groups that, with so many folks
purchasing this VIP treatment, the “reserve line” moves just as slowly as the regular one.
Just a small warning.

Staten Island Ferry        ICON/TRANSPORTATION Most visitors—and
even some New Yorkers—don’t know that the Staten Island Ferry makes its
own daily excursion within Instagram distance of the Statue of Liberty, Ellis
Island, and Governor’s Island. And riders pay absolutely nothing for the
great views. You simply board the ship (be sure to wait for one of the older
orange-and-green boats—newer ones don’t have decks for viewing). As
with the Circle Line (p. 267), sit on the right side (stay at the back of the

ferry for the best view of the Manhattan skyline). Locals joke that this is the
best “cheap date” in the city, so don’t be shy about toting along a bottle of
wine, some bread, and cheese. But be sure to dress warmly: In winter the
outdoor decks can be frigid. One-way, the trip takes approximately a half-
hour, after which you’ll disembark and take the next ferry back.
Departs from Whitehall Ferry Terminal, 4 South St. (at Whitehall St.). siferry.com. Free
admission. Daily 24 hr.; runs every 15 min. during rush hour weekdays, otherwise every 30
min. on the half-hour and hour. Subway: N, R to Whitehall St.; 4, 5 to Bowling Green; 1 to
South Ferry (ride in first 5 cars of train).
Statue of Liberty            ICON/MONUMENT The great harbor of New
York and the grand lady who guards it are, after Ground Zero and the
Empire State Building, the city’s top must-visit attractions. You’ll follow in
the footsteps of the millions of immigrants and visitors who came here
before you, their way lighted by the torch and the promise inscribed on the
statue’s base: that the “teeming masses yearning to breathe free” would find
succor, freedom from persecution, and economic opportunity in this new
land.
You will have a fine view of Lady Liberty from the shores of Battery
Park, but planning ahead to take the ferry out to the island and visit the
statue’s interior rewards the effort. This is the major New York site that
you really do have to plan ahead for. Please do understand that if you
don’t make advance reservations, you risk waiting up to an hour, or more,
for room on the ferry. And you’ll likely only get to visit the on-site museum,
which is not as thrilling as seeing the view from the statue’s pedestal. Some
8,000 visitors get to enter the statue each day, but on many days, nearly
7,000 others show up and are turned away. So put down this book and make
your reservation now for a date and time slot.
If it’s available, book a visit to the crown of the statue (this can sell out
weeks in advance). It’s a thrilling, exhausting climb up a circular stairway,
146 steps to the crown of the statue. On the way up, you’ll view the intricate
metal work that French engineer Gustave Eiffel (of Eiffel Tower fame)
created to anchor the statue; it acts like a spring, allowing the “skin” of the
structure to adjust to different temperatures and sway up to 3 inches in 50-
mph winds.

Liberty Island’s on-site museum gives insight into the Statue of Liberty’s history and how it was built. To enter
the statue itself, advance reservations are essential.

Those without monument tickets can still take a free ranger-led tour of
the island, use the audio guide (also free), and visit the museum, which has
a small but intriguing exhibit about the statue’s history and the
extraordinary engineering that went into creating it. Note that exhibits are
not chronological: If one area is too crowded, move to the next and circle
back when the crowds thin. You won’t miss anything by doing so. The
museum features a terrific film about Lady Liberty (try to stand in the center
of the room to hear better), and the original torch, which was replaced in
1983 because its glass panels leaked, causing water damage to the statue.
But the museum isn’t reason itself to get off at Liberty Island. If your time
is limited, the better option may be to simply stay on the ferry, which slows
down as it nears the statue, giving those on board a good view of Lady
Liberty in all of her surprisingly delicate beauty. Spend the time you’ll save

to go on to Ellis Island (p. 172), Liberty’s sister monument, with no
entrance quotas. I think Ellis is ultimately the more rewarding of the two . . .
unless you can visit Lady Liberty’s crown (which is really, really fun).

THE STATUE OF LIBERTY—in brief
The French connection: Dreamed up at a dinner party of French intellectuals in 1865, the
statue was first proposed as a 100th-birthday present from France to the U.S. (and as a
not-so-subtle jab at France’s then-authoritarian Second Empire). Fundraising woes kept it
from being completed in time for that anniversary, but in 1881, after over a decade of
begging for money (a lottery finally did the trick), sculptor Frédéric-Auguste Bartholdi was
able to finish the massive work.
The battle for the base: Though the statue was completed in 1881, it took another 2
years for the Americans to keep their half of the bargain and create a pedestal for it.
Newspaperman Joseph Pulitzer finally stepped in, and in a series of angry editorials
condemning the wealthy for not contributing, he convinced thousands of lower-income
Americans to send in what they could to get the job done. Thanks to their dimes and
nickels, the pedestal was finally built (designed by Richard Morris Hunt), and the statue was
dedicated on October 28, 1886.
Crafting the Lady: Repousse, a technique of hammering and shaping thin strips of
copper, was used to create Lady Liberty. Though the statue is massive at over 151 feet
from base to torch, the “skin” of the piece is just 3⁄32 of an inch thick. It is thought that the
ancient Colossus of Rhodes was built using this method.
A key to the symbolism: Every piece of the statue has meaning. The seven rays in the
crown represent the seven seas of the world, and the 25 windows there give a nod to the
25 gemstones found on Earth. On the tablet Liberty is holding are inscribed the Roman
numerals for July 4, 1776. And though it’s difficult to see, Liberty is breaking shackles with
her right foot.

Warning: If you don’t buy tickets in advance, the only place to buy them
near the ferry is inside Castle Clinton (you’ll see signs). A large number of
tourists were scammed in 2022 by official-looking “vendors” selling tickets
near the entrance to the ferry terminal. Don’t buy from them!
Liberty Island, New York Harbor; ferry ticket booth at Castle Clinton in Battery Park.
www.nps.gov/stli or statuecitycruises.com. 212/363-3200 (general info) or 877/523-9849
(ticket/ferry info). Free admission. Ferry ticket $24 adults, seniors $18, children 4–12 $12.
Access to statue 30¢ extra. Bundled tickets to 9/11 Memorial and Ellis/Liberty Island ferry
also available. Included in CityPass (p. 184). Ferries depart 9am–3:30pm (extended hours
Memorial Day–Labor Day). Ferries also depart from Liberty State Park in New Jersey.
Subway: 4, 5 to Bowling Green; 1 to South Ferry.

St. Paul’s Chapel CHURCH/HISTORIC SITE Built in 1766, this is not
only the oldest church in the city, it’s the only public space in continuous
use since the colonial era. The design of the church, with its Ionic columns
and huge pediment, was based on St. Martin-in-the-Fields in London,
though I think the overall effect of this church is not nearly as graceful.
Still, St. Paul’s is redolent with history: George Washington had a pew here
(now marked by a plaque), and he came directly to the church after his
inauguration at nearby Federal Hall (p. 312) to pray and give thanks. On
9/11, the church miraculously survived a rain of fiery metal when the Twin
Towers collapsed, then served as a focal point for the volunteer effort that
ensued, as hundreds of people came from all over the world to search for
survivors and then human remains. Many slept at St. Paul’s and took meals
here (an exhibit in the church details this history). Free guided tours
available every Friday at 3pm.
209 Broadway (btw. Fulton and Vesey sts.). trinitywallstreet.org. Free admission. Daily 10am–
6pm. Subway: A, C, 2, 3, 4, 5 to Fulton St.

Framed by neighboring skyscrapers, the spire of Trinity Church sits at the top of Wall Street, just a block from
historic Federal Hall (p. 312).

A MONEY- & TIME-SAVING tip
CityPass is New York’s best sightseeing deal. Two versions are available, both of which can
be useful, though you’ll need to choose carefully between them, so you get enough
oomph for your buy. Here are the details: THE ORIGINAL: With this one, you pay one
price ($129, or $109 for kids 6–17) for admission to five major attractions: The American
Museum of Natural History (including the Space Show or an IMAX film) The Guggenheim
Museum or Top of the Rock The Empire State Building Experience The 9/11 Memorial &
Museum or the Intrepid Sea, Air, and Space Museum The Statue of Liberty and Ellis
Island, or a 2-hour Circle Line harbor cruise Individual tickets to all these sites combined
would cost 40% more.
CITYPASS 3: This one covers only three attractions, and offers slightly less of a savings,
but you have a wider choice, as all of the sites above are possibilities, plus the Museum of
Modern Art, the Edge, or a city cruise. Cost for this one is $87/adult and $67/child. With
this one you could save about 25% over individual tickets for all of the attractions covered
by the pass.
Significantly, CityPass is not a coupon book: It contains actual tickets, so you can bypass
lengthy lines (though advance reservations will also do that). CityPass is good for 9 days
from the first time you use it. It’s sold at all participating attractions and online at
www.citypass.com/city/ny. You can download and self-print the pass or you may buy the
pass at your first attraction (start at an attraction that’s likely to have a shorter admission
line, such as the Guggenheim). If you begin your sightseeing on a weekend or during
holidays, when lines are longest, online purchase (or online timed reservations) is the
smarter way to go.

Trinity Church       CHURCH/HISTORIC SITE This is actually the third
Trinity Church to stand on this site. The first version was destroyed in the
fire set by fleeing colonists in 1776 to thwart British occupiers (the fire
ended up razing one-third of the structures in Manhattan). The second
church building was poorly constructed, and its roof collapsed in a heavy
snowstorm. But the third, consecrated in 1846, was a keeper and is
considered by many to be one of the best, if not the best, Gothic Revival
buildings in the United States. Designed by Richard Upjohn, the church
building embodied in stone a theological movement that rocked the
Anglican Church in the mid-1800s, harkening back to its Catholic roots
with more elaborate decoration, ceremony, and hierarchy. So instead of
creating a boxy, continuous space, like so many churches of the period (like
nearby St. Paul’s; see above), Upjohn used self-consciously medieval
features to underscore the sacred nature of the space. Normally, in a Gothic
cathedral, the chancel (the area behind the altar, reserved for the clergy and

choir) is marked off by railings, but that idea was quite controversial in
Democratic New York, so Upjohn created a subtle solution, raising this area
a few feet above the ground to give the feeling of an exalted place, without
prominent barriers in place. Other Gothic features include lovely stained-
glass windows, flying buttresses, and a towering 280-foot spire, which was
the tallest structure in the city until the piers of the Brooklyn Bridge were
built. The doors, modeled after Ghiberti’s famous bronze doors for the
Baptistery of Florence, were designed by noted American architect Richard
Morris Hunt (who also designed the base of the Statue of Liberty); the
sculptures on them were done by Austrian immigrant Karl Bitter. You can
see the latter’s self-portrait in the knoblike head sticking out of the lower
right-hand corner of the door; above him is Richard Upjohn and above that
Richard Morris Hunt. Don’t miss touring the graveyard, which holds the
remains of many Revolutionary War–era New Yorkers. Among the notables
are Captain James Lawrence, who uttered the famous command, “Don’t
give up the ship” in the War of 1812; he’s buried in a tomb that looks like a
ship, on the southern side of the church, surrounded by a fence made from
captured British cannons. Behind Lawrence and to the right a bit is the most
famous tomb here, that of Alexander Hamilton; beside Hamilton is the
grave of steamboat designer Robert Fulton. Download the church’s app if
you’d like more info; the church also gives free live tours (see below).
At Broadway and Wall St. trinitywallstreet.org.     212/602-0800. Free admission. Daily
8:30am–6pm; check website to see if tours are available. Subway: 4, 5 to Wall St.
Wall Street and the New York Stock Exchange ICON This is the
most famous (some would say infamous) financial institution in the world,
the New York Stock Exchange. The building’s towering columns, crowded
ornamental pediment, and huge flag trumpet louder than any opening bell
that this is a place of incomparable might and prestige (interestingly, it’s a
much more imposing building than the government’s plainer Federal Hall
across the street). In front of the Stock Exchange is a scraggly buttonwood
tree, meant to invoke the buttonwood that New York’s first traders stood
under in 1792 when they met to begin brokering the Revolutionary War debt
—the first stock market in America. One odd fact about the Stock
Exchange: Though it’s associated in the popular imagination with Wall
Street, its facade actually fronts Broad Street, not Wall. Unfortunately, the

NYSE is no longer open to the public for tours, but you can grab a cup of
coffee and “toast” the brokers in nearby Zuccotti Park, the place where the
OWS (Occupy Wall Street) movement was founded.
For a walking tour of the Wall Street area, see p. 302.
11 Wall St. nyse.com. Subway: J, Z to Broad St.; 2, 3, 4, 5 to Wall St.
The Woolworth Building               ICON This soaring “Cathedral of
Commerce” cost Frank W. Woolworth $14 million worth of nickels and
dimes in 1913. It was the tallest edifice in the city from 1913 until 1930,
when it was surpassed by the Chrysler Building. (At its opening, President
Woodrow Wilson pressed a button from the White House that illuminated
the building’s 80,000 electric light bulbs.) Called the “Mozart of
skyscrapers” by architectural critic Paul Goldberger, the neo-Gothic
architecture is festooned with spires, gargoyles, flying buttresses, vaulted
ceilings, 16th-century-style stone-as-lace traceries, castlelike turrets, and a
churchlike interior.
233 Broadway (btw. Park Place and Barclay sts.). Subway: 2, 3 to Park Place; 4, 5, 6 to
Brooklyn Bridge/City Hall; A, C to Chambers St.

Lower East Side
International Center for Photography MUSEUM Founded in 1974
by Cornell Capa, brother of eminent war photographer Robert Capa, the
ICP has a definite grounding in photojournalism. So when you visit, you’ll
often see probing photography that investigates the current zeitgeist,
whether that be societal challenges, recent conflicts, or “image overload”
(the topic of a superb 2022 show titled “A Trillion Sunsets”). The museum
has moved several times over the years, and is now in a handsome, multi-
floored space right across the street from the fab Essex Street Market (p.
101).
79 Essex St. (btw. Broome and Delancey sts.). icp.org. 212/857-0000. Wed–Mon 11am–
7pm (Thurs until 9pm). www.icp.org. Admission $16 adults; $12 seniors, people with
disabilities, and military; free for ages 16 and under. Subway: F, J, M, Z to Essex St.
Museum at Eldridge Street SYNAGOGUE An 1887 synagogue, the
oldest house of worship in the city for Eastern European Jews, the Museum
at Eldridge Street has the kind of grandeur one normally associates with the
cathedrals of Europe. There’s a poignancy to the place as well, as the
building was abandoned for 40 years before restoration began in the 1990s,
and it’s crumbling picturesquely away in places. You can do a self-guided
tour, but a better idea is to visit on the hour for the “From Bottom to Top”
tour, which covers the history of the synagogue and the issues involved in
its restoration. Don’t skip the superb videos, shown in a room next to the
entrance, about all the work that went into the transformation of the
synagogue.
12 Eldridge St. (btw. Canal and Division sts.). eldridgestreet.org.     212/219-0302.
Admission $15 adults, $10 seniors/students, $8 children 5−17; free to all Mon. Sun−Fri
10am−5pm; closed all national and Jewish holidays. Multiple docent-led tours daily, plus
self-guided tours. Subway: B, D to Grand St.; F to W. Broadway.

The Museum at Eldridge Street is set in a meticulously restored 19th-century synagogue.

New Museum of Contemporary Art MUSEUM Perhaps the greatest
sign of New York City’s ever-increasing prosperity is the fact that now, even
the gritty, grimy Bowery (birthplace of the term bowery bums for the
homeless people who used to swarm its cheap bars and bunk in its
missions) has a museum. And a bright and shiny one at that, a massive
steel-and-glass tower. As with much art of the moment, exhibits range from
the sublime to the silly (I was stopped dead in my tracks at an exhibit by a
cardboard box and a big plastic bag among all the sculptures—was it art or
the container the art came in? I knew the answer intellectually, but my heart
kept crying out: Recycle that bag and box and do something useful with
them!). Wall text is hard to find, so buttonhole one of the gallery guides
wearing big “ask me” buttons; sometimes their explanations will be more
interesting than the art itself.
235 Bowery (at Prince St.). newmuseum.org. 212/219-1222. Admission $18 adults, $15
seniors, $12 students, free for ages 18 and under; free admission Thurs 7–9pm. Tues–Sun

11am–6pm (Thurs until 9pm). Subway: 6 to Spring St.; N, R to Prince St.
The Tenement Museum                  MUSEUM At first glance, this museum
looks just like many brownstone buildings on this Lower East Side block . .
. and that’s exactly the point. The first-ever National Trust for Historic
Preservation site that was not the home of someone rich or famous, the
Tenement Museum’s first building was preserved to tell the story of the
immigrants who once lived within (97 Orchard St.). Those stories are rich
and varied: This five-story tenement housed some 10,000 people from 25
countries between 1863 and 1935. A visit here makes an excellent follow-
up to Ellis Island (p. 172). In 2017, the museum added another building
(103 Orchard) to tell the stories of more recent immigrants to the United
States. Visits to the museum are by hour-long guided tour (the Shop Life
tour is 11⁄2 hr.). Visitors have a choice of six programs, each of which
illuminates the lives of different sorts of tenants: from 19th-century garment
workers who did piecework in their apartment, to a family that survived not
one but two depressions, to the German family that ran a saloon in the
basement. The “Meet Victoria” tour features an actor, in costume, playing a
teenage Italian émigré (this is the one to pick if you’re traveling with
children). The story of an early-20th-century Black family was added to the
tour roster in 2022. Set in the museum’s second building, the newest
program, “100 Years Apart,” covers the experience of immigrant women
who lived in these buildings; while I think it’s a worthwhile addition, it’s
best for repeat visitors. Most first-timers will prefer learning about the
area’s earlier history in the original building, which is also a more evocative
space. Tours aren’t appropriate for children 7 and under, and some are only
for those 12 and up; see the website for details. The museum also offers
walking tours of the neighborhood (pair one with one of the programs
above for a 40% discount) as well as culinary experiences, tours combined
with “talk back” sessions, and rotating exhibits. Tours are limited in number
and sell out quickly, so it’s smart to buy tickets in advance.

AN art invasion ON THE LOWER EAST SIDE
In just the past few years, the Lower East Side has become a mecca for art galleries. Rising
rents in Chelsea (p. 194) pushed a number of them into this neighborhood, but the
transformation of the area from immigrant enclave to haven for the hip also played a role.
Because the neighborhood is not solely art-focused (like the gallery area of Chelsea),
finding galleries can sometimes feel like a scavenger hunt. Not all of them are on street
level—you’ll often have to ascend steep staircases in (mostly) unmarked buildings, or head
onto side streets that, at first glance, appear to be all bars and boutiques.
These galleries tend to represent up-and-comers rather than established art world
names, so it can be difficult to pin down each one’s aesthetic. I’ve picked the following
galleries because they have a track record for shining a light on exciting new talents.
Bridget Donohue Gallery (99 Bowery, 2nd floor; www.bridgetdonahue.nyc) Andrew
Edlin Gallery (212 Bowery; www.edlingallery.com) Heroes Gallery (162 Allen St.;
www.heroesgallery.gallery) Shin Gallery (322 Grand St.; www.shin-gallery.com)
Sperone Westwater (257 Bowery; www.speronewestwater.com) Marc Straus Gallery
(299 Grand St.; www.marcstraus.com) The Hole (312 Bowery; theholenyc.com) Tibor
de Nagy Gallery (11 Rivington St.; www.tibordenagy.com) In addition to this list, go to
the New York Times website for its monthly piece “What to See in NYC’s Galleries Right
Now,” which calls out the more thought-provoking current shows, both on the Lower East
Side and elsewhere in the city.

The Tenement Museum tells the story of New York City’s immigrants through historically restored apartments,
like this one where an Eastern European Jewish family of garment workers lived in 1911.

108 Orchard St. (btw. Delancey and Broome sts.). tenement.org.                   212/431-0233. Tours
$30. Daily 10am–5pm. Subway: F to Delancey St.; J, M to Essex St.

TriBeCa, Chinatown & SoHo
Jackie Robinson Museum MUSEUM As much about the Civil Rights
Movement as it is about baseball, this two-room museum takes a detailed,
clear-eyed look at the life of a great American hero and his times. It does so
with the use of well-produced videos, a smattering of artifacts, and a savvy
timeline plastered to the walls that juxtaposes milestones in Robinson’s life
with important world events. However, for an attraction that will take most
visitors about 45 minutes to see, the admission price feels steep.

Artifacts at the Jackie Robinson Museum.

75 Varick St. (at Canal St.). jackierobinsonmuseum.org. 866/288-5593. $18 adults; $15
seniors, students, and children. Thurs–Sun 11am–6pm. Subway: 1 to Canal St.
Leslie-Lohman Museum              ART MUSEUM The first LGBTQ art
museum in the world was born from the collection of Charles W. Leslie and
Fritz Lohman, pioneers who started collecting and exhibiting this genre in
1969. Along the way, they acquired genuine masterworks by such big
names as David Hockney, Keith Haring, and Jean Cocteau. Much of the art
by less well-known artists is equally accomplished, and it’s all accompanied
by wall text that gives real insight into the lives of the artists and the issues
they were illuminating. Note: Some of the material is highly erotic, which
may make some viewers uncomfortable.
26 Wooster St. (btw. Grand and Broome sts.). leslielohman.org.    212/431-2609.
Suggested donation $10. Wed noon–5pm; Thurs–Sun noon–6pm. Subway: A, C, E, N, Q, R,
1, 6 to Canal St.

Set in an 1832 Greek Revival townhouse, the Merchant’s House Museum is one of New York City’s few restored
historic homes.

Merchant’s House Museum MUSEUM New York City has never been
very good at preserving its past (perhaps we have too little room . . . or
patience), but on East 4th Street this precious sliver of history has survived
utterly intact. In fact, this is the only Victorian-era structure in New York
City preserved both inside and out. A handsome Greek Revival town house,
it was once the home of the Tredwell family, who furnished it in the highest
style of the day, all silk upholstered couches, bronze gas chandeliers, and
deep burgundy curtains. These furnishings, the clothing of the 10-person
family, their cookware, and anything else you might want to see are all on
display, thanks to the efforts in 1936 of a preservationist (before there really
was such a thing) named George Chapman. A lovely garden and frequent
ghost sightings add to the home’s appeal.
29 E. 4th St. (btw. Lafayette and Bowery). merchantshouse.org. 212/777-1089. Admission
$15 adults, $10 seniors/students and children ages 12 and under. Thurs–Sun noon–5pm;

guided tours at noon ($5 extra). Subway: 6 to Astor Place; N, R to 8th St.; F, B to
Broadway/Lafayette.
Mmuseumm MUSEUM Found objects in a found space—that in a
nutshell is what makes this, yes, nutshell-size gallery so beguiling. Set in a
non-working, 60-square-foot freight elevator shaft off an alley, the museum
was created by three indie filmmakers who found themselves drawn to
objects that, in some way, illuminated the world around them. Pieces on the
back and top three shelves are the fascinating permanent collection—a
compass created for Muslims that points toward Mecca for prayer, a snow
globe from North Korea, a prison-issued fingertip toothbrush, and more.
The changing exhibits tend to be either oddball—a collection of weirdly
shaped cornflakes, facsimiles of the currency ISIS has said it wants to
release—or poignant, such as a collection of “last text messages” (sent just
before someone died or cut off communication). Exhibits change yearly.
4 Cortlandt Alley (near White St.). mmuseumm.com. No phone. Donation requested. Fri–
Sun 11am–6pm; spring and summer only (see website for dates because they change).
Museum of Chinese in America MUSEUM The story of the Chinese
immigrant experience in the U.S. is wholly different from that of any other
ethnic group that came here. Arguably, these Chinese Americans, like the
African Americans who came here as slaves, had a much more difficult time
than other immigrant groups, and the tales of what they endured—thanks to
the limited work they were allowed to do and the “Chinese Exclusion Act,”
a federal law barring further Chinese immigration (that separated countless
families)—give this small museum true power. For a preview, go to
www.mocanyc.org/visit to look at Maya Lin’s video tour of the museum
(she’s the museum’s designer as well as the creator of the Vietnam Veteran’s
Memorial in Washington, D.C.). Sadly, the museum’s storage facility was
gutted by a fire in 2020, and consequently it had only limited hours as we
went to press. But thanks to grants and hard work, it may be back to full
operation by the time you read this book.
215 Centre St. mocanyc.org. 212/619-4785. Admission $12 adults, $8 seniors/students,
free for children ages 12 and under. Sat 10am–6pm. Subway: 6, N, R, Q, J, M to Canal St.
Old St. Patrick’s Cathedral       TOUR Funnily enough, though the tour
of this church is called “Catacombs by Candlelight,” the catacombs aren’t
the highlight of this sweep through the Old St. Patrick’s Cathedral. What
makes this experience so absorbing is how the talented, humorous guides

retell the history of the city—and country—through the lens of Catholic
immigration. Visitors are on the move while this happens. Over the course
of the tour, you’ll roam through a historic graveyard, into the church
sanctuary, into side rooms of the structure, and yes, into the dimly lit burial
place below what had been the city’s first cathedral.
263 Mulberry St. (near Prince St.). takeawalk.com. No phone. Tour $37 adults; $30 children
11 and under, seniors, and veterans. Fri–Mon 10:30am–4:15pm. Subway: 3 to Spring St.; N
to Prince St.

Greenwich Village/Meatpacking District
Whitney Museum of American Art                ART MUSEUM The canon of
American art is celebrated, and, in some ways, was created by the Whitney
Museum. It was Whitney curators, after all, and Whitney founder Gertrude
Vanderbilt Whitney, who championed such now-iconic artists as Edward
Hopper, Georgia O’Keeffe, Alexander Calder, and Jasper Johns at the start
of their careers, collecting many of their most important works. In most
cities that would be enough, but the Whitney’s crew has greater ambitions,
ambitions that have been turned into smooth concrete, steel, and glass in
Manhattan’s hippest neighborhood, the Meatpacking District. In May of
2015, the new Renzo Piano–designed home for the Whitney opened right
next to the High Line park (p. 262), and it is, in many ways, reshaping the
idea of what this institution, and art museums in general, can and should be.

Abstract art from the Whitney Museum’s permanent collection.

And what they should be is flexible. “We have no idea what artists will be
doing [this year], let alone later than that,” Dana Miller, former chief curator
of the permanent collection, told me. “So we wanted spaces that could be
reshaped in dozens of ways.” What that means is a building that’s not a
looker (I think) but that allows artists to be as creative as they want: Floors
can be drilled into, all interior walls are moveable, and every inch of the
place is wired, which should make installing electronic art a snap. For
visitors, this means they will have a wildly different museum experience
each time they come: Not only will the art change, but the environment will
cocoon them in different ways. I use the word cocoon quite deliberately,
because this is one of the few museums that takes into account the comfort
of its patrons. Many rooms are flooded with natural light and the floors are
sprung on “sleepers,” so there’s no foot fatigue, even after hours of standing
and looking at art. Two top-notch cafes, run by expert restaurateur Danny
Meyer, provide sustenance. The hours are generous, allowing for evening

museum-going. (And there are few neighborhoods more fun to explore,
before or after a visit, than the Meatpacking District.) Most importantly, the
Whitney’s home is 60% larger than its old Upper East Side digs, allowing
the best-known pieces from its epochal permanent collection—Calder’s
“Circus” (along with a video of the artist moving all the little figures), bleak
beauts by Hopper, blossoms by O’Keeffe, and more—to be always on
display on the fifth and sixth floors (go there first if you have limited time).
The museum now has more room for its famed Biennial, a show that
displays the most important American art of the previous 2 years (there
should be one in 2024!) and often shapes perceptions of what contemporary
art should be.

Rotating immersive art shows at Artechouse (p. 193) can be mesmerizing, though not all live up to the digital
medium’s promise.

Kayaking
on the
Hudson
The world’s largest kayaking program each summer loans dozens of kayaks for free to
folks who want to get up-close-and-personal with the Hudson River. Sessions are 20
minutes long, which is enough time to burn off some energy and to take spectacular
photos of the downtown skyline. Kids 12 and under must share a boat with an adult.
