Chapter 8: Theater, Classical Music & Landmark Venues

THE NYC THEATER SCENE
You can traipse the entire Metropolitan Museum of Art, attend a Yankees
game, and ascend to the top of the Empire State Building, but you can’t
really say you’ve done New York until you spend an evening at the theater.
It’s an essential element in a NYC vacation, like going to the beach in
Hawaii or slurping pasta in Italy. And though some predicted that the
pandemic would kill New York theater off, somehow the corpse rose from
its glittering grave, and in its first two seasons back produced Pulitzer
Prize–winning plays, fine new musicals, and theatrical events of all sorts.
It’s these sorts of performances that just may shift your perspective an iota,
give you a peephole into another culture, or perhaps illuminate, for 2
fleeting hours, the human condition.

Ticket Tactics
Let’s start with a trade secret that no one in the theater industry wants you
to know: Only suckers and out-of-towners pay full price for most Broadway
and off-Broadway shows (see “Theater Basics,” p. 332, for an explanation
of the difference between the types of theater). I’d say that, on average, only
five or six shows per year get away with charging full price for their seats
eight shows per week. For the other 60 or so productions, discounts are the
norm, not the exception. Don’t believe anyone who tells you otherwise.

THEATER basics
There are three types of theaters in NYC: Broadway, off-Broadway, and off-off-Broadway:
Broadway shows tend to be performed in the Times Square area (the one exception
being the shows at Lincoln Center). They cost, without a discount, between $99 for a
balcony seat (as little as $39 at some plays) to $189 for an orchestra seat, all the way up to
$700 for a so-called “premium” seat at hit musicals.
Off-Broadway shows are performed in venues all over town, with a good many clustered
in the Union Square area. Top prices for off-Broadway musicals rarely go above $139, with
plays topping out (usually) at $90. Off-Broadway theaters are smaller than those on
Broadway, pay less to cast and crew, and are thus able to present more controversial, less
commercial plays and musicals. Many of the recent Pulitzer Prize drama winners (including
Hamilton and Fat Ham) began as off-Broadway shows.
Off-off-Broadway shows are staged in very small theaters, often featuring experimental
works or actors’ showcases. Some of the best-known venues are La Mama
(www.lamama.org) and Here Arts Center (here.org). Although you’ll rarely see these shows
advertised or even reviewed in the New York Times, they will be listed on Time Out New
York’s website and at www.theatermania.com.
Schedule: Broadway and most off-Broadway shows perform eight times a week, most
commonly Tuesday through Sunday, though some do play on Monday (instead of Tuesday
or Sunday). Matinee (daytime) performances are usually presented at 2pm on Wednesday
and Saturday, and 3pm on Sunday. Evening performances take place 8pm Wednesday
through Saturday, 7pm on Tuesday night—though increasingly, evening performances are
taking place at 7pm on other nights of the week as well.

BUYING TICKETS ONLINE BOOKING TICKETS BEFORE YOU
ARRIVE IN NEW YORK CITY IS THE MOST TIME-EFFECTIVE
STRATEGY. YOU’RE ABLE TO SCHEDULE YOUR TIME IN
ADVANCE, GET EARLY DINNER RESERVATIONS, AND NOT
WASTE PRECIOUS VACATION HOURS STANDING ON LINE AT

BOX OFFICES. TO DO SO AT A DISCOUNT, TRY
THEATERMANIA.COM, BROADWAYBOX.COM, OR THE APP
TODAYTIX. IN GENERAL, DISCOUNTS WILL RANGE FROM
35% TO 50% OFF, THOUGH A HANDLING FEE WILL BE
TACKED ONTO THE COST OF YOUR TICKET, VARYING BY
VENUE (IT CAN BE AS MUCH AS $10). WITH THE FIRST TWO
COMPANIES YOU BUY YOUR TICKETS THROUGH
TICKETMASTER, BUT WITH A DISCOUNT CODE THAT SAVES
YOU MONEY; THEATER TICKETS ARE EITHER MAILED TO YOU
OR HELD AT THE BOX OFFICE. WITH TODAYTIX (WHICH
OFFERS TICKETS FOR UP TO 30 DAYS IN ADVANCE, DESPITE
THE NAME), YOU BUY DIRECT THROUGH THE APP, BUT PICK
UP YOUR TICKETS AT THE THEATER.
For the big hits, you can use the sites above (though they won’t be able to
give you a discount) or deal directly with Telecharge
(www.telecharge.com;                212/239-6200)        or      Ticketmaster
(www.ticketmaster.com; 212/307-4100), both of which handle Broadway
and off-Broadway shows and most concerts. For difficult-to-get theater (and
sports and musical events) tickets, the website SeatGeek.com is probably
the best bet, though you may pay top dollar. I don’t recommend going
through a broker not listed in this book, as their ticket prices can be
outrageous.
A sneaky strategy for getting tickets to insanely popular shows: Hunker
down in a Times Square–area hotel lobby at about 6pm and access
SeatGeek.com and/or Stubhub.com. If there’s a ticket for the show you want
to see there, monitor it until 40 minutes before show time. Usually, at that
point, the seller will have gotten so desperate that he’ll drop the cost of the
ticket to face value. Buy it, and then ask the hotel if you can use their desk
to print it out; all should let you do so. There’s some risk, but if you’re in
Times Square already, you should be able to snag last-minute tickets to
another show, either at the TKTS booth or over the web, if tickets to your
dream show aren’t obtainable.

GETTING YOUR TICKETS ONCE YOU’RE IN NYC

Tickets are sold directly at theater box offices, and by using them, you
don’t have to pay the service charge (though you rarely get a discount this
way, unless you have a code from one of the websites above). However, by
going to the box office, you may be able to score better seats. Often, on the
day of performance, the “house seats” that are reserved for the use of the
cast and crew (who pass them along to family members, friends, and
investors) are sold to the general public. And these are primo seats, in the
center and near the stage.

The Broadway Theater District lies between Sixth and Eighth avenues, from West 40th Street up to West 54th
Street, but there’s theater to discover all over town.

For the best discounts, and entrée to sold-out shows, joining the theater’s
lottery may be the way to go. Many shows sell the first two rows in the
theater by online lottery (the views are considered too close for full-price
ticketing). For some, like Hamilton, you’ll need to download the show’s app
to join the lottery. There are also regular lotteries at
Lottery.BroadwayDirect.com and the app TodayTix.com (download is

free). Please note that sometimes lotteries are for performances 1 to 4 days
in the future, so timing is crucial.

There are often deep discounts to be found at the TKTS booth, which sells day-of-performance tickets to both
Broadway and off-Broadway shows.

Last but certainly far from least is the discount-ticket TKTS booth for
day-of-performance tickets. Its main branch is located on 46th Street,
between Broadway and Seventh Avenue (Mon–Tues and Thurs–Fri 3–8pm,
Wed and Sat 11am–8pm, Sun 11am–7pm). It also has a branch at the David
Rubinstein Atrium on Broadway at 62nd Street (the official address is 61 W.
62nd St.; Tues–Sat 11am–6pm). TKTS often presents a greater breadth of
shows than do the online discounters, but you pay for that choice with your
time (during busy periods, the wait on line can be up to an hour). Those
who do brave the line are often rewarded with seats that are 50% off. There
are ways to “game” the TKTS line, including: Keep your ticket stubs
if you go to more than one show in a week. The staff at TKTS will let you

jump to the front of the line if you can show a ticket stub purchased within
7 days from TKTS.
Don’t go early. Tickets are released from the theaters to the booths
throughout the day, so you don’t necessarily increase your chances of
getting the show you want by going early in the day, or waiting on line
before the booth opens. Instead, go when it’s most convenient for you.
Go to the theater on a Monday or Tuesday night, the slowest nights of
the week. You’ll encounter almost no line and will have a much bigger
selection than usual (at least on Tuesday; on Monday many shows are
dark).
Pick a play instead of a musical. Pre-pandemic TKTS in Times Square
had one dedicated window for plays only, and its line was always
shorter. We hope this perk will return.
Download TKTS’s free app, so you can see what’s being offered, and at
what price, before you head over. That way you won’t waste your time
if the show you want to see isn’t up for grabs or if it’s too pricey.
Warning: Do not buy from the scalpers who roam up and down the line
at TKTS. A few may be legitimate—say, a couple from the ’burbs whose
companions couldn’t make it for the evening—but they could be swindlers
passing off fakes for big money. It’s not a risk worth taking.
Here are a few additional methods of garnering discounts or getting into
sold-out shows: Rush tickets: A number of Broadway and off-Broadway
theaters offer “rush tickets” for the first row of seats on the day of a show.
The average price is $49 for these neck-benders (it’s preferable to be a
couple of rows back—the sightlines are better, and there’s less danger of
being spit on by performers). Sometimes these seats are only available to
students, while in other cases any member of the public can get them (look
at the show’s website for details). These seats are given out on a first-come,
first-served basis.
Standing room: Some sold-out shows offer “standing room” tickets on the
day of the show only, to about 10 people per show (depending on the size of
the theater). They are sold at 10am when the box office opens; for the really
popular shows a line will form an hour earlier for these “standing spots” at
the back of the house. These non-seats cost between $27 to $45.

Student and youth discounts: Although Broadway theaters won’t care
how old you are, a number of off-Broadway houses do sell specially priced
seats (sometimes for as little as $25) to students and those under 30. While
some do this on the day of show only, others allow these theatergoers to
purchase in advance with the correct identification. Among the theaters that
usually discount in this way are the New York Theater Workshop, Lincoln
Center Theater, and the Roundabout Theater Company. You’ll also
occasionally find $5 tickets to off-Broadway shows and the New York City
Ballet for teenagers (and their chaperones) at High Five
(www.high5tix.org).

CONSIDER SEEING AN OFF-BROADWAY SHOW
Because of the huge financial pressures on Broadway producers, they
usually (but not always) stick with tried-and-true formulas, revivals, or
shows with a clear marketing hook. For anything slightly edgy or
intellectual, you often need to go to the smaller off-Broadway theaters (see
“Theater Basics,” p. 332). These theaters also tend to charge less for tickets.
Although I can’t guarantee you’ll always see a great show, the following
off-Broadway theater companies consistently produce exciting, award-
winning works:        Atlantic Theater Company (336 West 20th St.;
atlantictheater.org. 646/989-7996; subway C, E to 23rd St.). The Atlantic
is a major incubator for new musicals. It also gets some of the biggest
acting talents in the city to appear in its shows. Biggest hits include:
Kimberly Akimbo, Spring Awakening (Tony Award), The Band’s Visit
(Tony).
New York Theatre Workshop (79 E. 4th St., btw. Second Ave. and the
Bowery; www.nytw.org; 212/460-5475; subway 6 to Astor Place).
This is an intellectually heady and sometimes avant-garde company.
Biggest hits include: Once (Tony Award), Rent (Pulitzer Prize),
Hadestown (Tony), Merrily We Roll Along (the revival with Daniel
Radcliffe), What the Constitution Means to Me (Tony).

The Public Theater, in Greenwich Village, has launched many future Broadway hits.

Playwrights Horizons (416 W. 42nd St., btw. Seventh and Eighth aves.;
www.playwrightshorizons.org; 212/564-1235; subway 1, 2, 3, N, R, S
to Times Square; A, C, E to 42nd St.). Dedicated to nurturing the art of
the writer (lyricists and librettists as well as playwrights), Playwrights
has always had a great eye for talent, producing the works of Stephen
Sondheim, Christopher Durang, A. R. Gurney, and Wendy Wasserstein.
Biggest hits include: Driving Miss Daisy (Pulitzer Prize), Sunday in the
Park with George (Pulitzer Prize), A Strange Loop (Pulitzer Prize, Tony
Award).
The Public Theater (425 Lafayette St., off Astor Place;
www.publictheater.org; 212/564-1235; subway 6 to Astor Place). A
strong emphasis on American playwrights, especially Asian-, Latin-,
and African-American writers, has kept this theater relevant and popular
since 1967. In all, Public Theater productions have been awarded 40

Tonys (for shows that moved to Broadway) and 138 off-Broadway or
“Obie” awards. Biggest hits include: Hamilton (Pulitzer Prize, Tony
Award), A Chorus Line (Pulitzer Prize), Fun Home (Tony Award), Sweat
(Pulitzer Prize).
The Vineyard Theatre (108 E. 15th St., off Union Square;
www.vineyardtheatre.org; 212/353-0303; subway 4, 5, 6, N, R to
Union Square). The Vineyard may well be the biggest risk-taker of the
major off-Broadway theaters, presenting out-and-out performance art
alongside less far-out plays and musicals. When they’re good, they’re
great; and when their shows miss the mark, they’re still usually
intellectually intriguing. Biggest hits include: Avenue Q (Tony Award),
Three Tall Women (Pulitzer Prize), How I Learned to Drive (Pulitzer
Prize).

CLASSICAL MUSIC, OPERA & DANCE NEW
YORK HAS GROWN INTO ONE OF THE
WORLD’S MAJOR OPERA, MUSIC, AND
DANCE CENTERS. THE SEASON
GENERALLY RUNS SEPTEMBER THROUGH
MAY, BUT THERE’S USUALLY SOMETHING
GOING ON AT ANY TIME OF YEAR.

Opera
Metropolitan Opera             Everything about attending an opera here is
grand—from the entrance you’ll make, past monumental Chagall murals, to
the world-class singers you’ll hear (such as Joyce DiDonato or Roberto
Alagna) to the pomp and glitz of the productions themselves. Though recent
productions have received mixed reviews (one mentioned clunky scenery
that, when moving, is louder than the singers), you can’t miss if you see La
Bohème or another of the Met’s classic productions. And the lovely little
secret about this house is that the cheap seats get the best sounds. Sit in the
pricey orchestra section and you may have trouble making out the words,
but buy a “family circle” seat and the voices will float up to you in all their
crystalline clarity. The Met makes $25 rush tickets available for all shows,
at noon for evening performances (except for Sat, when you must log on at
2pm) and 4 hours before matinees. The seats can only be obtained online,
and an individual can only win two seats every 7 days. See the Met website
for more. Warning: Don’t show up late unless you want to watch the first
act on a video screen in the basement; the Met does not seat latecomers.
Note: The Met’s season runs from late September to mid-May. Metropolitan
Opera House, Lincoln Center, Broadway and 64th St. metopera.org.   212/362-6000.
Subway: 1 to 66th St.

CHOOSING THE right show TO SEE
I’ll admit it: I’m a walker. If I accidentally pick an awful show, I leave at intermission and
grab dinner, rather than sitting through something dull. It doesn’t happen that often,
because over the years I’ve formulated the following rules to help me choose which shows
to see.
Skip the long-running Broadway musicals: There should be an expiration date on
Broadway musicals, just as there is on milk. After about 2 years, they turn sour. Here’s why:
The first cast usually leaves around the 1-year mark, and then a second cast is announced,
to much fanfare. When it comes to the third go-round, big-name actors aren’t willing to
take over the roles, so lesser-known pros get cast in the parts. These second-tier actors
aren’t any less talented, but because they have no clout they never get to rehearse with
the director and put their own mark on the role. Instead, they are “put in” by a stage
manager and are expected to re-create what the previous actor did; that can lead to
wooden performances. The chorus, which usually stays with the show for a few years,
simply becomes bored and starts sleepwalking through their performances. That’s why
you’ll often see a better show if you go to a newer one. To find out how long a show has
been on, call the theater, ask the folks at the TKTS booth, look at Telecharge.com (which
lists when shows opened), or check The New Yorker magazine, which lists “long-running”
shows separately in its theater section.
Beware the “un-nominated” Broadway shows: It doesn’t matter which shows win a Tony
Award—that’s pretty much a crapshoot. But the nominating committee, which is made up
of savvy theater professionals—actors, writers, producers, and the like—usually does a
good job of rewarding the most interesting shows with nominations in late May. If a new
play, musical, or revival can’t manage to get a nod, take it as a sign that your theater
dollars may be better spent elsewhere. Nominated shows trumpet that fact in their ads
(but don’t punish off-Broadway shows—only Broadway shows are eligible for Tonys). A
good source for this information is Telecharge.com, which lists nominations and awards for
each show.
Do some research before you buy: The web is a treasure trove of information, including
past reviews of shows. Instead of going blindly to the TKTS line (p. 334), surf nytimes.com
or nymag.com before you get to New York and pick a show that’s garnered a fair number
of good reviews. While the reviewers aren’t always right (and lately, I think the New York
Times critics have been really off in their recommendations), at least by reading up you’ll
have a better idea of what the shows are about.
Avoid “jukebox” musicals: Mamma Mia set off a frenzy of shows that simply take the
catalogue of some famous pop composer and then string songs together with a silly,
inorganic story. In most cases you’ll hear better renditions of these songs at your local
theme park—don’t go!

KIDS TAKE THE STAGE: family-friendly THEATER
Broadway theaters do not allow children under the age of 5 to attend, nor do they give
discounts to kids (with the exception of the Kids’ Night on Broadway discount program—
go to www.kidsnightonbroadway.com; discounts usually offered Feb only). But beyond
Broadway is affordable, often mesmerizing theater aimed squarely at the pre-puberty
crowd. The following organizations in particular present consistently challenging and
entertaining family shows.
The New Victory Theater          , 209 W. 42nd St., between Seventh and Eighth aves.
(newvictory.org; 646/223-3010), books shows from around the U.S. and abroad that are
inventive and smart enough for the entire family to enjoy. One musical that made its debut
here even moved to Broadway (now how about that for a kiddie show?). Past offerings
have included quality puppet shows, acrobatic and circus troupes, “new vaudeville” acts,
and theater pieces.
The Swedish Cottage Marionette Theatre             (cityparksfoundation.org/arts/swedish-
cottage-marionette-theatre; 212/988-9093) puts on surprisingly artistic marionette
shows for kids at its 19th-century Central Park theater throughout the year. Reservations
are a must.
Every summer, the marvelous touring theater company Theaterworks USA
(theaterworksusa.com) presents free musicals for kids at the Lucille Lortel Theatre (121
Christopher St., near Hudson St.). Written and performed by up-and-coming Broadway
talents, they are among the most delightful shows in town for people of all ages.
Look for Young People’s Con-certs , in which kids get to interact with orchestra
members prior to curtain time, at the New York Philharmonic (nyphil.org/education; p.
340). Also check to see what’s on for the entire family at Carnegie Hall (carnegiehall.org;
p. 340), which offers family concerts at prices as low as $10, plus the Carnegie Kids
program, which introduces kids ages 3–6 to basic musical concepts through a 45-minute
music-and-storytelling performance. And don’t forget Jazz for Young People , Wynton
Marsalis’s stellar family concert series at Jazz at Lincoln Center (academy.jazz.org/jfyp; see
box p. 349).

The New Victory Theater, in the heart of the Theater District, has a full schedule of fun, high-quality
productions designed specifically for young audiences.

Classical Music
Bargemusic         This small theater (125 seats), set on an actual barge
moored near the Brooklyn Bridge, has big views of the Manhattan skyline
and acoustics to die for. Pianissimos are more piano here and fortissimos
molto-loud, even when played by a solo piano or string quartet. This is one
of the few truly intimate stages in the city, and the prices are intimate, too,
starting at just $35 a pop ($30 seniors, $20 kids and students, cash only). At
Fulton Ferry Landing (just south of the Brooklyn Bridge), Brooklyn. bargemusic.org.
718/624-2083 or 718/624-4061. Subway: 2, 3 to Clark St.; A to High St.; F to York St.

Carnegie Hall More than 100 years ago, Tchaikovsky himself presided
over the opening performance of Carnegie Hall, just one of a legion of great
musicians who have graced this famous stage. Today, you may see such
stars as Anne-Sophie Mutter, Itzhak Perlman, Daryl Hall and Todd
Rundgren, Jon Batiste, the Berliner Philharmoniker, or more—all drawn by
the unsurpassed acoustics and the honor of playing this magnificent hall
(you can tour it Oct–June in the daytime; info on the web). Unfortunately,
the hall is often rented out by school groups, so it’s no longer a guarantee
that there will be a great concert going on when you’re in town. Ticket
prices ricochet up and down, depending on the day of the week, the act,
and, of course, the area in which you choose to sit. 154 W. 57th St. at Seventh
Ave. www.carnegiehall.org.   212/247-7800. Subway: N, Q, R to 57th St.

The Lincoln Center arts complex hosts world-class opera, classical music, ballet, film, theater, and more.

New York Philharmonic            In 2023, the music world was turned on its
ear by the announcement that the NY Phil had stolen wunderkind conductor
Gustavo Dudamel from the Los Angeles Philharmonic. It was the classical
music equivalent of when Tom Brady abandoned Boston for Tampa.
(Dudamel’s tenure begins with the 2025/2026 season.) The Philharmonic
has become known in recent years for programming an eclectic mix of
classic symphonies and film scores, and featuring lots of star power: Yo-Yo
Ma and Joshua Bell were on the bill in recent performances. Most concerts
are performed in the acoustically excellent David Geffen Hall at Lincoln
Center. Philharmonic tickets range from about $99 to $250, with $25 rush
tickets available to students (with ID at pickup, purchased online up to 10
days in advance). A number of concerts feature pre-show talks and meet-
the-artist events, which tend to be intimate and informative. There are also
kids’ concerts and free concerts in NYC parks over the summer. David Geffen

Hall, 10 Lincoln Center Plaza, Broadway at 65th St. nyphil.org.   212/875-5656. Subway: 1
to 66th St.

LINCOLN CENTER: A one-stop shop FOR
CULTURE
Lincoln Center—a giant complex of theaters on the west side of Manhattan, flanking
Columbus Avenue between 62nd and 65th streets—hosts everything from major
symphonic premieres to the Big Apple Circus. It’s most famous for its presentation of
classic works of music, dance, opera, film, and theater, and toward that end houses a
number of permanent companies, as well as playing host to the world’s leading performing
arts organizations.
Resident companies include the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center
(chambermusicsociety.org; 212/875-5788), the Film Society of Lincoln Center
(filmlinc.com; 212/875-5601), and Lincoln Center Theater (lct.org; 212/362-7600),
the latter of which houses both a well-respected Broadway theater and an off-Broadway
theater. For details on the center’s other residents—the Metropolitan Opera, the New
York City Ballet, the Juilliard School, the phenomenal New York Philharmonic, and the
American Ballet Theatre—see “Classical Music, Opera & Dance” in this chapter. Most of
the companies’ seasons run from September or October to April, May, or June. Summer
brings outdoor/indoor concerts and events on the plaza.
Tickets for performances at Avery Fisher and Alice Tully halls can be purchased through
CenterCharge ( 212/721-6500) or online at www.lincolncenter.org. Tickets for all
Lincoln Center Theater performances can be purchased through Telecharge
(telecharge.com; 212/239-6200).
Terrific daily guided tours of the Lincoln Center complex will take you into the bowels of
the theaters and sometimes even into rehearsals. Tours start at 11:30am and 1:30pm at the
David Rubinstein Atrium on Broadway (btw. 62nd and 63rd sts.), and cost $25 ($20 seniors
and students). Info can be found at lincolncenter.org/visit/tours. The Metropolitan Opera
also has tours during its season; see its website for more info (p. 338).

Dance
American Ballet Theatre ABT features more of an emphasis on story
ballets than the New York City Ballet does—Coppélia, Swan Lake, Sleeping
Beauty—and tends to produce more bravura stars than NYCB (where the
emphasis is on ensemble work). Misty Copeland, the United States’ first
Black prima ballerina, is ABT’s biggest draw. ABT’s season usually runs
from mid-May to mid-July, for 2 weeks in the fall, and over the Christmas
holidays. See website for dates. Metropolitan Opera House (in Lincoln Center).
abt.org.   212/477-3030. Subway: 1 to 66th St.

City Center Alvin Ailey, the American Ballet Theatre, and Paul Taylor
perform here, along with other major dance companies. You’ll understand
why, once you’ve attended a show in this splendid Moorish-revival space
(formerly a temple). In the basement are the stages of the excellent off-
Broadway Manhattan Theatre Club (manhattantheatreclub.com). 131 W.
55th St. (btw. Sixth and Seventh aves.). nycitycenter.org.   212/247-0430 or 212/581-1212.
Subway: F, N, Q, R to 57th St.; B, D, E to Seventh Ave.

A scene from Swan Lake, performed by dancers from American Ballet Theatre (p. 341).

Joyce Theater        The blockbuster modern dance shows tend to play the
Joyce, and it’s not hard to see why: It’s simply the best space in the city to
see dance—there’s not a bad seat in the house. In this renovated, Art Deco–
era movie theater, the audience sits slightly above the dancers, meaning that
you won’t be seeing just the feet or just the bodies—you’ll get the whole
picture. In past years, this is where Pilobolus has played, as well as the
Limon Dance Company, Trisha Brown, and Savion Glover. 175 Eighth Ave. (at
19th St.). joyce.org.   212/242-0800 for tickets, or 212/691-9740 for theater. Subway: A, C, E
to 14th St.; 1 to 18th St.

New York City Ballet           NYCB was founded by Lincoln Kirstein and
the 20th-century’s greatest ballet choreographer, George Balanchine. And it
is for Balanchine’s work that you still attend performances at the New York
City Ballet; his choreography is the staple here and remains as diamond-

sharp, elegant, and moving as when it was first performed as many as 50
years ago. Balanchine’s version of The Nutcracker is a holiday classic and
one of the most difficult tickets to get each Christmas season. NYCB’s
regular season runs from late September to mid-October, mid-January to
early March, and mid-April to the beginning of June. David H. Koch Theater, 20
Lincoln Center Plaza, Broadway at 64th St. nycballet.com.   212/870-5570. Subway: 1 to
66th St.

LANDMARK MULTIUSE VENUES
Apollo Theater It’s a thrill just to walk into the legendary but intimate
Apollo Theater, past the collage of all the greats who’ve played here (built
in 1914, it looks much bigger on TV). Perhaps most famous for launching
the careers of Ella Fitzgerald, Aretha Franklin, and Duke Ellington, today
it’s mostly used for comedy shows and Amateur Night (each Wed), a
gladiatorial music battle where the winners may emerge stars and the losers
are skewered with the unkindest of boos and shouted insults. 253 W. 125th St.
(btw. Adam Clayton Powell Jr. and Frederick Douglass blvds.). www.apollotheater.org.
212/531-5300 or 5301. Subway: B, D to 125th St.

Beacon Theatre            They really knew how to build theaters back in the
1920s: Every seat at this Art Deco landmark has a good view, and the
acoustics are remarkable. Which may be why this is such a favorite of the
touring bands who make this their New York home. While you won’t get the
mega-names, you will see talented stars either on the way up or down,
names such as Tedeschi Trucks Band, Jackson Browne, Ringo Starr, and
comedians Jerry Seinfeld and Eddie Izzard. Prices vary widely by show and
seat. 2124 Broadway (at 74th St.). beacontheatre.com. 212/465-6500. Subway: 1, 2, 3 to
72nd St.

Audience members gather outside the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Opera House.

Brooklyn Academy of Music               Outside of Manhattan, BAM is the
finest of the multiuse facilities. Along with the Park Avenue Armory (p.
345), it may well be the best place in the United States for challenging,
inventive, and acclaimed international productions of music, dance,
performance art, and theater. It’s at BAM where you’ll see highbrow theater
straight from the West End (like James McAvoy in Cyrano de Bergerac),
Hannah Gadsby’s new comedy show, or a Phillip Glass symphony. Along
with the large BAM Opera House and the smaller BAM Harvey Theater,
the organization has a dedicated movie theater (the BAM Rose Cinema) for
art films, and a cafe space where up-and-coming talent perform. I’ve never
been disappointed by anything I’ve seen here, though occasionally I’ve had
difficulty getting a seat. Note: Discounts are sometimes offered to students
and seniors, so inquire when purchasing a ticket. 30 Lafayette Ave. (off Flatbush

Ave.), Brooklyn. bam.org.      718/636-4100. Subway: 2, 3, 4, 5, M, N, Q, R to Pacific
St./Atlantic Ave.

park it! SHAKESPEARE, MUSIC & OTHER FRESH-
AIR FUN
As the weather warms, NYC culture goes outside to play. Here are some top picks:
Shakespeare in the Park, an offering of the Public Theater (p. 336), casts big stars (Meryl
Streep, John Lithgow, Danai Gurira) in elaborate productions at the outdoor Delacorte
Theater in Central Park (near 79th St. in the center of the park). Tickets are free, but hard to
come by. Either sign up for the daily online lottery (at publictheater.org) or get on line in
the park. Tickets are distributed at the theater free on a first-come, first-served basis (two
per person) at 1pm on the day of the performance. Would-be theatergoers usually line up
starting around 9 or 10am; for big hits, people have been known to camp overnight in the
park!
New York Philharmonic: Free concerts are held beneath the stars on Central Park’s
Great Lawn and in parks throughout the five boroughs. For schedules, go to nyphil.org.
SummerStage, at several stages around the city, presents music, comedy, and dance. In
recent years, they featured Kurt Vile & The Violators, Regina Spektor, and They Might Be
Giants. The season usually runs mid-June through August. For info, visit
cityparksfoundation.org/summerstage.

Joe’s Pub         It’s hard to classify just what Joe’s Pub is, beyond a very
handsome space in a landmark building that hosts performances and serves
strong cocktails and pub food. Its show roster is all over the map—it has
hosted spoken-word artists, rising singer/songwriters, jazz bands, pop stars,
you name it. All I can tell you is that the quality of the talent, whatever it
may be, is always high, and the room is wonderfully festive. Too vague?
Here’s a list of past performers to give you a taste of what you might be in
for: Alicia Keys, Kiki & Herb, fashion designer Isaac Mizrahi, monologist
Mike Daisy, Patti LuPone, and Wynton Marsalis. Confusing, right? But in a
good way. 425 Lafayette St. (btw. Astor Place and 4th St.). joespub.org. 212/539-8778
or 212/967-7555 for advance tickets. Subway: 6 to Astor Place.

Park Avenue Armory              This colossal former military space, with a
55,000-square-foot drill hall at its core, has made a name for itself in recent
years for the prestige, scope (often huuuge), and quirkiness of the shows it
has produced and/or brought in from all corners of the globe. They’ve

included director Robert Icke’s Olivier Award–winning production The
Doctor (with Juliet Stevenson), several large pieces by the doyenne of
French theater Ariane Mnouchkine, new dance works by Anne Teresa de
Keersmaeker, and dozens of musical recitals. Tickets are not easy to come
by, since so many of the performances are bona fide cultural events. 643 Park
Ave. (at 66th St.). armoryonpark.org.       212/616-3930. Subway: 6 to 68th St.

Hudson Yards’ stunning performing arts center, The Shed, has programs ranging from plays to concerts to
visual art installations, all of them designed just for this space.
