Chapter 5: Exploring — Midtown (Chelsea, Flatiron, Hudson Yards, Midtown West & East)

Chelsea
Artechouse         GALLERY/SHOW Immersive digital art pieces by
contemporary artists are mounted here, with a new show every 3 months or
so, held in the 6,000-square-foot former boiler room of Chelsea Market (p.
124). Shows range from mesmerizing, thought-provoking works to ones
that are inscrutable and dizzying (the movement of the images makes some
viewers queasy). Since you never know what the quality of the current show
will be, I’d suggest going after 4pm or on the weekends—the bar is open
then, and that usually improves the experience.
439 W. 15th St. (btw. Ninth and Tenth aves.). artechouse.com. No phone. Admission $25
adults, $20 seniors/students/active military, $17 ages 4–15. Daily 10am-10pm, entry every 30
min. Subway: A, E, C, L to 14th St.
The Museum at FIT MUSEUM You don’t have to be a fashionista to
appreciate NYC’s premier design school’s museum. Yes, you’ll see a lot of
clothing, but exhibits here tend to explore cultural history through the lens
of fashion, looking at such topics as how denim went from factory wear to
club gear; the history of uniforms; or how Black designers reshaped
stereotypes. A visit should take less than an hour.
Seventh Ave. at 27th St. fitnyc.edu/museum. 212/247-4558. Free admission. Wed–Fri
noon–8pm; Sat–Sun 10am–5pm. Subway: 1, N, R to 28th St.; A, C, E, F, M to 23rd St.
Rubin Museum of Art           MUSEUM Travelers who need a break from
the bustle and stresses of New York can escape to the Rubin, a serene,
contemplative museum of art from the Himalayas. Secular in origin—the
museum was founded by an American millionaire and his wife who fell in
love with the art of this region—its effect is nonetheless tremendously
spiritual. The paintings, drawings, sculptures, and artifacts shown are all
religious items, many used by traveling monks to teach Buddhism or to help
worshippers deepen their meditation (that’s why so many of the works are
done on fabric—they’re meant to be rolled up and carried). Many tell the
stories of the various Buddhas, portraying meditating men with halos,
snarling demons, teachers, and commoners in the deepest blues, ruby reds,
emerald greens, and dazzling golds. For sheer beauty, the 1,500 works
housed in this museum are hard to top. Set on the site of the former
Barney’s department store (the Rubins chose it because the central circular
stairway looked like a “mandala,” the Tantric Buddhist diagram of the

cosmos), the museum also hosts an array of lectures, performances, film
screenings, and more. Its children’s and teen programs are particularly well
done.

CHELSEA CALLING: MEET NYC’S art district
More than 250 galleries are on the blocks spanning 19th to 29th streets between Tenth
and Eleventh avenues in West Chelsea, effectively making the Big Apple the planet’s
premier marketplace for contemporary art. Gallery after gallery has taken over the former
warehouses and industrial spaces of this dusty old ’hood, creating an eminently walkable
arts district. You can have a perfectly lovely time simply getting lost in the area and
wandering blindly from one space to the next, although you might hit a lot of clunky
exhibitions (as with any collection of new art, some are better than others)—but so what? If
you want to take this course of action, start on 24th Street, which has the largest
assortment of “name” galleries. A better tactic might be to catch a tour of the area (see
below) or to concentrate on the eight galleries listed here, which offer consistently
thought-provoking shows. Note: Chelsea galleries are generally Tuesday to Saturday 10am
to 6pm (June–Aug, galleries are closed on Sat). Your best subway option is either the C or
E line to 23rd Street. Another note: Because of rising rents in Chelsea, a number of
excellent galleries have moved in the last few years to the Lower East Side—see p. 187.

303 Gallery 555 W. 21st St. (303gallery.com; 212/255-1121). The Whitney biennial has
this gallery on speed dial, having picked up works by several of the young to mid-career
cutting-edge photographers and painters who present here.
Barbara Gladstone Gallery 515 W. 24th St. and 530 W. 21st St. (gladstonegallery.com;
212/206-9300 or 212/206-7605). Come here to see artists who have emerged as honchos
in the last 2 decades or so, such as Matthew Barney and Richard Prince. Gladstone
features conceptual, often highly political art—most prominently photography and videos,
but also sculpture and paintings. The gallery now has other showrooms at 130 E. 64th St.
and in Brussels and Seoul.
David Zwirner 519 & 525 W. 19th St. and 537 W. 20th St. (davidzwirner.com; 212/727-
7020). This is not the place for people with delicate sensibilities, but if you don’t mind
seeing art that’s really on the edge, you’ll often find something that will get your
adrenaline pumping. A New York Times profile praised Zwirner’s “idiosyncratic roster, with
great oddballs like R. Crumb and Raymond Pettibon alongside institutional darlings like
Stan Douglas and Francis Alÿs.” Also at 34 E. 69th St.
Gagosian 541 & 555 W. 24th St. and 522 W. 21st St. (www.gagosian.com; 212/741-
1111). A massive, important family of galleries (with another three uptown, one in
California, one in Hong Kong, several in Europe), it presents blockbuster shows of such
major 20th- and 21st-century figures as Julian Schnabel, Nan Goldin, and Cindy Sherman.
Lisson Gallery 504 W. 24th St. and 138 Tenth Ave. (www.lissongallery.com; 212/404-
0370). Founded in London, Lisson shows cutting-edge international art, featuring the
works of Ai Weiwei, Anish Kapoor, Marina Abramović, Shirazeh Houshiary, and others.
Pace Gallery 510 & 540 W. 25th St. (www.pacegallery.com; 212/929-7000). Another
“Blue Chip” gallery, with two outposts in Chelsea, as well as two in Europe, two in
California, one in Florida, and two in Asia, Pace has been a powerhouse since the 1960s.

Shows in 2022 featured the works of such biggies as Louise Nevelson, Kiki Smith, and
Julian Schnabel.
Paula Cooper 524 W. 26th St. and 521 & 529 W. 21st St. (www.paulacoopergallery.com;
212/255-1105). Cooper used to be one of the biggest names in art, the dealer that
everyone wanted. Though she’s slipped in the last decade and lost some of her big-name
clients, she still has the exquisite taste she’s always had, and exhibits a number of
prominent artists, including Mark di Suvero, Claes Oldenburg, Sol LeWitt, Walid Raad, and
Donald Judd.
Yossi Milo 245 Tenth Ave. (www.yossimilogallery.com; 212/404-0370). One of my
personal favorites, Milo works almost exclusively with photographers and has a terrific eye
for the next big thing. He also runs a very friendly gallery—he and his staff are always
happy to talk with interested patrons. Because he represents photographers, some of them
selling multiple editions of their work, you just may be able to afford to buy something
here.
A gallery tour: New York’s foremost expert in the Chelsea Gallery scene—he visits 50 to
70 shows a week just to keep current—is Raphael Risemburg of NY Gallery Tours
(nygallerytours.com; 212/946-1548). Risemburg, a former professor at Keane College in
New Jersey, has a droll, friendly manner and leads his tours in Socratic fashion: He’ll tell
you what he thinks of the art and then asks your opinion on the unanswered questions it
poses. His open tours, which cover four to five galleries, are offered almost every Saturday
($31); he also leads private tours for $195–$300 (varying by the number in the group).

150 W. 17th St. rubinmuseum.org.           212/620-5000. Admission $19 adults, $14
seniors/students, free for ages 12 and under; free to all Fri 6–10pm. Thurs–Sun 11am–5pm
(Fri until 10pm); closed Christmas and Thanksgiving. Subway: A, C, E to 14th St.; 1 to 18th
St.; 2, 3 to 14th St.

Flatiron District
Flatiron Building ARCHITECTURE You’ll probably know the Flatiron
Building even before you see it, thanks to the famous photos by Alfred
Stieglitz, who snapped it numerous times, calling the Fuller Building (its
original name) “a picture of new America still in the making.” Many
consider it the first skyscraper in New York; it certainly was one of the first
to use a steel frame, the classic skyscraper structure. Its unusual triangular
shape was architect Daniel Burnham’s solution to a space problem: The
building rests on the bow-tie intersection where Broadway and Fifth Avenue
cross each other. In order to produce a decent amount of rentable space, he
built it to a towering 375 feet on every sliver of land available to him. The
apex is just 6 feet across at its narrowest point. When it was first erected in
1902, crowds used to gather in Madison Square Park across the street to
wait for it to fall down! Later men were drawn here by the urban myth that
the building’s shape caused strange wind patterns that were effective in
lifting up women’s skirts. The cops who dispersed these groups of gaping
men on 23rd Street would call out “23 skidoo!” and so a slang term was
born. (It means, roughly, “So long, sucker.”) One of the most beloved
buildings in the city, it has been compared to a mighty ship sailing up Fifth
Avenue.
175 Fifth Ave. (at 23rd St.). Subway: N, R to 23rd St.

In an 1894 landmark building, Fotografiska mounts edgy photography shows.

Overlooking Madison Square, the iconic Flatiron Building lends its name to this neighborhood around 23rd
Street and Broadway.

getting high: WHICH OBSERVATION DECK TO
CHOOSE
With so many observation decks debuting in the last decade or so, choosing the right one
has become complicated yet essential—they’re pricey, and it’s an experience you want just
once per trip. Here’s a quick look at the contenders, in order of preference.
1. Empire State Building: Our top choice, pun intended. Not only does it have the
highest observation point in the city, but it does a bang-up job of teaching visitors why
this building holds a revered place in the city’s history. See p. 209.
2. Summit One Vanderbilt: For shutterbugs, this one reigns supreme, thanks to its wacky
all-mirrored interior (making it easy to take truly artful photographs), its clear-floored
jutting balconies, and its floating orb room. See p. 216.
3. Edge and Climb: The pick for adrenaline junkies, this Hudson Yards deck not only has a
pane of clear glass in its center, allowing visitors to look down into a dizzying vortex, but
true adventurers can opt to scale the building’s exterior, experiencing the world’s highest
skyscraper climb. See p. 199.
4. Top of the Rock: A classic, with the best views of Central Park, though it doesn’t have
the bells and whistles of the first three. See p. 206.
5. One World Observatory: Our last-place pick, thanks to what it doesn’t have, which is
an outdoor area (it’s thrilling to feel the wind whipping your hair around that high) and its
location at the tip of Manhattan, rather than in the heart of the action, like the other four.
See p. 178.
Note: It was announced as we were going to press that the Chrysler Building (p. 208)
would be adding a deck. We don’t include it here because we couldn’t review it in time,
but it may be an option by the time you visit. That being said, we think seeing the Chrysler
Building from an observation deck is a top experience—and you won’t be able to do so if
you’re standing on it.

Hudson Yard’s the Edge juts out over the streets below.

Fotografiska         GALLERY Part of an international chain of museum-
cum-nightlife venues, Fotografiska showcases provocative contemporary
photography, mixing single-artist exhibits with others that focus on a theme
(female nudes by female-identifying photographers was a very popular
show in 2022). The venue keeps the longest hours in the city, meaning you
can come here both early in the morning and well into the evening, if you
need an art fix at a time when all the city’s other museums are closed. In the
attached 19th-century church next door is Chapel, the museum’s gorgeous
bar.
281 Park Ave. S (btw. 21st and 22nd sts.). www.fotografiska.com. No phone. Admission $30
adults, $20 students/seniors. Sun–Tues 9am–9pm; Wed–Sat 9am–11pm. Subway: 6 to 23rd
St.

At the heart of the controversial Hudson Yards development, attractions include Vessel (left) and The Shed
(right).

MIDTOWN HUDSON YARDS
At 28 acres, Hudson Yards is the largest private real estate development in
American history. Amazingly, it was built in the most crowded city in the
United States without displacing a single resident. That’s because the area it
occupies, from 30th Street to 35th Street, and Tenth Avenue to the river,
covers the rail yards that extend from Penn Station (p. 381). An

extraordinary feat of engineering created a platform above some 30 active
railway tracks, with the massive skyscrapers of Hudson Yards resting
partially on that platform, partially on caissons drilled down into
Manhattan’s bedrock. The platform is wired with communication cables;
rainwater collected on building rooftops is filtered for on-site irrigation and
drinking needs; cooling units in the platform make sure the heat of the train
yards doesn’t affect the 28,000 trees, grasses, wildflowers, and other plants
in the development’s park areas.
But for all these state-of-the-art innovations, this is one of the most
unpopular projects in recent New York memory. Many locals compare it
unfavorably with Rockefeller Center (p. 205), the city’s last large-scale
development, a place of unparalleled architectural harmony and symmetry.
Unlike that project, which had a team of architects and designers working in
tandem, Hudson Yards is simply a cluster of unrelated skyscrapers, created
by half a dozen different architectural firms. The often-sneaky use of public
funds to underwrite this private luxury development has also been galling to
many New Yorkers.
That being said, there are many sites worth viewing here, and I think
visitors, especially, will find much to excite them. First, there’s the Edge
(daily 10am–10pm; admission $38 adults, $36 seniors, $33 children 6-12),
an observation deck jutting out 65 feet from its skyscraper, making it a “sky
deck”—the tallest one in the Western Hemisphere, and the fifth highest on
the planet at 1,100 feet. Designers inset a large triangle of glass in the floor
for photo ops that would look like you are floating thousands of feet above
the ground—except for the faint scuff marks and shine on the glass (it’s still
pretty cool). The walls around the deck are also glass and angled to afford
glare-free views of the river (sunset views at dusk) and city. If all that isn’t
enough of an adrenaline rush for you, City Climb ($185/person; children
17 and under must be accompanied by adult) will take you another hundred
feet up—by scaling the outside of the building! Visitors suit up in special
gear that’s clipped to a trolley to keep them safe as they climb a 45-degree
staircase to the crown of 30 Hudson Yards. The experience is only available
to those above 4'9" and below 6'7" and 310 pounds. Pregnant women,
people with disabilities, and children 12 and under cannot be
accommodated.

When the renderings of Hudson Yards were first made public, no element
elicited quite so much derision as the massive interactive statue Vessel .
Designed by Thomas Heatherwick, the open tower of copper-colored
stainless steel is shaped like either a basket, a pineapple, or shawarma
(depending on your Freudian disposition), with 154 sets of stairs
interlinking in a complex fashion to 80 platforms. I was ready to dislike it,
too, but it takes on a certain kooky majesty in person. Tragically, this has
been the site of several suicides, so nobody was allowed up it at the time we
went to press. I’m hoping it will reopen to the public after the owners finish
installing better guard rails. Check the website below to see if it has
reopened before heading over.
Other draws include the Shops at Hudson Yards mall (p. 275) and the
audacious arts complex The Shed          (p. 345), set on massive wheels that
can be “nested” into the tower behind it, creating an open-air pavilion for
outdoor performances. Its exterior is covered with what looks like a giant
silver puffy coat (like a ski parka). Inside is a maze of spaces, some with
redwood-tree-height ceilings, others a bit more intimate, but all easily
reconfigured for different uses, from art exhibits to performances, meaning
The Shed will wear a different face each time you visit.
Hudson Yards. www.hudsonyardsnewyork.com. Subway: 7 to 34th St./Hudson Yards.

Times Square/Midtown West
Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum                   MUSEUM/HISTORIC SITE
How’s this for an all-star lineup? Not only does the Intrepid Sea, Air &
Space Museum now display the space shuttle Enterprise, it’s got the world’s
only tourable nuclear submarine, the famed Concorde jet, nearly two dozen
grounded jets, a Revolutionary War–era submarine, and is itself a World
War II–era aircraft carrier. Whew! Even those who profess no interest in
aviation or military history will find themselves wowed by the breadth and
depth of this collection. You’ll likely have to devote a good 3 hours or more
to get your fill here, so arrive early if you can.
You’ll want to begin your visit at the USS Growler submarine, built in
1958 and so narrow that only small groups can enter at a time (which keeps
the lines here long). You’ll be taken on a brief, thrillingly claustrophobic
tour introduced by a terrific exhibition center, with videos and text about
life onboard. Children under the age of 6 are not admitted. Next, make your

way to the Concorde, the oversize luxury lawn dart that, after flying half-
empty for a number of years, was finally taken out of commission in 2003.
(The jet isn’t in the classic bent-nosed pose; that was only used for take-offs
and landings.) This ultra-deluxe flying bus carried a mere 100 passengers at
a time, most of them paying $6,000 each way for the privilege of crossing
the Atlantic faster than the speed of sound (it went from 0–165 mph in just
21⁄2 seconds). Take a close look at places A and B, the seats reserved for
Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip of England.

Visiting the pavilion of the space shuttle Enterprise costs an extra $7,
but most will find it worth the outlay. A terrific new exhibit in this area
explores what day-to-day life on a space shuttle is like. Then turn your
attention to the Fighting I, the main focus of your visit, a 40,000-ton

aircraft carrier that had one of the greatest survival stories of World War II.
Though it was hit by five kamikaze planes (two of them in a single day)
during its tours of duty, it continued to serve (the Japanese called it “The
Ghost Ship” because it couldn’t be sunk). Go directly to the Information
Center on the hangar deck to inquire if there’s a tour starting anytime soon.
You can wander through the ship on your own, but you’ll get more out of
the experience with the hour-long guided tour, led by highly informed
docents, most with military backgrounds.

Jets are parked on the deck of the retired aircraft carrier Intrepid, now packed with subs and spacecraft and all
manner of military hardware.

Pier 86 (W. 46th St. at Twelfth Ave.). www.intrepidmuseum.org. 877/957-7447 or 212/245-
0072. Admission $36 adults, $34 seniors/students, $26 ages 5–12, free for active or retired
military and children 4 and under. Various combo tickets add extras like space shuttle or
simulator rides. Free entry 1 Fri evening each month (check website for dates). Daily 10am–
5pm (summer weekends until 6pm). Closed Thanksgiving and Christmas Subway: A, C, E to
42nd St./Port Authority. Bus: M42 Crosstown.

Museum of Broadway MUSEUM When a Broadway show needs new
cast members, it puts an ad in Playbill, the long-running theater industry
publication. The Museum of Broadway did the same when it was looking
for gallery guards, and these eager, knowledgeable theater geeks (most are
would-be actors) are the heart and soul of this new museum. I found myself
turning to them in many of the galleries and being treated to wonderful,
often dramatic, tales about the exhibits and the shows they highlighted.
Which was a blessing, because the wall text at MOB can be intimidating,
with panel after panel of often encyclopedically dense theater history,
starting in the 18th century and weaving through minstrel shows,
vaudeville, classic musicals, kitchen-sink dramas, and juke box musicals to
the Broadway of today. The curators have smartly devoted entire rooms to
genre-shifting shows like Oklahoma (it has a wonderful video of Agnes de
Mille describing how she created the dream ballet), West Side Story (with
Tony’s jacket from the original run), Rent, and others. Along the way are
Instagram moments where visitors can pose in “environments” from their
favorite shows, plus cute interactive pieces (like an oversized jigsaw puzzle
devoted to composer Stephen Sondheim), lots of artifacts, and spellbinding
videos of famed set designers, directors, composers, playwrights, and other
theater pros discussing the evolution of their famous shows. The bottom
floor is devoted to the intricacies of how Broadway shows come to life, with
videos about the arts of lighting, wigmaking, lyric writing, stage managing,
and more. Most visitors will need about 2 hours to see it all, but real theater
fanatics could linger for double that amount of time.
145 W. 45th St. (btw. Sixth and Seventh aves). themuseumofbroadway.com. 212/239-
6200. Admission $39 adults, $36 seniors, $33 students plus $4 service fee for online
bookings. Subway: B, D, F, M to 47th–50th sts. / Rockefeller Center; 1, 2, 3, N, Q, R, W, S to
Times Square.

Among the many ready-made Instagram backgrounds at the Museum of Broadway: this groovy exhibit on the
musical Hair.

Museum of Modern Art               ART MUSEUM MoMA, as it’s nicknamed,
doesn’t want for masterpieces. This is where you’ll find seminal works by
Picasso, van Gogh, Brancusi, Dalí, and Matisse, among others. It’s also not
an institution that rests on its laurels: In 2019, the museum closed for 4
months to “reimagine” itself. Not only were pieces re-hung and moved, but
architectural re-finagling also added 40,000 square feet in additional gallery
space, expanding the museum by almost a third. The plan also included new
ground-level galleries that will always be free to the public, meaning that
visitors who don’t want to pay will get to see something. Also new: a
performance studio, and several more elevators and escalators to combat
gridlock. The Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden, one of the
city’s most delightful spots to linger, has not been touched.

The Museum of Modern Art’s huge collection includes powerful artworks such as Jean-Michel Basquiat’s 1984
painting Glenn.

Though there are many masterworks in the museum, be sure you give
yourself enough time for the following highlights:       Vincent van Gogh’s
Starry Night, which has a vivid impact when viewed in person, the
thickness of the brush strokes making it as much sculpture as painting.
Created a year before his suicide, when van Gogh was in an insane asylum,
the painting is filled with premonitions of what was to come, the foreground
taken up with a soaring cypress tree, symbol of death.
Pablo Picasso’s Desmoiselles d’Avignon, a massive brothel scene in
which Picasso experimented with a number of art styles—look
closely and you’ll see that one of the women’s heads looks like an
African mask, another profile is taken from Egyptian art, the woman
in the middle assumes a classical Venus-like pose, and a leg of one of
the figures devolves into cubist abstraction. Reportedly, Picasso

painted the work when he was suffering from syphilis, which may be
why the women appear so threatening.
Salvador Dalí’s Persistence of Memory, in which watches melt and a
long-nosed figure (some say it was a self-portrait of Dalí; others think
it represents an unborn baby) lies prostrate on the ground. You may
be surprised at how small this seminal work is.
Soaring sculptures by Brancusi, Andrew Wyeth’s Christina’s World,
vibrantly colorful masterpieces by Matisse, Jackson Pollock’s splatter art,
and painted metaphors by Magritte are among the other wonders of the
museum’s collection, the most important in the world for art of this era.
Note: MoMA has a museum-wide Wi-Fi network so that visitors can
access audio tours and commentary on their wireless devices; this includes
specialized versions for children, teens, and the visually impaired.
11 W. 53rd St. (btw. Fifth and Sixth aves.). www.moma.org. 212/708-9400. Admission $25
adults, $18 seniors, $14 students, ages 16 and under free if accompanied by adult. Daily
10:30am–5:30pm (until 7pm Sat). Subway: E, M to Fifth Ave.; B, D, F to 47th–50th
sts./Rockefeller Center.
Rise NY ATTRACTION An amusement park with the soul of a museum,
Rise NY’s marquee attraction is a ride that makes you feel like you’re
swooping over the city. It takes place in a 40-foot-tall dome with 180-
degree views of well-executed 3D videos, plus a soundtrack of every damn
song ever written about the city. Think: Disneyland’s California Adventure .
. . but on the other coast. Since the ride only lasts about 5 minutes, Rise NY
also includes a faux subway ride that barrels through time and space, from
the debut of the subway up to, well, Pizza Rat. There are also a dozen
galleries which look at the many, many items invented in New York—the
Singer sewing machine, the Otis elevator, the Broadway musical, hip hop—
and how they made the city central to the industries they spawned. Most
guests seemed to be dashing through the exhibits to get to the rides when I
was there, but those who linger will actually learn something—and that’s an
unusual occurrence this near to Times Square. Tip: Don’t pay extra for VIP
access, there are rarely long lines here.
160 W. 45th St. (off Seventh Ave). riseny.co. No phone. Admission $34 adults, $32
seniors/students/military, $30 children 3–12. Sun and Wed–Thurs 10am–8pm; Fri–Sat 10am–
10pm. Subway: 1, 2, 3, N, Q, R, S to Times Square.

Rockefeller Center ARCHITECTURE Gotham’s splendid “city within
a city” was built in the 1930s at the height of the Depression. Thanks to the
jobs it gave construction workers, it was the city’s second-largest employer
at the time, surpassed only by the federal Works Progress Administration
(WPA). And it remains a marvel of elegance and aspiration, a several-
blocks-wide collection of 19 buildings that, despite their mass, create a
space that is airy and light, a welcoming haven for both tourists and
residents. No matter how many times I come here, I still get goosebumps on
the walk from Fifth Avenue through the gardened central path—called “The
Channel,” as it runs between the French and the British buildings. Follow
this boulevard down to the ice-skating rink (the first commercial one in the
world), and the golden statue of Prometheus, or “Leaping Louie,” as wits
have called him over the years, his prone position under the soaring vertical
of the RCA building making him look like he just jumped. (Directly behind
the statue, a plaque marks the space where the 70-plus-foot Christmas tree
is set on November 20 each year.) The rink is open for ice skating October
to early April; the rest of the year, it now hosts roller skating. The rink’s
open Monday-Thursday 11am-10pm, Friday 11am–midnight, Saturday
9am-midnight, Sunday 9am-10pm. Hourlong skating sessions, including
skate rental, are $21 if you’re 6 or over, $11 for tots who are younger.
Take a left and walk toward 49th Street to the small side street with the
glassed-in TV studio on the corner, where NBC’s Today Show is taped.
Sign-waving crowds gather in this street area every weekday morning, as
early as 4am, to attempt to get their faces on TV. (When the show has
musical performances, people line up days before, and guests play on a
stage in this narrow alley. It looks much bigger on TV, doesn’t it?) Stroll
over to Fifth Avenue between 50th and 51st streets, where Prometheus’s
brother, mighty Atlas, the finest piece of art in the complex (by artist Lee
Lawrie), hoists a giant globe on his shoulders, muscles rippling. From the
back, Atlas looks a bit like a Christ figure, especially superimposed on St.
Patrick’s Cathedral across the street (p. 216). Go into the International
Building lobby directly behind the Atlas statue for a peek at one of the
city’s most magnificent public spaces, the walls bedecked with a rare,
swirling Greek marble, the gold “curtains” at the side creating an ever-
changing dance of shadows on the ceiling.

Lee Lawrie’s massive bronze statue of Atlas guards the Fifth Avenue side of Rockefeller Center.

I’m on the fence about recommending the Rockefeller Center Tour
($27). Yes, the tales associated with this city-within-a-city are fascinating,
but on the two occasions I’ve taken the tour, it was clear the guides were
bored with their jobs, which made the experience less compelling than it
should have been. History fans will still enjoy it, but others will want to
head straight to the 70th-floor observation deck at Rockefeller Center, Top
of the Rock        (30 Rockefeller Plaza; topoftherocknyc.com; 212/698-
2000; basic tickets $40 adults, $38 seniors, $34 ages 6−12, see website for
other combo packages; daily 9am–11pm). While not as high as the decks in
the Empire State Building or One World Observatory, it has its own striking
views (including a much better vista of Central Park), and it closely re-
creates the deck’s original cruise-ship-themed look from the 1930s.
Finally, there’s Radio City Music Hall (1260 Ave. of the Americas at
50th St.; www.radiocity.com; 212/247-4777; $50–$350 show tickets, tour
daily $42 adults, $37 seniors, students, and children 12 and under), which
remains a kitschy, thrilling delight: The Christmas Spectacular is a marvel

of excess, with dozens of people and hooved animals on stage; orchestras
magically rising from the pit; and best of all, the Rockettes chorus line, that
superhuman all-leg dancing machine. Even if you don’t get tickets to a
show, you can take a tour, well worth it to view the exquisite Art Deco
features of this sensational pleasure hall. Tour tickets are available on the
website or at the Radio City box office; they take place several times a day
(times vary) and last approximately an hour.
Btw. 48th and 50th sts., from Fifth to Sixth aves. radiocity.com.           212/247-4777 (tour info).
Subway: B, D, F, M to 47th–50th sts./Rockefeller Center.

With pedestrianized spaces and amped-up signs, Times Square still dazzles after dark.

Times Square ICON Adam Gopnik wrote about Times Square in The
New Yorker, “No other part of New York has had such a melodramatic
sensitivity to the changes in the city’s history, with an image for every
decade.” Think for a moment and those visions of Times Square should start
flooding your mind: snazzy clubs and peroxide blonde chorus girls in the

1920s and ’30s, sailors kissing girls at the end of World War II, the
wisecracking small-time hoods of Guys and Dolls in the ’50s, and, of
course, the bleak urban decay of the ’60s and ’70s when, as Gopnik put it,
“everything fell apart and Hell wafted up through the manhole covers.”
Times Square is back on the upswing now, the porn shops banished and
crime held (mostly) at bay. To get the full effect of today’s Square, it’s
imperative you visit at night. It’s then that the rainbow glitter of the flashing
lights from the dozens of billboards, giant TV screens, electronic news
crawls, and headlights of cars whizzing by wash over the Square, sweeping
all the litter and crowds into the background. The effect is like watching
fireworks. (This tradition of massive “spectaculars” is codified into law—in
the 1980s, ordinances were passed requiring that new buildings abutting the
Square have 16,000 sq. ft. of light shows on their facades, with “moving
elements” that are sufficiently bright.) One of the best views is from the
massive stairs atop the TKTS booth at 46th Street. In recent years, the city
pedestrianized large parts of the square, creating 110,000 square feet of
walkable space. Also added: an outdoor performance space for frequent
events during lunch hour (noon–2pm), happy hour (5–7pm), and temporary
art installments. Beyond this theater of the streets is the legitimate theater:
Times Square still has more playhouses per acre than any other area in
North America. For dawn theater, peer into the sidewalk-level television
studios of Good Morning America (44th and Broadway); the show also
offers advance tickets for those who’d like to be part of the studio audience
(go to ABCNews.go.com/gma for full info). And hey, don’t beat yourself up
if you feel claustrophobic when you stand at the corner of 47th and Seventh
Avenue: Studies have shown that it’s the most congested spot in the Western
Hemisphere. Warning: If you take a photo with any of the costumed
characters or “painted ladies” roaming Times Square, you’ll be expected to
tip them.
Subway: 1, 2, 3, 7, N, Q, R, S to Times Square; A, C, E to 42nd St./Port Authority.

Midtown East
Chrysler Building         ARCHITECTURE In the Chrysler Building we see
the Roaring-‘20s version of what Alan Greenspan called “irrational
exuberance”—a last burst of corporate headquarter building before stocks
succumbed to the thudding crash of 1929. Throughout the previous decade,
real estate speculators had been flinging up building after building, adding
almost 100 skyscrapers and utterly transforming the skyline of the city.
Automaker Walter P. Chrysler commissioned architect William Van Alen to
top them all, instructing him that he wanted a building “higher than the
Eiffel Tower,” the tallest in the world at that time. What Chrysler would
soon learn was that the gentlemen behind the Bank of America had the
same ambition, and they had hired Van Alen’s former partner (and sworn
enemy) H. Craig Severance to build them the tallest building on the planet
down on Wall Street. Soon the race was on, as each architect returned
continually to the drafting board, adding 10 more stories of penthouses
here, a lantern or a 50-foot flagpole there. In the fall of 1929, Severance was
sure he had won, so he completed the Bank of America building at 927 feet.
Van Alen then unveiled the coup de grâce that he’d been hiding in an
elevator shaft—a silver spike to crown his building, making it, at 1,046 feet,
an unbeatable 117 feet higher than his rival’s. Not only taller, the Chrysler
was the more striking of the two buildings, its scalloped spire set like a
jaunty jester’s cap atop a sleek tower. Take a look at the sharp stainless-steel
eagles that jut out just below the roof; the “gargoyles” below those on the
61st floor are modeled after the hood ornament of the 1929 Chrysler
Plymouth. The Chrysler remains one of the most impressive Art Deco
buildings ever constructed—but it wasn’t the tallest for long. Less than a
year after it was completed, the Empire State Building assumed that mantle
and held it until the World Trade Center came along.
405 Lexington Ave. (at 42nd St.). chryslerbuilding.com. Subway: S, 4, 5, 6, 7 to 42nd
St./Grand Central.
Empire State Building               ARCHITECTURE There’s no better
introduction to New York than a visit to the Empire State Building. It’s an
apex of the New York skyline, both literally (at 102 stories and 1,454 ft.)
and figuratively, and the view from its observation deck is at once
instructive and exhilarating. From your bird’s-eye perch, you orient yourself

geographically and see, with a clarity not possible on the ground, the
miracle of Manhattan, that runt of an island that couldn’t get much wider or
longer, and so did what no other city before it had done and expanded to the
skies, becoming a dense, pulsating city of boxy towers set on a painfully
narrow strip of land.

The observation deck at the Empire State Building is a classic site for aerial views of Manhattan and beyond.
Download the app so that you can identify more of what you see.

Look first to the south, where the Financial District’s powerful
skyscrapers loom over the field of lower, mostly residential housing that
stands between it and midtown. Beyond the Financial District, in the harbor,
are the Statue of Liberty to the right and the Brooklyn Bridge to the left (the
most graceful of the three bridges you’ll see in this direction). Right below
you will see the triangular Flatiron building (p. 195), one of the most
thrillingly odd in Manhattan (it was Frank Lloyd Wright’s favorite
building). Just to the side of it are the glittering gold roof of the
Metropolitan Life Tower and the World Life Insurance Towers, once centers

of New York’s high society and now just part of the landscape. Drift to the
north side of the building and you will be among a riot of skyscrapers,
thrown up in a manner that seems wildly chaotic from this vantage point.
This strip of midtown contains more office space per acre than any other
area in the world. Peer through the curtain of buildings to catch a glimpse of
Central Park, looking like a modest lawn from this great height. To your
right, take a good look at the shiny, scalloped spire of the Chrysler building
(see above; many have said it was designed to look like the grillwork of
1930s–era Chrysler cars).

The
Empire
State
Building
—in
Brief

It opened in 1931 after just 14 months of construction (total cost: $25 million).
Tallest building in the world from 1931 to 1970, when the World Trade Center took
the title. It’s still the 32nd tallest building on the planet.

The oddly shaped spire at the top was meant to be a landing port for blimps, but
high winds kept dirigibles from ever being able to anchor here.
In 1945, a plane accidentally crashed into the building, killing 17 people.
Every Valentine’s Day, 14 couples are married for free on the observation deck.

The Empire State Building has done an excellent job in recent years of
spreading out guests with advance timed reservations, so the crowding
issues that plagued the building pre-2018 have pretty much disappeared.
Still, there are some ways to get the most out of your visit here:
Download the free Empire State Building app. It will give you, as does
the ESB website, a real-time look at how long the wait is to get to the top
(the info is refreshed every 2 min.). Know, however, that the fun starts well
before “the top.” As you make your way through the building, you’ll see
exhibits on the building’s history, its move toward energy efficiency, its
iconic place in pop culture, and delicious views from the (slightly) lower

floors. The app also has a terrific free tour embedded in it, which delivers
commentary, historic photos, and videos about the construction of the
famed tower; and helps visitors identify the important buildings and parks
they’ll see from the observation deck (along with some background on
them).
All guests are offered the opportunity to take the stairs (from the
79th to the 86th floor) rather than the elevator. Doing so can shave a
good 10 to 20 minutes off your wait time.

Don’t forget to look up: High above the commuter crowds, the ceiling of Grand Central Terminal (p. 212) is
painted with the signs of the zodiac.

There is no snack bar on the observation deck but there is a souvenir shop
as you exit (coolest gift: Empire State Building zipper pulls).
350 Fifth Ave. at 34th St. esbnyc.com. 212/736-3100. 86th Floor Observatory admission
$44 adults, $38 seniors, $32 ages 6–12, free for children 5 and under. Main Deck Express
pass $84 (all ages). Top deck: add $32 to the prices above. Hours vary by season. Subway: B,
D, F, N, Q, R, M to 34th St.; 6 to 33rd St.

Grand Central Terminal ARCHITECTURE In ancient Roman times,
the entrances to great cities were framed with monumental arches, meant to
awe all who passed through. When Grand Central Terminal was being built
at the turn of the last century, it was recognized that our railroad terminals
were our grand gateways, the first view a traveler would have of the
metropolis. So, the architects of both Grand Central and the late, great
Pennsylvania Station (the original, torn down in the 1960s) created as much
pomp and stateliness as possible, filling these spaces with the symbols and
architecture of imperial Rome. On Grand Central’s south facade, 10
colossal Doric fluted pillars tower over Park Avenue; above them a massive
statue of Mercury, the god of travel, spreads his arms in welcome as
Hercules and Minerva, gods of strength and wisdom, lounge at his feet.
(The face of the clock below the sculpture is the largest piece of Tiffany
glass in the world.) The station’s interior is no less impressive, its concourse
soaring nine stories to a vaulted ceiling on which the signs of the zodiac are
created from 59 fiber-optic lights and 2,500 painted stars. The side walls
feature massive windows that throw shafts of light onto the acre-long
Tennessee marble floor. Not that the station needed them: One of its
innovations was the use of electric lights, so you’ll see bare bulbs sprinkled
throughout the station and on the massive chandeliers that overhang the
concourse. Two hundred buildings were demolished to make way for the
station, which opened on February 2, 1913, bearing a price tag of $80
million.
As you walk through, take in all of the trendy shops and food markets
housed in the arteries of the main concourse; another dining concourse
below, with the famed Oyster Bar at its heart (p. 140); and a huge Apple
Store on one balcony. If you’re traveling with children, take them to the
“whispering gallery” right outside the Oyster Bar. Stand on one side of the
arch there and have your child stand on the other, and then whisper to each
other back and forth; a trick of acoustics allows sound to travel from one
side of the vault to the other.
Informative walking tours of the station are offered daily at 3pm, with
additional tours in high season. The cost is $35, and they must be pre-
booked at takewalks.com.
42nd St., at Park Ave. grandcentralterminal.com.   212/532-4900. Subway: S, 4, 5, 6, 7 to
42nd St./Grand Central.

The Morgan Library & Museum                    LIBRARY/MUSEUM Famed
Canadian scientist George Mercer Dawson once wrote that a great library
contained “the diary of the human race.” With that definition, very few
libraries come as close to greatness as the Morgan, which contains
examples of the written word from the beginning of recorded time—from
pictorial Mesopotamian cylinder seals (4th millennium b.c., a precursor to
writing); to papyrus rolls from ancient Egypt, Greece, and Rome; to
brilliantly colorful medieval illuminated manuscripts. Its crowning jewels
are three editions of the Gutenberg Bible, the first book to be created using
movable type. (This is the only collection in the world to boast three
editions; scholars come from around the globe to study them, as each is
unique.) Also in the collection: manuscripts by Mark Twain, Jane Austen,
Charles Dickens, the Brontë sisters, Galileo, Bob Dylan, Alexander Calder,
and James Joyce. One of the 25 known surviving copies of the Declaration
of Independence is another highlight, along with a First Folio of
Shakespeare. (The fragility of these treasures means they can’t be
constantly on display, but you’ll usually see one of the Gutenbergs when
you visit, along with other exquisite books.) When you visit, be sure to set
aside at least an hour and a half to take in the ever-rotating special
exhibitions. In 2023, these will include a look at the economic revolution of
the Middle Ages (when money usage became widespread), and an exhibit of
the drawings of Renaissance master Tiepolo.

Three reasons to visit the Morgan Library: rare books on display, exquisite interior architecture, and excellent
rotating shows in the contemporary wing.

A PARK & a ride
On October 24, 2012, a small miracle occurred: Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms
Park on Roosevelt Island finally opened. An austerely beautiful tribute to the four-term
president, it was designed by star architect Louis Kahn shortly before his death in 1974. It
took an intervening 38 years for the project to finally come to fruition (mostly due to the
efforts of Kahn’s son, who created a documentary about his father’s vision that helped raise
the millions necessary to build the monument). The park offers wonderful views of the
Manhattan skyline, as well as a serene break from the bustle of NYC. But perhaps one of its
greatest lures is the amusement park–like ride one takes to the island aboard the
Roosevelt Island Tram (www.rioc.ny.gov/302/Tram; 212/832-4555). This is the aerial
vehicle you have probably seen in countless movies, most notably Spider-Man. It
originates at 59th Street and Second Avenue, costs $2.75 each way, and takes about 5
minutes to traverse the East River to Roosevelt Island, where there are a series of
apartment complexes (part of the fun is peering into the apartments as you swoop by). The
tram operates daily from 6am until 2am and until 3:30am on weekends.

The Morgan in the library’s name, 19th-century billionaire J. Pierpont
Morgan (1837−1913), collected more than just books; after his death, many
of his greatest artistic acquisitions were donated to the Wadsworth
Atheneum (in Hartford, Connecticut) and the Metropolitan Museum. The
original library, a marble villa in High Renaissance style, was designed by
Charles Follen McKim (of the famous firm of McKim, Mead & White). In
late 2018, a free-with-entry virtual reality tour was added, which allows
visitors an up-close look at the library’s ceiling murals, doors hidden in
bookcases, and other previously inaccessible features. It’s fun, but not quite
as insightful as it could have been (only do the tour if you’re devoting extra
time to the library; ask at the audiovisual guide desk to borrow a VR
device). Contemporary sections of the library, designed by lauded architect
Renzo Piano, added massive steel-and-glass pavilions in 2006, doubling the
size of the facilities. Unfortunately, they’re showing signs of wear and tear;
Piano didn’t create an easy way to clean the glass, and so its outside skin is
often covered with grit, and even trash. A gift store, cafe, and restaurant are
on-site.
225 Madison Ave. (btw. 36th and 37th sts.). themorgan.org. 212/685-0008. Admission $22
adults, $14 seniors, $13 students, free for ages 12 and under; free for all Fri 5–7pm. Tues–
Sun 10:30am–5pm (Fri until 7pm). Subway: 6 to 33rd St.
Museum of Sex MUSEUM Though it tries hard to avoid a carnival
atmosphere, with voluminous and often soporific wall text, this museum

still has a major “wink, wink, giggle, giggle” quotient. If you’re interested
in the subject from an anthropological perspective, you may be
disappointed. For the rest of us, including all of the folks who seemed to be
out on dates (or perhaps they met there?), the museum is good, dirty fun.
Warning: Due to the graphic nature of its exhibits, this museum is not for
everyone.
233 Fifth Ave. (at 27th St.). museumofsex.com. 212/689-6337. Admission $36; no one 17
and under admitted. Mon–Thurs 1–10pm; Fri 1pm–midnight; Sat noon–midnight; Sun
noon–10pm. Subway: N, R, 6 to 28th St.

The New York Public Library’s splendid Main Reading Room befits the Beaux Arts grandeur of this landmark
building.

Museum of the Dog MUSEUM Founded by the American Kennel
Club, this attraction welcomes four-legged museumgoers as well as their
two-legged companions. All get to experience the fun interactive exhibits on

service dogs and the differences breed-to-breed, and a (mostly) mediocre
collection of canine portraiture from the Victorian era through today.
101 Park Ave. (entrance on 40th St.). museumofthedog.org. 212/696-8360. Admission
$15 adults, $10 seniors/students/active military, $5 children, free for dogs. Wed–Sun 11am–
6pm. Subway: 4, 5, 6, S to 42nd St./Grand Central.
New York Public Library                LIBRARY/LANDMARK Many art
historians consider this the finest Beaux Arts building in the United States.
It certainly is one of the grandest, completed in 1911 at a cost of over $9
million and built by the famous firm of Carrère and Hastings. The exterior
takes its inspiration from the twin palaces on the north side of the Place de
la Concorde in Paris and is done in the same French Renaissance style, a
perfect harmony of columns, pediments, and statuary. Famous stone lions
guard the entrance and are said to roar whenever a virgin passes by. Want to
use the library? Well, you will be “reading between the lions” (sorry, I
couldn’t resist). The library itself holds thousands of volumes, many of
them housed underground below what is now Bryant Park. A “non-
browsing” facility, it uses an ancient dumbwaiter system to retrieve books
for readers—tomes are stacked into a small elevator and sent up when
requests are made. The permanent Polonsky Exhibition of The New York
Public Library’s Treasures showcases astonishing manuscripts,
recordings, letters, and images (both moving and still) from the library’s
massive collection. These include cuneiform tablets from the 3rd century
b.c., a pen knife morbidly fashioned from the paw of a deceased pet that
belonged to Charles Dickens, sheets of music hand-written by Mozart and
Beethoven, and much more. In addition, there are changing exhibits on
topics as varied as the history of children’s literature, New York literary
figures, innovations in photography, and more. Near the major exhibit hall
is a small theater for showings (on the half-hour and hour) of a really terrific
23-minute film about the library’s history. Don’t skip the Lionel Pincus and
Princess Firyal room, which houses one of the world’s most extensive
collections of maps (it’s magnificent after a $5-million renovation).
Entrance is always free, as are exhibits and the film, and the palatial interior,
with its expanses of marble and carved oak ceilings, is worth a look-see. For
a more formal tour, time your visit for 11am or 2pm Monday through
Saturday.

Fifth Ave. (at 42nd St.). nypl.org. 917/275-6975 (exhibits and events) or 212/930-0800
(general number). Free admission. Mon–Sat 10am–6pm (Tues–Wed until 8pm); Sun 1–5pm.
Tours Mon–Sat 11am and 2pm; Sun 2pm. Subway: 1, 2, 3 to 42nd St./Broadway; B, D, F, M to
42nd St./6th Ave.; S, 4, 5, 6 to Grand Central/42nd St.; 7 to Fifth Ave.
St. Patrick’s Cathedral CATHEDRAL The largest Roman Catholic
cathedral in the United States, St. Pat’s is also the seat of the Archdiocese of
New York. Designed by James Renwick, begun in 1859, and consecrated in
1879, St. Patrick’s wasn’t completed until 1906. The vast cathedral seats a
congregation of 2,200; if you don’t attend Mass, pop in between services to
get a look at the impressive interior. The St. Michael and St. Louis altar
came from Tiffany & Co. A self-guided audio tour, available on the website
for $25, provides an erudite introduction to the cathedral’s history and
architecture, narrated by Cardinal Timothy Dolan. We also highly
recommend visiting the original St. Patrick’s Cathedral down in SoHo for a
tour of its catacombs (p. 190).
Fifth Ave. (btw. 50th and 51st sts.). saintpatrickscathedral.org.  212/753-2261. Free
admission. Daily 6:30am–8:45pm. For Mass times, check the website. Subway: B, D, F, M to
47th–50th sts./Rockefeller Center.

Mirrors, glass-floored boxes, and digital effects amplify the stunning city views from Summit One Vanderbilt.

Summit One Vanderbilt             OBSERVATION DECK Can an observation
deck be a work of art? That’s the provocative question the developer SL
Green Realty posed when it hired artist Kenzo Digital to create an
immersive experience at the top of its newest skyscraper. Set right on 42nd
Street, Summit One has the sort of heart-of-the-action, glorious views that
the Empire State Building has (with even better views of the Chrysler
Building, since it’s just a few buildings over). But thanks to Kenzo Digital’s

imagination (before this he was best known for collaborations with
Beyoncé), those views are amplified and fractured by mirrors that cover
most of this 1,750,212-square-foot space. (Warning: The floors are
mirrored too, so unless you’re an exhibitionist, don’t wear a skirt here.) It’s
a dazzling effect, and one that will delight shutterbugs. In addition to the
mirrored spaces there are other surprises, like three fully transparent “sky
boxes” jutting out from the side of the building, allowing brave visitors to
stare down 1,063 feet to the sidewalk below; a room with floating mirrored
orbs; and another space with a digital screen that shows visitor’s faces
transposed onto clouds over the view. I’ll leave it up to you whether all this
is “art” but it’s certainly artful—and pretty damn wonderful. The only real
disappointments here are the experiences that cost extra money. For reasons
I don’t understand, nighttime visits cost more than daytime ones. Yes,
there’s a “light show” at night, with some walls illuminated in different
colors—it is groovy, but not $10 more groovy. And for an extra $20, you
can do “Ascent”: a glass elevator, with the world’s largest see-through
elevator floor, that climbs up the outside of the building. The latter sounds
more exciting than it actually is, as part of the roof sits below the elevator at
all times, and the views three stories up aren’t appreciably better anyway.
Don’t waste your money on either of these extras.
45 E. 42nd St. (at Vanderbilt, entrance in Grand Central on main concourse). summitov.com.
No phone. Admission $39 adults, $33 children ($5 less for NYC residents). Daily 9:30am–
10:30pm.

A tour of the United Nations headquarters (advance ticket required) reminds visitors of all this international
body has done for world peace and progress.

United Nations ARCHITECTURE/HISTORIC SITE It’s this 7-block
stretch of international territory that makes New York City the capital of the
world. No, really. It’s become fashionable of late in some political circles to
denigrate the UN. Though some reform is obviously necessary, a tour here
will remind you of just how much the United Nations has done since its
inception. It was founded, after all, with the express purpose of ensuring
that there would never be another world war, and it has accomplished that,
no small task. Perhaps more importantly, a visit here will remind you of
how much potential the UN still has for effecting meaningful progress in
numerous fields, from the elimination of disease and poverty to the
resolution of ethnic conflicts.
Those who take the hour-long tour will visit not only the General
Assembly (where Khrushchev once famously pounded his shoe in anger)

and the Security Council, but also the less well-known Economic and
Social Council Room that oversees the work of UNICEF, the World Health
Organization (WHO), and 28 other UN programs of development. (Little-
known fact: It’s thanks to recommendations by the WHO that most
countries have expiration dates stamped on milk.) It’s in this room that
officials are working to create standardized tests for avian flu, vaccinate the
world’s children against polio, and promote the cause of world literacy. The
Nobel Peace Prize won by the UN Peacekeeping forces in 2001 is displayed
just outside the council room, along with an enlightening exhibit on the
important work these troops are still doing throughout the world. Along
with the interior rooms, visitors view the lobby of the General Assembly
building with its free exhibits (photojournalism mostly), a meditation room,
and the memorial stained-glass window Marc Chagall created in 1964 for
former Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld (to the right of the entrance).
