Chapter 1: The Islands

The Islands
There’s no better place to start a tour of Paris than the two river islands at its
centre, the Ile de la Cité and the Ile St-Louis. The former is the core from
which the rest of Paris grew and harbours the cathedral of Notre-Dame, a
superb example of Gothic grandeur and harmony, and the stunning Sainte-
Chapelle, preserved within the precincts of the Palais de Justice. Linked to
the Ile de la Cité by a footbridge, the smaller Ile St-Louis has no heavyweight
sights, but possesses a beguiling charm all of its own, with its tall, austerely
beautiful houses on single-lane streets, tree-lined quais, a church and
assorted restaurants, cafés and shops. The island feels removed from the rest
of Paris, an oasis little touched by the city’s turbulent years of revolution and
upheaval. Inhabitants of the island even have their own name: “Louisiens”.
                                                          ILE DE LA CITÉ THE ISLANDS      43

Ile de la Cité                                                                                 1
The Ile de la Cité is where Paris began. It was settled in around 300 BC by a Celtic
tribe, the Parisii, and in 52 BC was overrun by the Romans, who built a palace-fortress
at the western end of the island. In the tenth century, the Frankish kings transformed
this into a splendid palace, of which the Sainte-Chapelle and the Conciergerie prison
survive today. At the other end of the island they erected the great cathedral of
Notre-Dame. By the twelfth century the small Ile de la Cité teemed with life, somehow
managing to accommodate twelve parishes, plus numerous chapels and monasteries. It
was all too much for the monks at St-Magloire, who moved out in 1138 to quieter
premises on the Right Bank.
  It takes some imagination today to picture what the medieval city must have looked
like, as most of it was erased in the nineteenth century by Baron Haussmann,
Napoléon III’s Préfet de la Seine (equivalent to mayor of Paris), displacing 25,000
people and destroying ninety streets – which had, admittedly, become squalid and
notoriously dangerous at night. In their place were raised four imposing Neoclassical
ediﬁces, largely given over to housing the law and police.
  The few corners of the island untouched by Haussmann include the tranquil square
du Vert-Galant, place Dauphine and the medieval streets rues Chanoinesse, des Ursins
and de la Colombe, to the north of the cathedral.

Pont-Neuf
M Pont-Neuf
A popular approach to the Ile de la Cité is via the graceful, twelve-arched Pont-Neuf,
which, despite its name (“New Bridge”), is Paris’s oldest surviving bridge, built by
Henri IV, who is commemorated with a statue halfway across. Made of stone and
free of the usual medieval complement of houses, it was a radical departure from
previous structures, hence its name. Henri IV, one of the capital’s ﬁrst great town-
planners, took much interest in the Pont-Neuf ’s progress and would sometimes come
to inspect it, delighting the workmen on one occasion by taking a ﬂying leap over an
incomplete arch.
  So impressive was the bridge in scale and length that it soon became symbolic of the
city itself, drawing large crowds; pedlars, secondhand book- and ﬂower-sellers,
dog-barbers and tooth-pullers set up stalls, while acrobats and actors entertained
passers-by.

Square du Vert-Galant
M Pont-Neuf
The square du Vert-Galant is enclosed within the triangular stern of the island, and
reached via steps leading down behind the statue of Henri IV on the Pont-Neuf.
“Vert-Galant”, meaning a “green” or “lusty” gentleman, is a reference to the king’s
legendary amorous exploits, and he would no doubt have approved of this tranquil,
tree-lined garden, a popular haunt of lovers – the prime spot to occupy is the knoll
dotted with trees at the extreme point of the island. From here you can also hop onto
one of the river boats that dock on the north side of the square (see p.28).

Place Dauphine
M Pont-Neuf
On the eastern side of the Pont-Neuf, across the street from the Henri IV statue,
red-brick seventeenth-century houses ﬂank the entrance to place Dauphine, one of the
city’s most secluded and attractive squares. The traﬃc noise recedes, often replaced by
nothing more intrusive than the gentle tap of boules being played in the shade of the
chestnuts. At the eastern end is the hulking facade of the Palais de Justice, which
swallowed up the palace that was home to the French kings until Etienne Marcel’s
bloody revolt in 1358 frightened them oﬀ to the greater security of the Louvre.
                      44           THE ISLANDS ILE DE LA CITÉ

1                            Sainte-Chapelle
                             Palais de Justice, bd du Palais, 1er • Daily: March–Oct 9.30am–6pm; mid-May to mid-Sept also Wed till 9pm; Nov–Feb 9am–5pm • €8.50,
                             combined admission with the Conciergerie €12.50 • T 01 53 40 60 80 • M Cité
                             The only part of the Ile de la Cité’s old palace that remains in its entirety is the
                             Sainte-Chapelle, its fragile-looking spire soaring above the Palais buildings and its
                             excessive height in relation to its length giving it the appearance of a lopped-oﬀ
                             cathedral choir. Though damaged in the Revolution, during which it was used as a ﬂour
                             warehouse, it was sensitively restored in the mid-nineteenth century, and remains one of
                             the ﬁnest achievements of French High Gothic, renowned for its exquisite stained-glass
                             windows. It was built by Louis IX in 1242–48 to house a collection of holy relics
                             bought at an extortionate price – far more than it cost to build the Sainte-Chapelle
                             – from the bankrupt Byzantium Empire. The relics, supposedly Christ’s crown of thorns
                             and fragments of the True Cross and a nail of the cruciﬁxion, are now in Notre-Dame’s
                             treasury, displayed only on certain days, including Good Friday.
                             The upper and lower chapels
                             The Sainte-Chapelle actually consists of two chapels: the simple lower chapel was
                             intended for the servants, and the upper chapel, reached via a spiral staircase, was
                             reserved for the court. The latter is dazzling, its walls made almost entirely of stained
                             glass held up by powerful supports, which the medieval builders cleverly crafted to
                             appear delicate and fragile by dividing them into clusters of pencil-thin columns.
                             When the sun streams through, the glowing blues and reds of the stained glass dapple
                             the interior and you feel like you’re surrounded by myriad brilliant butterﬂies. There
                             are 1113 glass panels, two-thirds of which are original (the others date from the
                             nineteenth-century restoration); they tell virtually the entire story of the Bible,
                             beginning on the north side with Genesis, continuing with the Passion of Christ (east
                             end) and the history of the Sainte-Chapelle relics (on the south side), and ending with
                             the Apocalypse in the rose window. The chapel is frequently used for classical concerts
                             – buy tickets a day or so in advance to avoid long queues.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R. DE S


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R. DE LA TACHERIE
                                                       St-Germain-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RUE E. COLONNE
DE COLI GNY
    R. DE L’AM IRAL
                            L’AUXERROIS                      Pont                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CHATELET                                 Ville
                                                             Neuf
                                                                                                                                                              QUAI DE LA MEGISSERIE                                                                                                                                           QUAI DE GESVRES
                                                                                                                                                        VO IE GE O RG ES P O M PI D O U



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PONT AU CHANGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PONT NOTRE DAME
   CAFÉS AND WINE BARS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PONT D'ARCOLE
 Berthillon            4
 Café St-Régis         2
                                                                                                                                                                                River Seine
 Taverne Henri IV      1                                                               PONT NEUF
                                        SQUARE DU
                                                             PL. DU                                Q UA I                                                                                                                                                                                             (ﬂower market) PLACE
                                       VERTGALANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAI S                 RUE DE LUTECE



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RUE D’ARCO LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD DU PA
  QUA I
                            DE CO
                                          NTI                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sainte-



                       INE
                           Conciergerie
                           Palais de Justice, 2 bd du Palais, 1er • Daily 9.30am–6pm • €8.50, combined ticket with Sainte-Chapelle €12.50 • M Cité
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                           The Conciergerie is one of the few remaining vestiges of the old medieval Palais de
                           Justice and is Paris’s oldest prison, where Marie-Antoinette and the leading ﬁgures of
                           the Revolution were incarcerated before execution. Inside are several splendid, vaulted
                           Gothic halls, including the Salle des Gens d’Armes, built in 1301–15. The far end is
                           separated oﬀ by an iron grille; during the Revolution this area was reserved for the
                           pailleux, prisoners who couldn’t aﬀord to bribe a guard for their own cell and had to
                           sleep on straw (paille).
                             Beyond is a corridor where prisoners were allowed to wander freely. There are a
                           number of reconstructed rooms here, such as the “salle de toilette”, where the
                           condemned had their hair cropped and shirt collars ripped in preparation for the
                           guillotine. On the upper storey is a mock-up of Marie-Antoinette’s cell in which the
                           condemned queen’s cruciﬁx hangs forlornly against peeling ﬂeur-de-lys wallpaper.

                           Tour de l’Horloge
                           M Cité
                           Outside the Conciergerie is the Tour de l’Horloge, a tower built around 1350, and so
                           called because it displayed Paris’s ﬁrst public clock. The ornate face, set against a
                           background of ﬂeur-de-lys, is ﬂanked with statues representing Law and Justice, added
                           in 1585. The clock tower’s bell, which would once have rung out to mark special royal
                           occasions, sounding during the St Bartholomew’s Day massacre (see p.367), was melted
                           down during the Commune (see p.187).

                           Place Lépine
                           M Cité
                           East from the Conciergerie is place Lépine, named after the police boss who gave Paris’s
                           coppers their white truncheons and whistles. The police headquarters, known popularly
                           as the Quai des Orfèvres (as readers of Georges Simenon’s Maigret novels will know),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E M A G NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C H ARL
                                                                                                                                                        IS PHIL IPPE
    Hôtel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RUE                                                                                          0                       100
   de Ville                                          PLACE

                                  RUE DE LOBA U
         AU X

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PONT MARI E
                                                                                                                              PO NT LO
                FLE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POR T DES CEL                                                                         L’AVE MARIA
                      UR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EST INS
                           S
RUE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SQUARE
      DES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H GALLI
            URS                                                                                                                             QUAI DE BOURB ON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sully
                   IN S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Morland
                                                                                                                 R UE J DU BE LL AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QU AI D’A NJ OU

 RUE C
          HAN
                 OI N
                        ES
   RUE DU CLOITR ENOTR EDAM                                                 PO                                                       AI
         Cathédrale de                                                                  SQUARE
                                                                                       DE L’ILE DE              Mémorial de la                                                                                                         RNE LLE




                                                                PONT DE L’ARCHEVECHE
 DE MO NT EBE
                        LLO
    46     THE ISLANDS ILE DE LA CITÉ

1        stands on one side of the square, though the police are set to move to new modern
         oﬃces before long. Livening up the square on the other side is an exuberant daily
         ﬂower market, augmented by a chirruping bird market on Sundays.

         Cathédrale de Notre-Dame
         Place du Parvis Notre-Dame, 4e • Cathedral Mon–Fri 8am–6.45pm, Sat & Sun 8am–7.15pm • Free Towers April & Sept daily
         10am–6.30pm; May–Aug Mon–Fri 10am–6.30pm, Sat & Sun 10am–11pm; Oct–March daily 10am–5.30pm; last entry 45min before
         closing • €8.50 Cathedral guided tours 1hr–1hr 30min in English (Wed & Thurs 2pm, Sat 2.30pm) and French (Mon–Fri, though not 1st
         Fri of the month or any Fri during Lent, 2pm & 3pm, Sat & Sun 2.30pm) • Free Trésor Mon–Fri 9.30am–6pm, Sat 9.30am–6.30pm, Sun
         1.30–6.30pm • €3 • W cathedraledeparis.com • M St-Michel/Cité
         A Gothic masterpiece, the Cathédrale de Notre-Dame rears up from the Ile de la Cité
         like a great ship moored by huge ﬂying buttresses. Built on the site of the Merovingian
         cathedral of St-Etienne, itself sited on the old Roman temple to Jupiter, Notre-Dame
         was begun in 1160 under the auspices of Bishop de Sully and completed around 1345.
         The cathedral’s seminaries became an ecclesiastical powerhouse, churning out six popes
         during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, though it subsequently lost some of its
         pre-eminence to other sees, such as Rheims and St-Denis. The building later fell into
         decline, and during the Revolution the frieze of Old Testament kings on the facade was
         damaged by enthusiasts who mistook them for the kings of France. Napoleon restored
         some of the cathedral’s prestige, crowning himself emperor here in 1804, though the
         walls were so dilapidated they had to be covered with drapes to provide a suﬃciently
         grand backdrop.
           In the 1820s Notre-Dame was given a much-needed restoration, largely thanks to a
         petition drawn up by Victor Hugo. Hugo had stirred public interest through his novel
         Notre-Dame de Paris, in which he lamented the building’s sorry state (Gothic architecture
         was particularly favoured by Romantic novelists, who deemed the soaring naves of the
         great cathedrals singularly suited to sheltering “tormented souls”). The task was given to
         architect Viollet-le-Duc, who carried out an extensive and thorough renovation, some
         would say too thorough, remaking much of the statuary on the facade – the originals can
         be seen in the Musée National du Moyen Age (see p.125) – and adding the steeple and
         baleful-looking gargoyles. Viollet-le-Duc’s parting contribution was a statue of himself
         among the angels lining the roof: it’s the only one looking heavenwards.
         The facade
         The facade is Notre-Dame’s most impressive exterior feature; the Romanesque
         inﬂuence is still visible, not least in its solid H-shape, but the overriding impression is
         one of lightness and grace, created in part by the ﬁligree work of the central rose
         window and the gallery above. Of the magniﬁcent carvings over the portals, perhaps
         the most arresting is the scene over the central one showing the Day of Judgement: the
         lower frieze is a whirl of movement as the dead rise from their graves, while Christ
         presides above, sending those on his right to heaven, those on his left to hell. All
         around the arch peer out alert and mischievous-looking angels, said to be modelled on
         the cathedral choirboys of the time. The left portal shows Mary being crowned by
         Christ, with scenes of her life in the lower friezes, while the right portal depicts the
         Virgin enthroned and, below, episodes from the life of St Anne (Mary’s mother) and
         the life of Christ. These are masterfully put together, using visual devices and symbols
         to communicate more than just the bare-bones story – in the nativity scene, for
         example, the infant Christ is placed above Mary to show his elevated status and lies on
         an altar rather than in a crib, symbolizing his future sacriﬁce.
         The towers
         If you climb the towers (access to which is round the side of the cathedral), you can see
         Viollet-le-Duc’s gargoyles and angels up close, as well as the great 13-ton Emmanuel
         Bell in the south tower. One of the largest and oldest bells in Europe, the Emmanuel Bell
                                                                                         ILE DE LA CITÉ THE ISLANDS   47

was forged in 1685 and spared during the 1789 Revolution (unlike Marie, the large bell
in the north tower, which was destroyed and melted down). It is only rung at Christmas
                                                                                                                           1
and other special occasions, or in times of mourning, such as the day after 9/11. The
cathedral’s other nine bells, which had become badly out of tune, were replaced in 2013.
The interior
Inside Notre-Dame, you’re struck immediately by the dramatic contrast between the
darkness of the nave and the light falling on the ﬁrst great clustered pillars of the choir.
It is the end walls of the transepts, nearly two-thirds glass, including two magniﬁcent
rose windows coloured in imperial purple, that admit all this light. These, the vaulting
and the soaring shafts reaching to the springs of the vaults, are all deﬁnite Gothic
elements, while there remains a strong inﬂuence of Romanesque in the stout round
pillars of the nave and the general sense of four-squareness. The trésor is unlikely to
appeal unless ornate nineteenth-century monstrances and chalices are your thing.
  Your best bet if you want to avoid the crowds is to visit between 8 and 9am or in the
evening. To join a free tour, meet at the welcome desk near the entrance. Free organ
recitals are also held every Saturday at 8pm; the instrument, crafted by the great
nineteenth-century organ-maker Aristide Cavaillé-Coll, is one of France’s ﬁnest, with
more than six thousand pipes.

Kilomètre zéro
M Cité
Notre-Dame, at the heart of Paris, is also the symbolic heart of France: outside on the
pavement by the cathedral’s west door is a bronze star, known as kilomètre zéro, from
where all main-road distances in France are calculated. The large windswept square in
front of the cathedral, built by Haussmann in the 1860s, is known as the Parvis (from
“paradise”) Notre-Dame. White paving blocks set into it show the outlines of the small
streets and buildings that stood here in medieval times.

Crypte archéologique
Place du Parvis Notre-Dame, 4e • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm • €4 • M Cité/St-Michel
At the far end of the Parvis Notre-Dame is the entrance to the atmospherically lit
crypte archéologique. This large excavated area holds the remains of the original
cathedral (St-Etienne) plus vestiges of the streets and houses that once clustered around
Notre-Dame; most are medieval, but some date as far back as Gallo-Roman times and
include parts of a Roman hypocaust (heating system).

Mémorial de la Déportation
Square de l’Ile de France, 4e • Daily 10am–noon & 2–7pm, closes 5pm in winter • Free • M Cité/Pont Marie
At the eastern tip of the Ile de la Cité is the stark and moving symbolic tomb of the
200,000 French who died in Nazi concentration camps – among them Resistance

    SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL
    On rue Chanoinesse, the cathedral school of Notre-Dame, forerunner of the Sorbonne, once
    ﬂourished. Around the year 1200, one of the teachers was Peter Abélard. A philosophical
    whizz kid and cocker of snooks at establishment intellectuals, he was very popular with
    students but not with the authorities, who thought they caught a distinct whiﬀ of heresy.
    Forced to leave the school, he set up shop on the Left Bank with his disciples, in eﬀect
    founding the University of Paris. Less successful was the story of his love life. While living near
    the rue Chanoinesse, he fell passionately in love with his landlord’s niece, Héloïse, and she with
    him. She gave birth to a baby, her uncle had Abélard castrated, and the story ended in
    convents, lifelong separation and lengthy correspondence. They were reunited in death,
    however, and lie side by side in Père-Lachaise cemetery (see p.209).
    48     THE ISLANDS ILE ST-LOUIS

1        ﬁghters, Jews and forced labourers. The Mémorial de la Déportation is barely visible
         above ground; stairs hardly shoulder-wide descend into a space like a prison yard, and
         oﬀ here is a stiﬂing crypt where thousands of quartz pebbles represent the dead. Floor
         and ceiling are black, and it ends in a dark, raw hole, with a single naked bulb hanging
         in the middle. On either side are empty barred cells. Above the exit are the words
         “Pardonne. N’oublie pas” (“Forgive. Do not forget”). The little green park surrounding
         the memorial is more of a celebration of life and a popular hangout.

         Ile St-Louis
         The Ile St-Louis is arguably the most romantic part of Paris. For centuries this was nothing
         but swampy pastureland, a haunt of lovers, duellists and miscreants on the run, until in
         the seventeenth century developer Christophe Marie chose to ﬁll it with elegant mansions;
         by 1660 the island was transformed. Unlike its larger neighbour, the Ile St-Louis has no
         sights as such, save for a tiny museum (Tues–Fri 2.15–6pm; €5; T 01 43 54 35 61;
         MPont Marie) at 6 quai d’Orléans devoted to the Romantic Polish poet Adam Mickiewicz.


         Hôtel Lauzun
         17 quai d’Anjou, 4e • M Pont Marie/Sully Morland
         One of the most elegant mansions on Ile St-Louis, the Hôtel Lauzun was built in 1657
         by Versailles architect Le Vau. It has an intact interior, complete with splendid trompe
         l’oeil decorations. Its most famous inhabitant was the poet Baudelaire who lived in a
         small apartment on the second ﬂoor from 1843 to 1845. He wrote much of Les Fleurs
         du mal here and hosted meetings of the Haschischins club, attended by bohemian
         writers and artists, including Manet, Balzac and Delacroix, and during which, as the
         name suggests, hashish was handed round – apparently in the form of a green jelly.
         Flutes of champagne are probably as heady as things get these days, as the mansion is
         often used for government receptions. It’s also sometimes open for guided tours to the
         public – details are given in the “Visites conférences” section in Pariscope (see p.39).

         Hôtel Lambert
         1 quai d’Anjou, 4e • M Pont Marie/Sully Morland
         More splendid still than the Hôtel Lauzun is the Hôtel Lambert, also built by Le Vau,
         at the tip of the island. Sadly, in 2013, some of the building was destroyed by ﬁre; ﬁne
         frescoes by Eustache Le Sueur were lost, though fortunately many others were saved,
         including the “galerie d’Hercule” by Charles Le Brun (who painted Versailles’ Galerie
         des Glaces). Despite the damage, the mansion is still widely reckoned to be the most
         beautiful residence in Paris. Voltaire, a past inhabitant, thought it was ﬁt for a king.
         The building was bought by the Qatari royal family in 2007 for an estimated €80
         million; their refurbishment plan, including the construction of a lift and underground
         car park, had to be scaled back after prominent historians and politicians protested.

         The southern quais
         31 rue St-Louis-en-l’Ile, 4e • M Pont Marie/Sully Morland
         A visit to the island wouldn’t be complete without a stop at Berthillon (see p.270); eating
         one of its exquisite ice creams while wandering down rue St-Louis-en-l’Ile is a tradition.
