Chapter 17: Day-trips from Paris

Day-trips from Paris
In the further reaches and beyond the boundaries of Ile-de-France lie
exceptional towns and sights that are still accessible as day-trips from Paris,
and are worth making the eﬀort to visit. An excursion to Chartres can seem a
long way to go for a building; but then you’d have to go a very long way
indeed to ﬁnd a building to beat it, and there are plenty of other attractions
in the charming town. Of the châteaux that abound in this region, we
describe only a select few: Chantilly, with its wonderful art museum;
Vaux-le-Vicomte, the envy of Louis XIV; and Fontainebleau, the most elegant
of Renaissance palaces. Monet’s garden at Giverny, the inspiration for all his
water lily canvases, is perennially popular; it’s bright and vibrant in spring,
hauntingly melancholy in autumn.
                                                                                CHANTILLY DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS                          237

Chantilly                                                                                                                                 17
People mostly visit CHANTILLY, a small town 40km north of Paris, to watch horses race
and to see Italian art in the romantic château, which rises from the centre of a lake
amid a forested park. The town’s famed, supersweet Chantilly cream provides an extra
enticement. The horses are hard to miss: scores of thoroughbreds can be seen
thundering along the forest rides of a morning, and two of the season’s classiest ﬂat
races are held here – the Jockey Club and the Prix de Diane, held on the ﬁrst and
second Sunday in June. The château has a fabulous art collection, and stables almost as
grand as the main building; within the Hameau, the rustic faux-village in the château
grounds, the café oﬀers good opportunities to sample the local Chantilly cream.

Château de Chantilly
Daily except Tues: château April–Oct 10am–6pm; Nov–March 10.30am–5pm; park April–Oct 10am–8pm; Nov–March 10.30am–6pm •
Pass Domaine with Musée du Cheval €21; château and park only €14; park only €7; guided tours of private apartments free, or €6 • T 03
44 27 31 80, W chateaudechantilly.com
The Chantilly estate has been the powerbase of two of the most powerful clans in France:
ﬁrst to the Montmorencys, then, through marriage, to the Condés. The present, mostly
late nineteenth-century château replaced a palace, destroyed in the Revolution, which
had been built for the Grand Condé, who smashed Spanish military power on behalf of
the infant king, Louis XIV, in 1643. It’s a beautiful structure, surrounded by what’s more
a lake than a moat, looking out in a romantic manner over a formal arrangement of pools
and gardens created by the busy André Le Nôtre, the designer of the gardens at Versailles
(and indeed at every other seventeenth-century château with pretensions to grandeur).
Musée Condé
The Musée Condé, which occupies the nineteenth-century Grand Château, harbours
one of the greatest collections of Classical art in France. Stipulated to remain exactly as
organized by Henri d’Orléans, the son of France’s last king and the donor of the
château, the arrangement is madly crowded by modern standards, and yet immensely
satisfying, as the pictures almost seem to spark ideas oﬀ each other. Some highlights
can be found in the Rotunda – Piero di Cosimo’s allegorical Simonetta Vespucci and
Raphael’s Virgin of Loreto – and in the Sanctuary, with Raphael’s tiny Three Graces
displayed alongside Filippo Lippi’s Esther and Assuerius. But the highlight must be the
octagonal, red-walled Tribune, where Botticelli’s resplendently fertile Autumn seems to
rival Ingres’ astoundingly sexy Venus Anadyomene, and works by Delacroix, Poussin and
Van Dyck crowd in all around.
Chapelle and Cabinet des Livres
In addition to the Musée Condé, you can visit two of the château’s rooms freely on the
main entrance ticket. The chapel exists primarily to glorify the bronze-and-marble
mausoleum of Henri II de Bourbon, father of Le Grand Condé; one of the two statues
contains the hearts of all the Princes de Condé. The inlaid wooden boiseries, brought
here from the Château of Ecouen, are particularly ﬁne, too. The Cabinet des Livres

    USEFUL INFORMATION FOR DAYTRIPS
    At the end of each individual account you’ll ﬁnd information on how to get there. Return train
    tickets cost €10–30, depending on how far you’re going. For Fontainebleau and usually
    Chantilly as well, you can save a few euros by buying a combined train and château entry
    ticket (“Forfait Loisirs”) at the station before you leave. To check times of speciﬁc trains, contact
    the national train carrier, the SNCF (T 08 92 30 83 08, W sncf-voyages.com), or the transport
    group for the Paris region, Transilien (W transilien.com); RER and métro routes can be consulted
    at RATP (W ratp.fr). Tourist information on the region surrounding Paris, the Ile-de-France,
    can be found at W new-paris-ile-de-france.co.uk.
 238    DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS CHANTILLY

17     displays a perfect facsimile – and browsable, digitized version – of the fabulous Les Très
       Riches Heures du Duc de Berry. This is the most celebrated of all the medieval Books of
       Hours, and the museum’s single greatest treasure. The illuminated pages illustrating the
       months of the year with representative scenes from contemporary (early 1400s) rural
       life – such as harvesting and ploughing, sheep-shearing and pruning – are richly
       coloured and drawn with a delicate naturalism.
       Appartements Privés
       A free, forty-minute guided tour (French only) will take you round the private
       apartments of the Princes de Condé, on the ﬁrst ﬂoor of the sixteenth-century wing
       known as the Petit Château. The tour mostly shows oﬀ superb furnishings, but there is
       a rare highlight: the exquisite boiseries panelling the walls of the newly restored
       Singerie, or Monkey Gallery, wittily painted with allegorical stories in a pseudo-
       Chinese style. A grand parade of canvases in the long gallery depicts the many battles
       won by the Grand Condé. A second guided tour (€6) takes you round the elegant but
       surprisingly intimate ground-ﬂoor apartments of the Petit Château, which belonged to
       the château’s last private owners, the Duc and Duchesse d’Aumale. It was they who
       bequeathed the château to the Institut de France (see p.135), its present owners. The
       Duc d’Aumale had little reason to cling to it, in fact, as he was not actually a Condé, but

                                                                                                     Amiens                                              Calais

       DAY-TRIPS FROM PARIS
                                                                                          Beauvais
                                                                                          Airport
       Rouen
                                                                                        Beauvais

                                                                               A16
                                                                                                                                                 A1




                       Ri                                                                                       Chantilly               Senlis
                        ve r                               VAL D’OISE
                            Sein
                                e
                                      Giverny
                 Vernon                                                                    O   ise
                                                                                        er
                                                                                     Riv                             N104
        Evreux                                                     Pontoise                                                            Charles-de-Gaulle
                                                                                                                N1                                                                  ne
                                    A13                                                                                                     Airport                                ar
                                                                                       A15
                                                                                                                                                         Meaux                     rM
                                                                                                     St- Denis                                                              Rive

                 N                                                             Nanterre                   A86               Bobigny                                    A4

                                                                         A14
                                                                                                          PARIS                   A3                         Disneyland
                                                                                                                                                             Paris
                                                                                                N118
                                                                        Versailles                                    Créteil
                                          YVELINES                                                                      D'Orly
                                                                                 Palaiseau                              Airport

                                           Rambouillet                                                                       Evry      A105                 SEINE-ET-
                                                                                                                                                             MARNE
                                                                                                        A10                 N104

                                                                                                                                                      Vaux-le-Vicomte
                                                                                                                             A6
                                                     A10
                                                                                                                                                 Melun
                                                                               ESSONNE
                     Chartres                                                                                                                 Fontainebleau
                                                                                          Etampes

                      EURE-ET-LOIR

                                                                                                                                                                  0                     10
                                                                                                                                                                      kilometres
                                                                              CHANTILLY DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS                         239


    A MAN OF HONOUR                                                                                                                    17
    Chantilly is perhaps most famous as the venue for a single notorious incident: the suicide of
    Vatel. The story is widely retold to illustrate the otherworldly moral code of the ancien régime.
    Maître d’ to the nobility at the château, (supposed) inventor of Chantilly cream and
    orchestrator of ﬁnancier Fouquet’s fateful supper party in 1661 (see p.240), François Vatel was
    justiﬁably proud of his status. In April 1671, the Prince de Condé set him to organize a feast for
    three thousand guests, in honour of Louis XIV. On the opening evening, two tables went
    without meat thanks to unexpected arrivals. “I cannot endure such a humiliation,” Vatel was
    heard to say, over and over again. At four in the morning, the distraught Vatel was seen
    wandering the corridors of the palace, where he met a ﬁsh supplier with two baskets of ﬁsh. “Is
    that all there is?” he asked, in horror, to which the man replied “Yes”. The maître d’ had in fact
    sent for supplies from all over France, though these had not yet arrived. Dishonoured, he
    played the Roman and ran upon his sword.


the ﬁfth son of King Louis-Philippe, and inherited the château through his godfather,
Louis VI Henri, who had lost all six of his children – the eldest son was actually
murdered on the orders of Napoleon, in 1804. The Duc d’Aumale’s inheritance was
doubly surprising as the old Condé was only induced to change his will by his mistress,
a former prostitute named Sophia Dawes, who was also suspected of having murdered
him, after the 74-year-old prince was found hanging from his bedroom window (not
here, but in another château, at St-Leu), strung up by two knotted handkerchiefs.

Musée du Cheval
7 rue Connétable • Museum Daily 10am–5pm • €11, or €18 combined ticket with Château de Chantilly and park; €28 including admission
to Spectacle Equestre Equestrian shows Usually daily except Tues 11am & 2.30pm; the Spectacle Equestre mostly Sat & Sun afternoons
in summer – check latest schedule online • T 03 44 27 31 80, W domainedechantilly.com
Five minutes’ walk along the drive from the Château de Chantilly towards town stands
the colossal stable block, the Grandes Ecuries, looking out towards the racetrack. The
building was erected at the beginning of the eighteenth century by the incumbent Condé
prince, who believed he would be reincarnated as a horse and wished to provide ﬁtting
accommodation for 240 of his future relatives. After two years of renovations, the Musée
du Cheval has reopened its doors, boasting ﬁfteen rooms and more than two hundred
objects and artworks devoted to the horse and its history. Three rooms are given over to
equestrian sport, in particular the races that have associated Chantilly with horseracing
since1834. The vast, barrel-vaulted main hall still has stalls for horses of diﬀerent breeds
from around the world. In the central ring a specialist team of riders and trainers put on
an equestrian demonstration show, “Chevaux en fête”, of the Spanish Riding School type,
and, less frequently, the more elaborate, choreographed Spectacle Equestre.

Potager des Princes
17 rue de la Faisanderie • Mid-March to Oct daily except Tues 10am–noon & 2–5.30pm, Sat & Sun 2–5.30pm • €10 • T 03 44 57 39 66,
W potagerdesprinces.com
Set 400m down from the Grandes Ecuries stables, one block north of the main rue du
Connétable, the lush Potager des Princes, or “kitchen garden of the princes”, is more than
merely meticulously planted herbs and vegetables – though it is that, certainly, in the best
French tradition. There are also fountains set amid beds of ﬂowers, a Japanese garden and
bamboo maze, and a luscious orchard designed for the Grand Condé by the ubiquitous Le
Nôtre. Children may be more excited by the collection of rare hens, ducks and pheasants,
the “rabbit village”, and the goats, gambolling beside the garden of exotic plants.
ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION                                                                                          CHANTILLY
By train Trains depart daily for Chantilly Gouvieux station        main Grandes Lignes level, not the downstairs level serving
(every hour or so; 25min) from Paris’s Gare du Nord – on the       the suburbs – on the line to Creil. Note that it may be worth
 240     DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS VAUXLEVICOMTE

17     buying a combined train and château entry ticket (“Forfait
       Loisirs”). Free buses to the town centre (line 15) usually wait
                                                                           Aigles. You’ll pass the racetrack about a third of the way along.
                                                                           By car Chantilly is less than an hour’s drive north of Paris
       outside Chantilly station; you have to get oﬀ by the Grandes        on the A1 motorway; exit 7, signposted Chantilly, takes you
       Ecuries and walk 500m to the château gates. It’s arguably           in quick succession via the D16 and D1017 onto the D924A,
       more pleasant to take a direct, 30min stroll along a signposted,    which you follow for 8km through the forest up to the
       beech-shaded footpath; turn right outside the station, then         chateau gate.
       almost immediately left at the roundabout along the av des          Tourist information W new-paris-ile-de-france.co.uk.


       Vaux-le-Vicomte
       46km southeast of Paris • Mid-March to mid-Nov daily 10am–6pm; fountains and other waterworks April to early Nov second and last Sat
       of the month 3–6pm; candelight illumination of state rooms and gardens early May to early Oct Sat 8pm–midnight • €14, €16 including
       Appartements Privés de Fouquet; gardens only €8; candelight illumination €17 including château entry after 2pm (château closed
       6–8pm) • T 01 64 14 41 90, W vaux-le-vicomte.com
       Of all the great mansions within reach of a day’s outing from Paris, the Classical
       château of Vaux-le-Vicomte is the most architecturally harmonious, the most
       aesthetically pleasing and the most human in scale. It stands isolated in the countryside
       amid ﬁelds and woods, and its gardens make a lovely place to picnic.
         The château was built between 1656 and 1661 for Nicolas Fouquet, Louis XIV’s ﬁnance
       minister, by the ﬁnest design team of the day – architect Le Vau, painter-designer Le
       Brun and landscape gardener Le Nôtre. The result was magniﬁcence and precision in
       perfect proportion, and a bill that could only be paid by someone who occasionally
       confused the state’s accounts with his own. Fouquet, however, had little chance to enjoy
       his magniﬁcent residence. On August 17, 1661, he invited the king and his courtiers to a
       sumptuous housewarming party. Three weeks later he was arrested – by d’Artagnan of
       Musketeer fame – charged with embezzlement, of which he was certainly guilty, and
       clapped into jail for the rest of his life. Thereupon, the king stripped the château of most
       of its furnishings, and carted oﬀ the design trio to build his own Versailles.
         By 1875, the château had passed through a series of incompetent aristocratic hands
       and had fallen into a state of utter dereliction. It was bought by Alfred Sommier, a
       French industrialist, who made its restoration and refurbishment his life’s work. It was
       ﬁnally opened to the public in 1968. Today, work continues on restoring more and
       more public rooms to their original grandeur.

       The château and gardens
       Seen from the entrance, the château is a rather austerely magniﬁcent pile surrounded
       by an artiﬁcial moat. It’s only when you go through to the south side, where the
       gardens decline in measured formal patterns of grass and water, clipped box and yew,
       fountains and statuary, that you can look back and appreciate the very harmonious and
       very French qualities of the building – the combination of steep, tall roof and bulbous
       central dome with classical pediment and pilasters.
         The interior is opulent, and its main artistic interest lies in the work of Le Brun.
       He was responsible for the two ﬁne tapestries in the entrance, made in the local
       workshops set up by Fouquet speciﬁcally to adorn his house, and subsequently
       removed by Louis XIV to become the famous Gobelins works in Paris (see p.174).
       Le Brun also painted numerous ceilings, notably in Fouquet’s bedroom, the Salon
       des Muses, his Sleep in the Cabinet des Jeux, and the so-called “king’s bedroom”,
       whose decor is the ﬁrst example of the ponderously grand style that became known
       as Louis XIV. Other points of interest are the cavernous kitchens, which have not
       been altered since construction, and a room displaying letters in the hand of
       Fouquet, Louis XIV and other notables. One, dated November 1794
       (mid-Revolution), addresses the incumbent Duc de Choiseul-Praslin as tu.
       “Citizen,” it says, “you’ve got a week to hand over one hundred thousand
       pounds…”, and signs oﬀ with “Cheers and brotherhood”.
                                                                      FONTAINEBLEAU DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS                                241

  The Musée des Equipages in the stables comprises a collection of horse-drawn
vehicles, complete with model horses. On Saturday evenings in summer the state
                                                                                                                                          17
rooms and gardens are illuminated with two thousand candles, as they probably were
on the occasion of Fouquet’s fateful party, with classical music in the gardens adding to
the eﬀect. The fountains and other waterworks can be seen in action on the second and
last Saturday of the month (not in winter).
ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE                                                                                 VAUXLEVICOMTE
By train Services run from the Gare de Lyon as far as              the last 7km (around €15 one way); there’s a rank at the
Melun (every 30min; 25min), from where an occasional               train station, with numbers to call if there are no taxis waiting.
shuttle-bus service (€7 return) covers the journey to the          By car Vaux-le-Vicomte is 7km east of Melun, which is itself
château (Sat only June–Aug, Sat & Sun rest of year; serving        46km southeast of Paris by the A4 autoroute (exit Melun-
some trains only; check W vaux-le-vicomte.com for up-to-           Sénart) or a little further by the A6 (exit Melun).
date timetables). On weekdays, you’ll have to take a taxi for      Tourist information W new-paris-ile-de-france.co.uk.


Fontainebleau
Daily except Tues: April–Sept 9.30am–6pm; Oct–March 9.30am–5pm; call T 01 60 71 50 60 on the day for timetables of guided tours of
the Petits Appartements • €11; guided tours of the Petits Appartements €6.50 • T 01 60 71 50 70, W musee-chateau-fontainebleau.fr
The château of Fontainebleau, 60km south of Paris, was once a mere hunting lodge in
the magniﬁcent forest that still surrounds it. Its transformation into an extravagantly
luxurious palace only took place in the sixteenth century on the initiative of François I,
who imported a colony of Italian artists to carry out the decoration, most notably
Rosso Fiorentino, Primaticcio and Niccolò dell’Abate. The palace continued to enjoy
royal favour well into the nineteenth century; Napoleon spent huge amounts of money
on it, as did Louis-Philippe. And, after World War II, when it was liberated from the
Germans by General Patton, it served for a while as Allied military HQ in Europe. The
town has since become the seat of the prestigious INSEAD business school – a
hothouse for future directors of Tesco and the like.

The château
The buildings, unpretentious and attractive despite their extent, have none of the unity of
a purpose-built residence like Vaux-le-Vicomte. In fact, their chief appeal is the gloriously
chaotic profusion of styles – a showcase of French architecture from the twelfth to the
nineteenth centuries. From the expanse of the Cour du Cheval Blanc, built as a humble
basse cour or working courtyard in the 1530s, you progress up a seventeenth-century
horseshoe staircase into a confusion of wings, courtyards and gardens. At the very heart of
the palace, the secretive and splendidly asymmetrical Cour Ovale conceals a twelfth-century
fortress keep, jarringly but pleasingly ﬂanked by ﬁne Renaissance wings on either side.
  The palace’s highlights, however, are the sumptuous interiors worked by the Italians,
chieﬂy the dazzlingly frescoed Salle de Bal and the celebrated Galerie François I, which
is resplendent in gilt, carved, inlaid and polished wood, and adorned down its entire
length by intricate stucco work and painted panels covered in vibrant Mannerist
brushwork. The paintings’ Classical themes all celebrate or advocate wise kingship, and
had a seminal inﬂuence on the development of French aristocratic art and design.
The Petits Appartements and museums
Utterly contrasting in style is the sober but elegant decor of Napoleon’s Petits
Appartements, the private rooms of the emperor, his wife and their intimate entourage.
You have to buy a separate ticket to join the (obligatory) guided tour, but a tour of the
Musée Napoléon – which displays a wide variety of souvenirs, some very personal, some
oﬃcial – is included in the main château ticket. The tour of the Musée Chinois shows oﬀ
the Empress Eugénie’s private collection of Chinese and Thai objets d’art in their original
Second Empire setting; you also get to visit the Empress’s breathtaking private theatre.
 242     DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS CHARTRES

17     The gardens and the Forest of Fontainebleau
       The gardens are equally splendid and in the summer months you could splash about
       on the Etang des Carpes, an ornamental lake with a Classical pavilion as its island
       centrepiece; you can’t swim, but you can rent boats. There are also horse-drawn carriage
       rides, and hot-air ballooning available. If you want to escape into the relative wilds,
       head for the surrounding Forest of Fontainebleau, which is full of walking and cycling
       trails, all marked on Michelin map #106 (Environs de Paris). Its rocks are a favourite
       training ground for Paris-based climbers.
       ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION                                                                           FONTAINEBLEAU
       By train Trains run from the Gare de Lyon to Fontainebleau-    château gates.
       Avon station (40min); ask about the combined train and         By car Driving to Fontainebleau from Paris is an option; it’s
       château ticket (“Forfait Loisirs”) at the station. Shuttle     16km from the A6 autoroute (exit Fontainebleau).
       buses (15min) take you from Fontainebleau station to the       Website W new-paris-ile-de-france.co.uk.


       Chartres
       When King Philippe-Auguste visited CHARTRES to mediate between church and
       townsfolk after the riots of October 1210, the cathedral chapter noted that “he did not
       wish to stay any longer in the city but, so as to avoid the blasphemous citizens, stayed
       here only for one hour and hastened to return”. Chartres’ modern visitors often stay
       little longer, but if you’ve come all the way from Paris, a journey of 80km, the modest
       charms of the little town at the cathedral’s feet may persuade you to linger. One of the
       world’s most astounding buildings, the cathedral is best experienced early or late in the
       day, when the low sun transmits the stained-glass colours to the interior stone and the
       quiet scattering of people leaves the acoustics unconfused.

       Chartres cathedral
       Cloître Notre-Dame • Cathedral Sept–May daily 8.30am–7.30pm; June–Aug Mon, Wed, Thurs & Sat 8.30am–7.30pm, Tues, Fri & Sun
       8.30am–10pm • Free North tower May–Aug Mon–Sat 9.30am–noon & 2–5.30pm, Sun 2–5.30pm; Sept–April Mon–Sat 9.30am–noon
       & 2–4.30pm, Sun 2–4.30pm • €7 • T 02 37 21 75 02, W cathedrale-chartres.org
       Built between 1194 and 1260, Chartres’ Gothic cathedral was one of the quickest ever
       constructed and, as a result, preserves a uniquely harmonious design. An earlier
       Romanesque structure burnt down in 1194, but the church’s holiest relic – the Sancta
       Camisia, reputed to have been the robe Mary wore when she gave birth to Jesus – was
       discovered three days later, miraculously unharmed. It was a sign that the Virgin
       wanted her church lavishly rebuilt, at least so said the canny medieval fundraisers.
       Thereafter, hordes of pilgrims stopped here on their way south to the shrine of Santiago
       de Compostela in Spain, and the church needed to accommodate them with a sizeable
       crypt, for veneration of the relic, and a nave large enough to sleep hundreds – the
       sloping ﬂoor evident today allowed for it to be washed down more easily.
         The geometry of Chartres cathedral is unique in being almost unaltered since its
       consecration, and virtually all of its stained glass is original – and unsurpassed
       – thirteenth-century work. Many of the windows in the nave were donated by craft
       guilds and merchants, whose symbols can often be seen in the bottommost pane. Some
       of the stories ﬁt the donors’ work, such as the carpenters’ window showing Noah’s ark.
       The superb, largely twelfth-century “Blue Virgin” window, in the ﬁrst bay beyond the
       south transept, is ﬁlled with a primal image of the Virgin that has been adored by
       pilgrims for centuries. The choir screen, which curves around the ambulatory, depicts
       scenes from the lives of Christ and the Virgin. Its sculptor, Jehan de Beauce, was also
       responsible for the design of the Flamboyant Gothic north spire.
         Chartres may be the best-preserved medieval cathedral in Europe, but if a group of
       medieval pilgrims suddenly found themselves here they would be deeply dismayed.
       Since their time, the sculptures on the exterior portals have lost their bright paint and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHARTRES DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS                                                                                                                                                             243

          gilt, while the walls have lost the whitewash that once reﬂected the stained-glass windows.
          Worse still, the high altar has been brought down into the body of the church, among the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
          hoi polloi, and chairs cover up the labyrinth on the ﬂoor of the nave (except on Fridays
          between Easter and October, when you can trace its 200m-long route all the way to the
          centre), whose diameter is the same size as that of the rose window above the main doors.
            Outside, hosts of sculpted ﬁgures stand like guardians at each entrance portal. Like
          the south tower and spire which abuts it, the mid-twelfth-century Royal Portal actually
          survives from the earlier Romanesque church, and it’s interesting to compare its
          relatively stylized ﬁgures with the more completely Gothic sculptures on the north and
          south porches, completed half a century later.
          The north tower and the gardens
          Crowds permitting, it’s worth climbing the three hundred steps up the north tower for
                                                                                                      Paris
     0                                 100
                  metres                                                                                                                                                                              PLACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     DROUAISE                                                    B O U L E VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHARTRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IEU

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RUE D E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              JE A                                 ES D
                                                                                           AV E N U E


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N JAURES
                                                                                                                       D ’A L S                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S FILL
                                                                                                                                   AC E                                                                                              LA B
                               N                                                         AN
                                                                                                                                          LO R
                                                                                                                                                 RA                                                                                      REC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HE
                                                                                                                                                      IN                                                                                                                                                                                                    S GDE
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                       ELIC


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RUE DU MASS A CRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RUE DE
                                                                                  DU P                                                                                                                   RU
                                                                                                                                             Y                                                RE   T
                                                                                                                                          GU                                             MU                  ES                                                                                                                                                             AV E N U E BETH OU A R T
                                                                                                                                    PE                                             RUE                          TJ
                                                                               RUE                                                 S                                                                                 ULI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Eure
                                                                                                                               LE                                                                                         EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ACR E
                                                                                                                          AR                                                                                                                       T   DU MASS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PO N
                                                                                                                                                           UE  S
                                                                                                                   CH                                  CQ
                                                                                                         D                                          JA                                                                        LT
 RU                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AU
                                                                                                      AR                                                                                                             NT
                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           St-André
          ED                                                                                                                                                                                                    HA                                                                                                FO NTAI NE
                                                                                                                                              R.
                                                                                               EV                                                                                                    EC
                  U                                                                       UL                                                                                                       RU
                          FA                                                                                                                                         S   E
                               UB                                                      BO                                                              TH       ER E
                                       OU                                                                                                             TE                    Musée des                                                      OLAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R U E D U M O U L I N A TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                             RG                                                                                                   ES                         Beaux-Arts                                                  ICH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N                      RUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BOU
                                                      ST                                               RUE DES L I SSES                                                                                                        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RUE D
                                                                                                                                               RU
                                                                JE
                                                                       AN                                                             Centre                                                                                                                     DE LA

                                                                                                        RUE DU PETIT
                                                                                                                                                                                    PI E
                                                                                                                                   International                                  AL                           Jardins de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RUE                                        LEV              E S F IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CO R R O
                                                                              RUE DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DE L
                                                                                                                       J AC                                                    IN
                                                                                                                                     du Vitrail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                l'Evêché
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EURS
                                                                                                                        QU RU                                            RD
                  Gare                                             N                                                       ES E D                                    RU E CA                             E                                                                                                                  A TA                                                                                                             IL LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IERIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     M               Cathédrale
                                                                IE                                                             DE OC                                                              DA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BOU
                  SNCF                                                                                             BE            FO TEU                                                                                                                                                                                       NNE                                                                                         ETIT
                                                            B                                                                                                                            RE                          Notre-Dame                                                                                                                                        FOC
                                                                                LA CO
                                                        I                                                             AU           UR R                                              T                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DU P
                                                     EL                                                                  VA          ME                                           NO                                                                                                                                                 R IE                                                                 RUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RUE D
                                                 F                                                                          IS          ST                                   RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                 RA
                                                                                                                                                                      OIT                                                                  AC A
                                                                                   URO
                                                                                                                                                      UX
                                                                                                                                                                 CL
                                       R.
                                        AV                                                                                                                                                                                           E        CIA
  Gare                                       EN                                                                                                                                                                                AM                                                                                                                                                                                          ES 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D                     SS
routière                       LE                UE                                    NNE
                                                                                                                                                      NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DÉTO U RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M
                           O                                                                                                                                                                                    OT
                                                                                                                                                    LA
                     C                                 J.                                                                                        LB                                                         N                                      T E
                  NI                                        DE                                         PLACE                                 E VA                                                        RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A   N
                                                                BE                                    CHATELET                                                                                      IT
                                                                  AU
                                                                                                                                           CH                                             CLO                          IT                PLACE DE LA
                                                                                                                                        DU                                                                         A                                                                                               R UE DU BOURG                              P O RTE GUILLAU ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                UL
                                                                                                                                                                            E


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R U E D E S EC U Y E U R S
                                                                  RD   CE                                                                           PE R                ED M                                                             POISSONERIE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Maison Picassiette
                                                                                                                                                                                                          EA
                                                                                                                                      R.
                                                                SA                                                                                    CH              RU LEE                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RU E AU                                        RUE D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RU
                                                                                                                                                                                                    RU
                                                            ES
          RU                                                                                                                                               ERO            TH
                  EG                                 GE
                                                       SF                                                                      I LLE
                                                                                                                                        RU                     NN      BE                TE                            ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PLACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BILLARD                                                                                                                                                   ULE
                           EN
                                                                                                                              EV          ES                    E                   PEN                                                                                                                                                                                       UP                           VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X JU IF S                 Eure
                                                 OR                                                                                                                                                                                 CH
                                                                                                                              RL                                                                                    'O R
                                ER           GE                                                                                              T E                                 SER                        IL D                        AN                                                                                                                                     UIT                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SOLE
                                                                                                                         HA
                                        AL
                                            R.                                 Jean Moulin                                                     ME                                                                                         GES                                                                                                                       RUE              SB
                                                                                                                                                                                    RU E
                                                                                                                       D ’                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CL
                                                                                Memorial                                                          ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DE L
                                                                                                              LIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ER                             EM
                                             KO                                                         CO L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CH
               RU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A FO
                                                                                   BO ULE VAR D DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RU E PE
                  E
              AN DU                                  EN                                               RUE                                                      PLA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IES      CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E                                                                                                                                                                               UL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A PI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RUE D
                 DR DO                                  IG                                                                                                       CE                                                                                                                                                                                                       UL                                   PO                          AU
                    É H CTE                                                                                                                                           DU                                         DE L                                                                                                                                                        ER                           ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RR AU LT
                       AY U R                RIE                                                                                                                                                            E                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                         RU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UE
                                                                                   LA RES IST AN CE
                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ES G R EN
                                             LE
                                            UI                                                                                                                           C YG                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       St-Aignan                                                                                                                               AUX                               PLACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RUE             PRET
                                       AT                                                                                                                                      NE
                                 EL                                       E                                                                                                        PLACE                                                                                                                                       RU                                                                                                               MORARD
                               RU ED                               LO N                                                                                                           MARCEAU                                                                ETS                                                                      ES                                                                                           RES
                                        R UE D E B A B Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I   S          RE                                                    RT E M O R A         RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N CO            I ER                                                   PO
                                                                                                                                                  RUE                                                                                                                                                                   A                TP                                              EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A
               RUE G A                                                                                                                                D    E LA                                                                                                                                                  TFR                                                               ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Orléans
                           BRIEL
                                                                                   PLACE                                                                              TO N                                                                                                        RU E S                                                                                      RU
                                        PERI                                                                                                                                   N E LLE                                                       ERCEE
                                                                                 DES EPARS                                                                                                    RI E                                   POELE P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PLACE DES

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RUE STMICH EL
                                                       RG
                                            BOU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H ALLES
                             F      AU                                                                                                        RUE
Le Mans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RUE JERO
                                                                                                                                                      DES B
                          ND                                                                                                                                      OUCH                                                                                                                                                                                                    St-Pierre
                                                                              UNOURY
                      A                                                                                                                                                        ERS
              R
              G                                                                                                               BO
                                                                                                                                   UL
                                                                                                                                        EV                                                                                                                                                                                                         ME PE
                                                                                                                                             AR
                                                                                                                                                    D C                                                                                                                                                                                                TION
                                                                       RUE MA
   RU                                                                                                                                                          H ASL
                                                                                                                                                                                  ES                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LE
          E
               GA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TIL
                      BR                                                                                                                         HANZY                                                                                               PLACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O          UR
                               IEL                                            RUE DE C                                                                                                                                                              PASTEUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BOULEVAR D D E L                                        A C
                                        LE                                                             H AT E A U
                                             LO                                                                                    DUN
                                                     NG                                                                                       RUE C                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RESTAURANTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Le Bistrot de la Cathédrale                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Le St-Hilaire                                                                2
                                                                          Tours
 244     DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS CHARTRES

17     its bird’s-eye view of the sculptures and structure of the cathedral. The gardens behind
       the cathedral, meanwhile, are a perfect spot for contemplation of the ﬂying buttresses.
       There are a couple of paying extras, including the crypt and a collection of ecclesiastical
       treasures, but they’re relatively unimpressive.

       Centre International du Vitrail
       5 rue du Cardinal Pie • Mon–Fri 9.30am–12.30pm & 1.30–6pm, Sat 10am–12.30pm & 2.30–6pm, Sun 2.30–6pm • €4 • T 02 37 21 65
       72, W centre-vitrail.org
       Occasional exhibitions of stained glass take place in the Centre International du Vitrail, a
       foundation devoted to sustaining and promoting the art form. The half-timbered building
       was once a medieval wine and grain store, and has a handsomely vaulted interior.

       Musée des Beaux-Arts
       29 Cloître Notre-Dame • May–Oct Wed & Sat–Sat 10am–noon & 2–6pm, Sun 2–6pm; Nov–April Wed & Sat 10am–noon & 2–5pm, Sun
       2–5pm • €3.40 • T 02 37 90 45 80
       The Musée des Beaux-Arts, in the rather gorgeous former episcopal palace just north of
       Chartres cathedral, has some beautiful tapestries and a room full of the works of French
       Fauvist Vlaminck, as well as the Spanish Baroque painter Zurbarán’s St Lucy. It puts on
       good temporary exhibitions.

       The River Eure and Collégiale de St-André
       Behind the Musée des Beaux-Arts, rue Chantault leads past old townhouses to the
       River Eure and Pont du Massacre. You can follow this reedy river lined with ancient
       wash houses downstream along rue de la Tannerie, or upstream via rue du Massacre on
       the right bank. On the latter route, the cathedral appears from time to time through
       the trees; closer at hand, on the left bank, is the Romanesque Collégiale de St-André, a
       church now used for art exhibitions and concerts.

       Maison Picassiette
       22 rue du Repos • April Mon & Wed–Sat 10am–noon & 2–5pm, Sun 2–5pm; May, June & Sept Mon & Wed–Sat 10am–noon & 2–6pm,
       Sun 2–6pm; July & Aug Mon & Wed–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun 2–6pm; Oct Sat 10am–noon & 2–6pm, Sun 2–6pm • €5.20
       A left turn at the southern end of rue de la Tannerie, then third right, will bring you to one
       of Chartres’ eccentric tourist attractions. Over almost thirty years, Raymond Isidore, a
       local road-mender and cemetery caretaker, decorated his Maison Picassiette with mosaics
       using bits of broken pottery and glass he found in the streets. “I took the things that other
       people threw away”, as he put it, before he died in 1964. The result is a quirky yet moving
       and striking example of Christian Naïve art – it’s worth making the small detour to see it.

       Chartres’ medieval town
       At the end of rue de la Tannerie, the bridge over the river brings you back to Chartres’
       medieval town. At the top of rue du Bourg there’s a turreted staircase attached to a house,
       and at the eastern end of place de la Poissonnerie, a carved salmon decorates a sixteenth-
       century building. The food market takes place on place Billard and rue des Changes (Wed
       & Sat morning), and there’s a ﬂower market on place du Cygne (Tues, Thurs & Sat).
         At the edge of the old town, on the corner of rue Collin-d’Harleville (to the right if
       you’re coming up from the station), stands a memorial to Jean Moulin, Prefect of Chartres
       until he was sacked by the Vichy government in 1942. When the Germans occupied the
       town in 1940, Moulin refused to sign a document attributing Nazi atrocities to
       Senegalese soldiers in the French army. He later became De Gaulle’s number one man on
       the ground, coordinating the Resistance, and died at the hands of Klaus Barbie in 1943.
       ARRIVAL AND INFORMATION                                                                                     CHARTRES
       By train Services run from the Gare du Montparnasse            By car Chartres is 91km from Paris, around 1hr 15min by
       (hourly; roughly 1hr).                                         car. From the périphérique, follow the A6B autoroute, then
                                                                                GIVERNY DAYTRIPS FROM PARIS                         245

follow the signs just after Villejuif and L’Haÿ-les-Roses that
lead you via the E50 onto the A10 near Massy. Follow the
                                                                   train station, by the cathedral (mid-April to Oct Mon–Sat
                                                                   9.30am–6.30pm, Sun 10am–5.30pm; Oct to mid-April
                                                                                                                                       17
signs onto the A11 near Orsay, and follow this to Chartres,        Mon–Sat 10am–6pm, Sun 10am–5pm; T 02 37 18 26
coming oﬀ at junction 2.                                           26, W chartres-tourisme.com).
Tourist oﬃce The tourist oﬃce is a 5min walk from the              Website W new-paris-ile-de-france.co.uk.
EATING AND DRINKING
Le Bistrot de la Cathédrale 1 Cloître Notre-Dame                   around €22. Daily except Wed noon–2pm & 7–10pm.
T 02 37 36 59 60. This wine bar and bistrot has a perfect          St-Hilaire 11 rue du Pont St-Hilaire T 02 37 30 97 57,
spot right opposite the cathedral, and it doesn’t waste it,        W www.restaurant-saint-hilaire.fr.         The      genteel
with simple dishes like “poule au pot Henri IV”, a good            St-Hilaire serves reﬁned regional cuisine (menus from €27)
selection of Loire wines, friendly service and a summer            in a sweet little upstairs dining room. Tues–Sat 12.15–
terrasse outside. Menu du jour on the blackboard, for              1.30pm & 7.30–10pm.


Giverny
Claude Monet considered his gardens at Giverny to be his greatest masterpiece. They’re way
out in Normandy, 65km from Paris in the direction of Rouen, but well worth the trip.

Monet’s gardens at Giverny
84 rue Claude Monet • April–Oct daily 9.30am–6pm • €9.50 • T 02 32 51 28 21, W fondation-monet.fr
Monet lived in Giverny from 1883 till his death in 1926, painting and repainting the
eﬀects of the changing seasonal light on the gardens he laid out between his house
and the river. Every month from spring to autumn has its own appeal, but May and
June, when the rhododendrons ﬂower round the lily pond and the wisteria bursts
into colour over the famous Japanese bridge, are the prettiest months to visit
– though you’ll have to contend with crowds photographing the water lilies and
posing on the bridge. Monet’s house stands at the top of the gardens, an idyllic
pastel-pink building with green shutters. Inside, the rooms are all painted diﬀerent
colours, exactly as they were when Monet lived here, and the painter’s original
collection of Japanese prints, including wonderful works by Hokusai and Hiroshige,
still hangs on the walls.

Musée des Impressionnismes
99 rue Claude Monet • April–Oct daily 10am–6pm • €7 • T 02 32 51 94 65, W www.museedesimpressionnismesgiverny.com
Just up rue Claude Monet from the artist’s gardens is the Musée des
Impressionnismes, which puts on exhibitions of works not just by Impressionists but
by artists inﬂuenced by the movement. The museum owes its existence to the circle
of American artists drawn to Giverny by Monet’s fame, but its exhibitions are far
from parochial: shows have included “Bonnard in Normandy” and “Impressionism
along the banks of the Seine”.
ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE                                                                                               GIVERNY
By train and bus Without a car, the easiest approach to            (W fondation-monet.fr) to try and time your arrival with
Giverny is by train to Vernon from Paris-St-Lazare (4–5            one of the bus departures. The buses back are more
daily; 45min). At St-Lazare, follow signs to the mainline          frequent. You can also take a taxi (€18), rent a bicycle at the
“Grandes Lignes” platforms, and get your ticket from the           station (€14 for the day; it’s best to reserve in advance:
main oﬃce, signposted “Espace de Vente”, or the yellow             T 02 32 21 16 01) or simply walk (1hr): cross the river and
machines; the Ile-de-France counter is for suburban                turn right on the D5; take care as you enter Giverny to
services only. There is a bus service that makes the 6km           follow the left fork, otherwise you’ll make a long detour to
journey to the gardens (€8 return; 20min). There are only          reach the garden entrance.
four daily buses from Vernon to Giverny, and they ﬁll up           By car Giverny is an hour’s drive from Paris; take the A13,
quickly on busy days, so it’s best to check the website            direction Vernon/Giverny to exit 14.
