Chapter 12: Montmartre and northern Paris

Montmartre and northern Paris
Stacked on its hilltop in the northern 18e arrondissement of Paris, Montmartre
sets itself apart from the city at its feet. Its chief landmark, visible from all over
the city, is the church of Sacré-Coeur, crowning the Butte as if an
overenthusiastic pâtissier had run riot with an icing gun. The slopes below,
around Abbesses métro, preserve something of the spirit of the village that
once basked here, but unlike most villages Montmartre has a diverse and
dynamic population, by turns lefty, trendy and sleazy. Between Montmartre
and the Grands Boulevards, which deﬁne the edge of the city centre proper,
stretch the 9e (neuvième) and 10e (dixième) arrondissements, whose shared
nineteenth-century architecture and almost total lack of green space make
them look quite similar. Yet where the 9e arrondissement is largely genteel
and well groomed, the 10e is mostly boisterous and shabby.
                                       MONTMARTRE MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS                     181

The 9e arrondissement has two beguiling museums devoted to its nineteenth-century
artistic heyday, the Musée Moreau and Musée de la Vie Romantique, and the northern
fringe of the arrondissement, around Pigalle, just below the Butte Montmartre, is
famous for its cabarets and sex shows. The main interest of the 10e lies in the shops,
restaurants and markets of the immigrant population, especially in the poor, largely
African Goutte d’Or quartier, east of Montmartre. Another good area for eating is
bourgeois Batignolles, just west of Montmartre.

Montmartre
In spite of being one of the city’s chief tourist attractions, Montmartre retains a surprising
whiﬀ of its rural origins. It’s an unusually proud and tight-knit neighbourhood, and there
are few cars. Incorporated into the city only in the mid-nineteenth century, its heyday was
from the last years of the nineteenth century to World War I, when its rustic charms and
low rents attracted crowds of artists. Since then, the quartier’s physical appearance has
changed little, thanks largely to the warren of plaster-of-Paris quarries that perforate its
bowels and render the ground too unstable for new building. Tiny squares still give way
to sudden vistas south over the rooftops of central Paris, and the occasional studio
window is a tangible reminder of its illustrious artistic past.
  In the second half of the twentieth century, the Butte, along with Pigalle at its foot
(see p.189), slumped into a sleazy half-life of porn shows and semi-genteel poverty, but
both neighbourhoods have undergone radical gentriﬁcation in recent years. Fashionable
nightspots have displaced the sex shows, and the young and moneyed have largely
replaced artists and prostitutes. The heart of the action is around Abbesses métro,                   12
extending right down to Pigalle, with rue des Martyrs as the chief artery of cool. It’s a
lively area on Sundays but relatively dead on a Monday.
  Most visitors make straight for the landmark church of Sacré-Coeur via the steps or
funicular railway (covered by ordinary métro tickets) immediately below. But for a less
touristy approach, head up via place des Abbesses, around which you’ll ﬁnd a host of
bijou bars and cafés.

Abbesses
M Abbesses
You could almost be persuaded that pretty, tree-shaded place des Abbesses was a village
square – if it weren’t for its centrepiece, one of Guimard’s rare, canopied Art Nouveau
métro entrances; there are only two others in the city (see box, p.184). The métro
canopy isn’t in fact an authentic Abbesses sight, as it was transferred from the Hôtel de
Ville, complete with its glass porch, tendril-like railings and lascivious-looking lanterns
– but it looks perfectly at home here in the square. At the north end of the square, “Le
mur des je t’aime” is a tiled wall inscribed with the words for “I love you”, handwritten

   MONTMARTROBUS
   The diminutive size of the Montmartrobus is designed to help it negotiate the twisting
   streets of the Butte, but its eccentric shape and determinedly ecological electric engine also
   make it ﬁt right in with the quartier’s spirit. If you don’t want to walk, taking this bus is
   probably the best way of doing a Montmartre tour, and normal métro/bus tickets are valid.
   Starting at place Pigalle, the route heads up rue des Martyrs and west along rue des
   Abbesses and rue Durantin, then follows the curve of rue Lepic to rue des Saules and rue
   Caulaincourt, before jinking up to Jules-Joﬀrin métro. On the return leg it heads down rues
   Ramey, Custine and Lamarck, curling round the foot of Sacré-Coeur and the funiculaire and
   heading back up to place du Tertre. It then winds back towards place des Abbesses via rues
   Cortot, Girardon and Gabrielle, before ﬁnally running down rues Chappe, Yvonne Le Tac and
   Houdon, back to place Pigalle.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RU E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RU E NI CO                                RAM



          Cimetière de                                             OU
                                                                                                                 PIC                                                                                                                                                      Dalí




                                C H E L CO U
                      CA
                                                                                   EC                           E                                                                                                                                        SQ. J. R O I S F R                  A
                                E RA                                                    AU                                                                                                           ABB                                                                    E R E S B A R S AC .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AR
                  E                                                                          CH                      RUE                         RUE                                                             ESS            R. R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RUE
               RU
                 HY P. H R U E
                            PUG                                                                                 S TO U                                                                         AIN P                                                                                                                                                       RUE                                                                                      RU                                                              D ’O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RSE                                                          Barbès
 Jules-                 RUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE



                   SQ UA REY
             9
                                   RI N I T E                             TOUR DES DAMES
                               LA T                                                                                                                                                                                    EO RG ES                                                                                  RU E CH
                           EDE                                                                                                                Moreau                                                                                                                                                                                   OR O N                                                                           E
                      RU
        E L
  Gare St-Lazare
     RUE DE PROVENCE
                                                     MONTMARTRE MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS          183

in eighty languages; it is something of a rendezvous for courting couples. For aimless
wandering and café life, the area around Abbesses is particularly satisfying, and the
unusual number of high-quality, artisan boulangeries is proof that the quarter has held
on to its residential roots – you’ll ﬁnd three on rue des Abbesses alone.

St-Jean de Montmartre
Place des Abbesses, 18e • Free • M Abbesses
On the downhill side of place des Abbesses, the red-brick church of St-Jean de
Montmartre is well worth peeping inside for its radical construction, dating from the
early 1900s. The incredibly slender pillars and broad vaulting were only made possible
by the experimental use of reinforced concrete, a material that was, as the church’s
architect Anatole de Baudot claimed, both the bones and the skin.

Chapelle des Auxiliatrices and around
11 rue Yvonne-Le-Tac, 18e • Fri 3–6pm • Free • M Abbesses
East of place des Abbesses, the Chapelle des Auxiliatrices is where Ignatius Loyola founded
the Jesuit order in 1534. This is also supposed to be the spot where St Denis, the ﬁrst
Bishop of Paris, was decapitated by the Romans, shortly before he carried his own head to
St-Denis (see p.232). One block south, rue d’Orsel makes the transition from chichi
Montmartre to cheap Barbès, with trendy clothes shops at its top end, near Abbesses, and
cheap fabric shops at the bottom. Towards its western end is the picturesque place Charles
Dullin, centred on the small Théâtre de l’Atelier, where the great mime Jean-Louis Barrault
– the inimitable Baptiste in Les Enfants du Paradis – made his debut.
                                                                                                         12
Butte Montmartre
At 130m, the “Mound”, or Butte Montmartre, is the highest point in Paris. The various
theories as to the origin of its name all have a Roman connection: it could be a
corruption of Mons Martyrum – “the Martyrs’ hill”, the martyrs being St Denis and his
companions; on the other hand, it might have been named Mons Mercurii, in honour
of a Roman shrine to Mercury; or possibly Mons Martis, after a shrine to Mars.
  If you’re in any doubt about ﬁnding your way up the Butte, just keep heading uphill
– the area is so charming that there’s no such thing as a wrong turn. One of the quietest
and most attractive paths begins at place des Abbesses, climbing rue de la Vieuville and
the stairs in rue Drevet to the minuscule place du Calvaire, which has a lovely view
back over the city.
Bateau-Lavoir
Place Emile-Goudeau, 18e • M Abbesses
With its graceful Wallace fountain, its steps and its view, the tiny place Emile-Goudeau
is one of the more adorable squares in Paris. It’s also overlooked by a building that

    WALLACE’S FOUNTAINS
    After the Prussian siege and the bloody ﬁghting of the Commune (see box, p.187), Paris was
    physically and emotionally scarred, and badly in need of succour. In 1872, a wealthy British
    resident of the city called Richard Wallace came up with the perfect symbol of renewal. He
    gave the city ﬁfty cast-iron drinking fountains, each topped with a kind of miniature temple
    designed by the sculptor Charles-Auguste Lebourg, its roof supported by four caryatids
    representing Simplicity, Temperance, Charity and Goodness. More fountains were added in later
    years, and today some 65 still stand in the city. Painted in lustrous green, their usefulness is
    limited these days by the loss of the cups once permanently attached to them. All the same, les
    fontaines Wallace remain quintessential symbols of Paris. (Curiously, the fountains have an
    unusual status in the French language, too, being one of the few French words to begin with “w”;
    like le whisky, le weekend and le wi-ﬁ, they are a treasured import.)
 184     MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS MONTMARTRE

       encapsulates Montmartre’s rich artistic history: a former piano factory known as the
       Bateau-Lavoir. In 1904 Picasso took up a studio here, and he stayed for the best part of
       a decade, painting Les Demoiselles d’Avignon and sharing loves, quarrels and opium trips
       with Braque, Juan Gris, Modigliani, Max Jacob, Apollinaire and others, both famous
       and obscure. It was on the place Emile-Goudeau that he had his ﬁrst encounter with
       the beautiful Fernande Olivier, thrusting a kitten into her hand as she passed by. “I
       laughed,” she said, “and he took me to see his studio.” Fernande became his model and
       lover. Although the original building burnt down some years ago, the modern
       reconstruction still provides studio space for artists, and you wouldn’t notice any
       change on the square itself.
       Moulin de la Galette
       Rue Lepic, 18e • M Abbesses
       Perhaps the most historic route up the Butte is via rue Lepic, which owes its winding
       contours to the requirements of the slow wagons that carried plaster of Paris down
       from the quarries. The street begins at the seedy place Blanche, which is occupied by a
       resolutely ordinary food market at its lower end. Above rue des Abbesses, however, it
       becomes progressively more elegant. Just short of the top the Moulin de la Galette looks

           THE MÉTRO: MIRROR OF PARIS
           When you descend into the métro network, Paris’s true ethnic and social mix is revealed. The
           city centre may be ﬂush with the white and wealthy, but the franciliens who live beyond the
12         périphérique ring road – women in Islamic veils, streetwise kids from the housing projects,
           working men in overalls – mostly travel to and from work underground. And every new
           immigrant group sends a wave of buskers down the tunnels. The métro also has its own
           culture. When it gets crowded everyone knows not to use the strapontins, the folding seats by
           the doors, and it’s understood that only someone really pushy walks up or down an escalator.
           There’s a certain style about the way Parisians travel, too, notably the casual upward ﬂick of the
           wrist that turns the door handle just before the train stops moving.
             Internationally, however, the métro is best known for its beautiful Art Nouveau signs and
           entrances, designed by Hector Guimard in 1900. (As usual when confronted with cutting-edge
           design, Parisians were initially less than impressed, comparing Guimard’s sinewy green railings
           and lantern holders to threatening tentacles.) The last three complete Guimard stations, with
           their glazed roofs intact, can be found at Abbesses, below Montmartre; at the Porte
           Dauphine, on the edge of the Bois de Boulogne; and at Châtelet’s place St-Opportune
           entrance. Not far away from the last, at the Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre métro entrance on
           place Colette, you can see a diﬀerent take on Guimard’s design: arching over the entrance are
           two colourful “crowns” made of glass and aluminium designed by artist Jean-Michel Othoniel
           and known as the “Kiosque des Noctambules”. Some stations have distinct characters below
           ground, too: check out the funky multicoloured lamps at Bonnes Nouvelles station, for example,
           the hanging globe lights at Cité, the museum cabinets and jewelled entrance at Palais-Royal-
           Musée-du-Louvre, the sci-ﬁ copper-submarine styling of Arts-et-Métiers, Varennes’ massive Rodin
           sculptures, St-Germain-des-Prés’ sleek comic-book projections, the historic cartoons at Bastille
           and the one-letter-per-tile decor of Concorde – which spells out the Revolutionary Declaration of
           the Rights of Man.
             Technologically, the métro is one of the ﬁnest underground systems in the world, though its
           famous rubber tyres are actually restricted to lines 1, 4, 6, 11 and 14. Line 1 has the latest in
           air-conditioned, articulated, compartmentless carriages, while the swanky line 14 goes one
           better with driverless trains, which oﬀer exciting views down the tunnels. There are more
           elevated métro pastimes than playing train drivers, too. The writer Jacques Jouet and the
           avant-garde literary group, Oulipo, invented a system for composing métro poems; you have to
           write a line every time the train is still, and think up the next while the train is moving. For tourists,
           the best things about the métro are its reliability – except when there’s a strike – and its cost:
           roughly two-thirds of the ticket price is subsidized by the French taxpayer.

                  CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT MONTMARTRE CEMETERY P.189; PLACE DU TERTRE P.186; VIEW FROM THE SACRÉCOEUR >
 186     MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS MONTMARTRE

       down from atop its modest patch of green – the last remnant of Montmartre’s maquis,
       the scrub that once covered the Butte. The abandoned dances here were immortalized
       by Renoir in his Bal du Moulin de la Galette, now hanging in the Musée d’Orsay.
       Today, the windmill is one of just two survivors of the many that once spun atop
       Montmartre. The other, the Moulin Radet, stands at its feet, above the confusingly
       named Moulin de la Galette restaurant (see p.290). If you’re approaching from place des
       Abbesses, you can cut straight up to the windmills via rue Durantin and rue Tholozé.
       Place Marcel Aymé to place Dalida
       Towards the top of rue Lepic, rue Girardon climbs up to place Marcel Aymé, a peaceful
       square with a lovably eccentric statue that celebrates Aymé’s best-loved short story:
       Le Passe-Muraille or The Man Who Could Walk Through Walls. A few steps higher up,
       square Suzanne-Buisson provides another quiet haven, with a sunken boules pitch and
       fountains overlooked by a statue of St Denis clutching his head to his breast. Above
       that again, place Dalida oﬀers ﬁne views of Sacré-Coeur; it once had as its centerpiece a
       distinctly busty bust of the singer and gay icon Dalida, but the original was stolen,
       presumably by seekers of the ultimate camp curio. Her empty plinth is overlooked by
       the elegant Château des Brouillards, or “Fog House”, where Renoir once lived. It gets
       its romantic name not from the fact that Renoir used to sit on the steps smoking, but
       from the clouds that used to gather around the top of the Butte.
       Avenue Junot
       From place Marcel Aymé, the gorgeously exclusive avenue Junot sweeps west, giving
12     onto still more exclusive enclaves. Beside no. 11 is a desirable nest of houses and
       gardens, the Hameau des Artistes – its digicoded gate usually ﬁrmly shut against the
       hoi polloi. Behind the (closed) gate of the next private lane, the passage Lepic–Junot,
       lies the weighty “witch’s stone” that gives it its local name: the passage de la Sorcière.
       The secluded cul-de-sac Villa Léandre, with its lovingly tended plants and village-like
       feel, is just round to the left. Don’t miss the house of Dadaist poet Tristan Tzara at 15
       av Junot; built by Adolf Loos in 1926, it’s a Cubist masterpiece.
       Espace Dalí
       9–11 rue Poulbot, 18e • Daily 10am–6pm, July & Aug till 8pm • €11 • T 01 42 64 40 10, W daliparis.com • M Abbesses
       Rue Poulbot, at the beginning of rue des Norvins, leads round to the underground
       Espace Dalí. It mostly shows reproduced engravings and wacky sculptures signed oﬀ by
       the artist. There’s a certain interest in seeing this, less familiar side of his work, but it’s
       really more of a giant souvenir shop than a museum, and lives up to the anagram that
       André Breton made of Dalí’s name: Avida Dollars.
       Place du Tertre
       M Abbesses/Lamarck-Caulaincourt
       If you want to preserve romantic memories of the Butte Montmartre, stop short of the
       top. What was once a pretty, tree-shaded square at Montmartre’s crown, place du
       Tertre, has completely fallen victim to its own fame. Today, it’s jammed with tour
       groups, souvenir stalls and street artists knocking up lurid oils of Paris landmarks from
       memory. Even the famous trees are mostly modern replacements for the ones planted
       here in the seventeenth century.
       St-Pierre de Montmartre
       2 rue du Mont-Cenis, 18e • Daily 8.30am–7.30pm • Free • W saintpierredemontmartre.net • M Abbesses/Lamarck-Caulaincourt
       The church of St-Pierre de Montmartre, between place du Tertre and the Sacré-Coeur,
       oﬀers sanctuary from the tourist bustle. It once served a Benedictine convent that
       occupied the Butte Montmartre from the twelfth century onwards, and now rivals
       St-Germain-des-Prés for the title of oldest church in Paris. Though much altered, with
                                                MONTMARTRE MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS                                  187

modern stained glass by Max Ingrand throughout, it still retains its Romanesque and
early Gothic structures. More ancient still are four columns inside the church, two by
the west door and two in the choir; they probably date from a Roman shrine that stood
on the hill, though their capitals were carved in Merovingian times.
Sacré-Coeur
Church Daily 6am–11pm • Free Tower access Daily: April–Oct 9am–6.45pm; Nov–March 9am–5pm • €6 • Wsacre-coeur-montmartre
.com • MAbbesses/Anvers
Parisian poet Jacques Roubaud compared the Sacré-Coeur to a big baby’s bottle for the
angels to suck. Certainly, it’s a sickly sweet confection of French and Byzantine
architecture, yet its pimpled tower and white ice-cream dome has become an essential
part of the Paris skyline. The site has been sacred since the Romans venerated Mars and
Mercury here, but today’s temple dates from the 1870s, after the Catholic Church
raised a public subscription to atone for the “crimes” of the Commune (see box,
below). The thwarted opposition, which included Clemenceau, eventually got its
revenge by naming the space at the foot of the monumental staircase square Willette,
after the local artist who turned out on inauguration day to shout “Long live the devil!”
  The interior is gloomily neo-Byzantine, and apart from its carillon of bells – the
largest bell in France, at 19 tonnes, swings here – and its collection of holy relics from
all over France, the only exciting thing about the Sacré-Coeur is the view from the top.
The gateway to the stairs – with 300 steps, it’s a steep and claustrophobic climb – is

   THE PARIS COMMUNE                                                                                                        12
   In March 1871, Montmartre saw the ﬁrst sparks ﬂy in what would become the great
   conﬂagration of the Paris Commune. After Napoléon III’s disastrous campaign against the
   Prussians in the summer of 1870, and the declaration of the Third Republic in September of the
   same year, Paris ﬁnally fell to the Prussian army on January 28, 1871, after a four-month siege.
   Peace terms were agreed by the end of February, and the Prussians withdrew, leaving the new
   Republic in the hands of a shaky conservative administration. Paris’s situation was least secure of
   all, as the city’s workers – and their armed representatives in the National Guard – had been
   disenfranchised by the February settlement, and were not inclined to respect it. The new Prime
   Minister, Adolphe Thiers, dispatched a body of regular troops under General Lecomte to take
   possession of 170 guns which the National Guard controlled on the high ground of the Butte
   Montmartre. Although the troops seized the guns easily in the darkness before dawn, they had
   failed to bring any horses to tow them away. That gave the revolutionary Louise Michel time to
   raise the alarm.
     An angry crowd of workers and National Guard members quickly gathered. They persuaded
   the troops to take no action and arrested General Lecomte, along with another general,
   Clément Thomas, who was notorious for the part he had played in the brutal repression of the
   1848 republican uprising. The two generals were shot and mutilated in the garden of no. 36
   rue du Chevalier-de-la-Barre, behind the Sacré-Coeur. Across the city, soldiers and National
   Guard members joined the rebellion, and, by the following morning, a panicking government
   had decamped to Versailles, leaving the Hôtel de Ville and the whole of the city in the hands of
   the National Guard. The rebels quickly proclaimed a revolutionary Commune, decreeing
   the separation of church and state, the enfranchisement of women and numerous measures
   to protect workers’ rights.
     By the beginning of April, the Communards were under attack from Thiers’ army, its numbers
   newly swelled by prisoners of war helpfully released by the Prussians. Isolated and ill equipped,
   they didn’t stand a chance. In the notorious semaine sanglante, of May 21–28, some 25,000
   Communards died – no one knows the exact ﬁgure – with some 10,000 executed or deported.
   The cost to Paris was also severe; the Hôtel de Ville and Tuileries palace (see box, p.68) were
   reduced to smouldering ashes. Today the Communards are commemorated in Père-Lachaise
   cemetery (see p.212), and in the enduringly martial spirit of the French Left; since 1871, not to be
   revolutionary has somehow seemed a betrayal of the dead.
 188     MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS MONTMARTRE

       under the church’s west ﬂank; you’ll need change for the automatic ticket machine by
       the turnstile. Once at the top, you’re almost as high as the Eiﬀel Tower, and you can see
       the layout of the whole city – a wide, ﬂat basin ringed by low hills, with stands of
       high-rise blocks in the corners.
       Montmartre vineyard
       Rue des Saules, 18e • W fetedesvendangesdemontmartre.com • M Lamarck-Caulaincourt
       Rue des Saules tips steeply down the northern slopes of the Butte past the terraces of the
       tiny Montmartre vineyard, whose annual harvest yields an extraordinary 1500-odd bottles
       of wine. Sadly, the actual pressing is no longer down on place du Tertre, as it was in the
       1940s; it’s now done in a basement of the arrondissement’s own town hall. The result is
       pretty rough, yet few wine buﬀs would be hard-hearted enough to resist having at least one
       bottle in the cellar. A raucously celebrated festival marks the vendange, or wine harvest, on
       the ﬁrst or second weekend of October. It’s a celebration of Montmartre’s left-wing spirit,
       and now includes the riotously romantic Cérémonie des Non-Demandés en Mariage, at
       which ardently secular, republican couples publicly state that they “have the honour not to
       ask your hand in marriage” – as the singer Georges Brassens famously put it.
         The picturesque house standing opposite the lowest corner of the vineyard is the cabaret
       club Au Lapin Agile, made famous by the Montmartre artists who drank there in the 1900s
       – among them Picasso, whose $50 million self-portrait as a harlequin is set inside. The
       “nimble rabbit” is still alive today and still serving up classic French chanson (see p.308).
       Musée de Montmartre
12     12 rue Cortot, 18e • Daily 10am–6pm • €9 • T 01 49 25 89 37, W museedemontmartre.fr • M Lamarck-Caulaincourt
       The Musée de Montmartre occupies an elegant old house that is particularly rich in
       artistic associations: it was home, at various times, to Auguste Renoir, Raoul Dufy, and
       Suzanne Valadon and her troubled son Maurice Utrillo. Its low-key exhibits attempt to
       re-create the atmosphere of Montmartre’s heyday via a selection of Toulouse-Lautrec
       posters, mock-ups of period rooms and painted impressions of how the Butte once
       looked. Its temporary exhibitions, such as a recent one on the Chat Noir cabaret, are
       usually more engaging, and work is underway to open up Valadon’s studio, above the
       entrance pavilion, to the public for the ﬁrst time. The museum’s three small gardens
       have also been charmingly renovated; you can get a ﬁne view from the back garden
       over the hilly northern reaches of the city and the vineyard.
         The street outside the museum is overlooked by a lighthouse-like white water-tower,
       which is one of the landmarks of the city’s skyline. Nearby, Berlioz lived with his
       English wife in the corner house on the steps of rue du Mont-Cenis, from where there’s
       a breathtaking view northwards to the Stade de France, along the canyon of the steps.
       This is perfect, sepia-tinged, romantic Montmartre – a double handrail runs down the
       centre, with the lampposts between – and the streets below are among the quietest and
       least touristy in the neighbourhood.
       The eastern slopes of the Butte
       M Abbesses/Château-Rouge
       To the south and east of the Sacré-Coeur, the slopes of the Butte drop steeply down
       towards boulevard Barbès and the Goutte d’Or quarter. Directly below are the gardens
       of square Willette, milling with tourists. To avoid the crowds, make for the quiet
       gardens to the north of the Sacré-Coeur, the Parc de la Turlure, and descend via rue
       Chevalier de la Barre, a pretty little road whose steep stairs, towards the top, are
       adorned with an art installation made up of LED lights. Alternatively, make your way
       down the steps of rue Utrillo, passing the pleasant café, L’Eté en Pente Douce, which has
       outdoor tables. From here, more steps lead down along the edge of the gardens to rue
       Ronsard, where you can see the (sealed) entrances to the quarries where the original
       plaster of Paris was extracted.
                                                              THE 9e MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS                                189

Halle St-Pierre
2 rue Ronsard, 18e • Mon–Fri 10am–6pm, Sat 10am–7pm, Sun 11am–6pm • €8 • W hallesaintpierre.org • M Anvers
Once a workaday market building, the pavilion-like Halle St-Pierre is now an exhibition
space dedicated to Art Brut, or works by artists – often autodidacts – that mainstream
galleries won’t touch. The biannual exhibitions range from the visionary to the
indigestible; a recent exhibitor was H.R. Giger, the artist behind the ﬁlm Alien. The
Halle is energetically run by a charitable association, with evening concerts (mostly
classical, mostly on Thursdays), kids’ workshops, book readings and a café with good
cakes and teas. All around the Halle are bustling shops selling cheap fabrics by the metre.
From here it’s a short walk to the busy, multi-ethnic crossroads around Barbès-
Rochechouart métro station. Contraband cigarettes are sold under the iron viaduct here,
among other scams, while the streets around are lined with takeway couscous joints.

Montmartre cemetery
Entrance on av Rachel, 18e, underneath the bridge section of rue Caulaincourt • March 16–Nov 5 Mon–Fri 8am–6pm, Sat 8.30am–6pm,
Sun 9am–6pm; Nov 6–March 15 closes 5.30pm • Free • M Blanche/Place-de-Clichy
West of the Butte, near the beginning of rue Caulaincourt in place Clichy, lies the
Montmartre cemetery. Tucked down below street level in the hollow of an old quarry,
it’s a tangle of trees and funerary stone, more intimate and less melancholy than
Père-Lachaise or Montparnasse. A few metres inside the gates, watch out for the
antique cast-iron poor-box (Tronc pour les Pauvres).
   The illustrious dead at rest here include Stendhal, Berlioz, Degas, Feydeau, Oﬀenbach,
Nijinsky and François Truﬀaut, as well as La Goulue, the dancer at the Moulin Rouge
immortalized by Toulouse-Lautrec. Emile Zola’s grave stands beside the roundabout,                                                  12
near the entrance, though his actual remains have been transferred to the Panthéon (see
p.126). In division 15, left of the entrance, lies Alphonsine Plessis, the real-life model for
the consumptive courtesan Marguerite, the “Dame aux Camélias” of Alexander Dumas’
novel and, later, the original “Traviata”. Liszt, who became her lover after Dumas, called
her “the most absolute incarnation of Woman who has ever existed”. Dumas himself lies
on the other side of the cemetery, in division 21. Nearby, in division 22, beside avenue
Samson, Vaslav Nijinsky’s tomb is adorned with a bronze statue of the dancer in his
famous role as the Harlequin in Diaghilev’s production of Carnaval. Tucked away
behind him, the tomb of the 1830s ballerina Marie Taglioni is usually strewn with
rotting ballet shoes, left there by dancers from the Paris ballet in honour of the ﬁrst
woman to dance on pointe. A large Jewish section lies by the east wall.

The 9e
Immediately south of Montmartre, the 9e (neuvième) arrondissement isn’t much visited
by tourists. Yet lurking inside the limits of the broad east–west boulevards that frame it is
a handsome, distinctly urban residential district with a powerful nineteenth-century
atmosphere, especially around place St-Georges. The once-seedy northern fringe has now
been rebranded as the trendy SoPi, or “South of Pigalle” district; it still has its gritty
elements, though bohemian shops and bars are moving in, especially in the streets
around rue des Martyrs. The wealthier, more businesslike, southernmost strip of the
arrondissement, next to the Opéra and Grands Boulevards, is covered in Chapter 4.

Blanche and Pigalle
From place de Clichy in the west to Barbès-Rochechouart métro in the east, the hill of
Montmartre is underlined by the sleazy boulevards de Clichy and de Rochechouart.
The pedestrianized centre of the boulevards was occupied by dodgem cars and other
tacky sideshows for most of the twentieth century, but Montmartre’s upward mobility
is now dragging its shabby hem along with it. The traﬃc-choked roads have now been
“civilized”, as the Paris planners put it, with bus and cycle lanes, and lots more
 190     MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS THE 9e

       greenery. It remains to be seen whether or not they will be recolonized by the
       sophisticated strollers, or ﬂâneurs, that deﬁned them in the late nineteenth century. At
       the eastern Barbès end, where the métro clatters by on iron trestles, the crowds teem
       round the Tati department store, the cheapest in the city, while the pavements are thick
       with Arab and African street vendors hawking watches, trinkets and textiles.
         At the place de Clichy end, tour buses from all over Europe feed their contents into
       massive hotels. In the middle, between place Blanche and place Pigalle, sex shows, sex
       shops and prostitutes – male and female – vie for the custom of solitaires and couples
       alike. It’s an area in which respectability and sleaze rub very close shoulders. In the
       adjacent streets – rues de Douai, Victor-Massé and Houdon – specialist music and hi-ﬁ
       shops jostle with exploitative “hostess” clubs, and some of the city’s trendiest shops and
       bars. At the more respectable end of this zone is rue des Martyrs; it’s one of Paris’s most
       enjoyable gastro-streets, lined with fancy food and ﬂower shops as it descends from the
       Butte towards the more respectable districts to the south.
       Musée de l’Erotisme
       72 bd de Clichy, 18e • Daily 10am–2am • €10 • W musee-erotisme.com • M Blanche
       Perfectly placed among all the sex shops and shows of Pigalle is the Musée de
       l’Erotisme. It’s more sincere than smutty: the ground ﬂoor and ﬁrst ﬂoor are awash with
       phalluses, fertility symbols and intertwined ﬁgurines from all over Asia, Africa and
       pre-Columbian Latin America, while the European pieces tend to the satirical, with
       lots of naughty nuns and priests caught in compromising situations. There’s also
       plentiful cabaret memorabilia and screens showing vintage pornography. The upper
12     ﬂoors are devoted to generally excellent temporary exhibitions on themes such as Paris’s
       historic maisons closes, or brothels. A few steps west, the photogenic Moulin Rouge still
       thrives on place Blanche. Once Toulouse-Lautrec’s inspiration, it’s now a shadow of its
       former self (see box below).
       Avenue Frochot
       M Blanche
       One of the city’s most elegant villas (private streets), avenue Frochot, leads oﬀ place Pigalle.
       Ordinary mortals are kept out by a digicoded gate, so you’ll never get to see Jean Renoir’s
       house at no. 7. Still, the facade of the house beside the gate at the south end is worth a

           PARIS CABARETS
           For many foreigners, entertainment in Paris is still synonymous with cabaret, especially that
           mythical name, Pigalle’s Moulin Rouge, at 82 bd de Clichy (T01 53 09 82 82, Wmoulinrouge
           .fr). Unlike the Folies Bergère, further south at 32 rue Richer (T08 92 68 16 50, Wfoliesbergere
           .com), which has gone for a mixed programme of music and magic shows, the Moulin Rouge
           still trades on its bare-breasted, cancanning “Doriss Girls”. The show is as glitzy and kitsch as
           you’d expect, full of high-tech special eﬀects and nodding feathers, and audiences are mainly
           made up of package tourists whose deal includes a ticket (otherwise around €100, or from
           €180 with dinner). For similar alternatives, try the Lido (116bis av des Champs-Elysées, 8e;
           T01 40 76 56 10, Wlido.fr), best known for its “Bluebell Girls” – and, these days, its “Lido Boys”
           too – and its high-tech, Vegas-style shows. At the Crazy Horse (12 av George V, 8e; T01 47 23
           32 32, Wlecrazyhorseparis.com), performances are relatively arty – and nude.
              The crowds are thinner at the pair of tiny transvestite cabarets on rue des Martyrs, just up
           from Pigalle métro. At its best, Chez Michou, at no. 80 (T01 46 06 16 04, Wmichou.fr), is like a
           scene from an Almodóvar ﬁlm, with singing transvestites masquerading as various female
           celebrities, but you’ll need to know French pop culture to get much out of it. Chez Madame
           Arthur, at no. 75bis (T01 42 54 15 92), is similar. Both can be outrageously camp good fun, or
           rather desperate on a quiet night, and your bill is likely to be larger than you might expect;
           dinner menus (not obligatory) start at around €100.
                                                                  THE 9e MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS                        191

look: it’s a giant, Art Deco, stained-glass take on Hokusai’s famous print of Mount Fuji
being engulfed by a tidal wave. It owes its existence to a cabaret that stood here in the
1920s, Le Shangaï, and looks particularly splendid at dusk, when it’s lit from behind.

Place St-Georges
M St-Georges
The handsome centrepiece of the 9e is the circular place St-Georges. The central
fountain – still with its horse trough – is topped by a bust of Paul Gavarni, a nineteenth-
century cartoonist who made a speciality of lampooning the mistresses that were de
rigueur for bourgeois males of the time. This was the mistresses’ quarter – they were
known as lorettes, after the nearby church of Notre-Dame de Lorette, built in the 1820s in
the Neoclassical style. On the east side of place St-Georges, the Hôtel de la Païva was built
in the 1840s in an extravagant French Renaissance style for Thérèse Lachman, a famous
Second Empire courtesan who married a Marquis. On the west side, the Hôtel Thiers was
destroyed by the Communards in 1871 but quickly rebuilt; it now houses the Dosne-
Thiers foundation, with a huge library specializing in nineteenth-century French history.

Nouvelle Athènes
M St-Georges
The heart of the 9e arrondissement was ﬁrst developed in the early nineteenth century as a
fashionable suburb. It was soon dubbed Nouvelle Athènes, or New Athens, after the
Romantic artists and writers who came to live here made it the centre of a minor artistic
boom. Place Toudouze and rues Clauzel, Milton and Rodier are worth wandering along
for their elegantly ornamented facades. A short distance southwest of St-Georges, a                                             12
passageway oﬀ rue Taitbout leads through to the serene square d’Orléans, an 1829
development which aped Regency London and attracted Chopin, Alexandre Dumas ﬁls
and George Sand as early residents. Some of the ﬁne townhouses of the original Nouvelle
Athènes scheme can still be spotted just to the west, along rue de la Tour des Dames.

La Sainte-Trinité
M Trinité d’Estienne d’Orves
As it cuts its bustling way towards the relatively down-at-heel commuter hub of the
Gare St-Lazare, rue St-Lazare passes the bulbous church of La Sainte-Trinité. Its
single, over-size French Renaissance-style tower is its most exciting feature. Inside,
the vast space under the barrel vault feels cold and sterile – hard to imagine that the
deeply spiritual composer Olivier Messiaen was organist here for the best part of half
a century.

Musée de la Vie Romantique
16 rue Chaptal, 9e • Daily except Mon 10am–6pm • Entry price varies during exhibitions, otherwise free • T 01 55 31 95 67 •
M St-Georges/Blanche/Pigalle
To get the full ﬂavour of the neuvième’s nineteenth-century heyday, make for the
Musée de la Vie Romantique in the house of the painter Ary Scheﬀer. He was art tutor
to Louis-Philippe’s children (and upstairs are a number of his hideously sentimental
aristocratic portraits) but he is more renowned today for his friendships with the
writer George Sand and her lover, Frédéric Chopin, who used to give private,
improvised concerts here. The shuttered building, standing at the end of a private
alley, is a delightful surprise, with its tree-shaded, courtyard rose garden where you can
take tea on sunny days. The interior preserves the rich colours of a typical bourgeois
home of the nineteenth century. The ground ﬂoor displays ﬁne furnishings and objets
once owned by George Sand – whom you might think of as France’s George Eliot,
though she was still more unconventional, what with her cross-dressing and serial
taking of lovers. There are family portraits, jewels, locks of hair and a cast of Chopin’s
exquisite left hand.
 192     MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS THE 10e AND THE GOUTTE D’OR

       Musée Gustave Moreau
       Rue de la Rochefoucauld, 9e • Daily except Tues 10am–12.45pm & 2–5.15pm • €5 • T 01 48 74 38 50, W musee-moreau.fr •
       M St-Georges/Blanche/Pigalle
       The design of the eccentric little Musée Gustave Moreau was conceived by the artist
       himself, to be carved out of the house he shared with his parents for many years, and
       you can visit their tiny, stuﬀy apartment rooms, crammed with furniture and trinkets.
       His fantastical Symbolist paintings get a lot more room – two huge, studio-like spaces
       connected by a beautiful spiral staircase – but the eﬀect is no less cluttered. Moreau’s
       canvases hang cheek-by-jowl, every surface crawling with ﬁgures and decorative swirls
       – literally crawling in the case of The Daughters of Thespius – or alive with deep colours
       and provocative symbolism, as in the museum’s pièce de résistance, Jupiter and Semele.
       From 2014, his paintings will also be displayed on the ground ﬂoor, currently being
       renovated and restored to its original decor. For all the rampantly decadent symbolism,
       some viewers haven’t been quite convinced that he wasn’t more than an oddball pedant.
       Degas, for one, commented that Moreau was “a hermit who knows the train timetable”.

       The 10e and the Goutte d’Or
       The rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière separates the 9e from its grittier twin, the 10e
       (dixième) arrondissement. At its upper end the northern stations dominate, while to
       the south lies the gritty but fascinating quarter of the faubourgs St-Denis and
       St-Martin. In the far north, just inside the 18e, east of Montmartre, lies the African
       quarter of the Goutte d’Or. The prettier end of the arrondissement is to the east, on the
12     far side of the Canal St-Martin (see p.197).

       The northern stations
       M Gare du Nord/Gare de l’Est
       The life of the 10e is coloured by the presence of the big northern stations. Most
       travellers scarcely give them a glance, intent on hurrying oﬀ to more salubrious parts of
       the city, but the station buildings are in fact very beautiful, closer to Classical orangeries
       in style than icons of the industrial age. The Gare du Nord (serving all places north,
       including the high-speed train lines to Germany and London) was built by the architect
       Hittorﬀ in the early 1860s, and is aggressively dominated by its three giant arches,
       crowned by eight statues representing the original terminus towns, from Amsterdam and
       Berlin to Vienna and Warsaw. Facing the boulevard de Strasbourg, the slightly earlier
       Gare de l’Est (serving northeastern and eastern France, and Eastern Europe) is more
       delicate, though when its central arch was open to the elements, as it was when
       originally built, the steam and smoke billowing out would have had a powerful eﬀect.
         The area around the stations is mostly gritty and unappealing. Beside the Gare de l’Est,
       however, a high wall encloses the gardens of square Villemin (entrance on rue des Récollets
       and avenue de Verdun), which provides a welcome green haven. The garden once belonged
       to a convent, the Couvent des Récollets, one much-restored, seventeenth-century wing of
       which still stands on rue du Faubourg-St-Martin. Further east again, the Canal St-Martin
       (see p.197) is an even more tranquil place to escape the city hustle. Just south of the Gare
       de l’Est, the church of St-Laurent has a handsome choir dating from the ﬁfteenth century.
       Thanks to Haussmann, who thought its original facade irritatingly oﬀ-centre, the church’s
       Gothic-looking west front actually dates from the same era as the Gare du Nord.

       The faubourgs
       The southern end of the 10e arrondissement is its liveliest, a poor but vibrant quarter
       that has become home to Indian, black African and Near Eastern communities as well
       as, in recent years, a small vanguard of young, trendy Parisians. The two main
       thoroughfares, the rue du Faubourg-St-Denis and rue du Faubourg-St-Martin, bear the
       names of the faubourgs, or suburbs, that once stood just outside the town walls. For
                                                                                                                                                                                                           THE 10e AND THE GOUTTE D’OR MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               193

                   once, you can still get a vivid sense of the old city limits, as two triumphal arches stand
                   marooned by traﬃc at either end of the boulevard St-Denis. The Porte St-Denis was
                   erected in 1672 to celebrate Louis XIV’s victories on the Rhine – below the giant letters
                   spelling out Ludovico Magno, or “Louis the Great”, are the bas-reliefs The Crossing of the
                   Rhine (on the south side) and The Capture of Maastricht (on the north). With France’s
                   northern frontier secured, Louis ordered Charles V’s city walls to be demolished and
                   replaced by leafy promenades; they became known as the boulevards after the Germanic
                       EF
                                                                                                                                                   HA                                                                                                                                                          ME
                                               RUE                                                                                     RU E M YR                                                                                                         SSO                         M                                                                                T




                                                                                                                                                                                                B O U L E VA R D B A R B E S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RUE R I CHO                                                   DES                                                      SQ. ST
                          E
  RUE C. NODIE R
                   E
                        EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B EUG                                                                                                  Hôpital Fernand                                                                                         DU C



                                      MONTHOLON


              RU E DE TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PGE D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U D ES
                                                                               VATOIR E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IR    SBO                                                                                                                                                                                     QUA




                                                                                                                  RUE DU FAUBOURG POISSONNIERE
                     RUE
 194     MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS THE 10e AND THE GOUTTE D’OR

       word for an earth rampart, a bulwark. Some 200m east, the more graceful Porte
       St-Martin was built two years after its sibling, in celebration of further victories in
       Limburg and Besançon. Louis planned a veritable parade of these arches, but the
       military misadventures of the latter part of his reign were hardly worth celebrating.
       Musée de l’Eventail
       2 bd de Strasbourg, 10e • Mon–Wed 2–6pm; closed Aug • €6 • T 01 42 08 90 20, W annehoguet.fr/musee • M Strasbourg-St-Denis
       The fascination of the Musée de l’Eventail is that it’s more working atelier than museum.
       In a small suite of period rooms on the ﬁrst ﬂoor of an ordinary Haussmann building,
       Anne Hoguet continues the family tradition of fan-making, working almost exclusively
       on commission for customers from the worlds of haute couture or theatre. There is always
       an exhibition drawing on a selection of the museum’s thousand-strong collection of fans,
       both historic – some date back to the 1720s – and contemporary. Of course, you can
       always commission a fan yourself, and ready-made models can be had for as little as €10.
       Rue du Faubourg-St-Denis and around
       At its lower end, the rue du Faubourg-St-Denis is full of charcuteries, butchers,
       greengrocers and ethnic delicatessens, as well as a number of restaurants, including the
       historic brasseries Julien and Flo (see p.293). The latter is tucked away in an attractive
       old stableyard, the cour des Petites-Ecuries, one of a number of hidden lanes and
       covered passages that riddle this corner of the city. The best known is the glazed-over
       passage Brady, the hub of Paris’s “Little India”, lined with Indian barbers’, grocers’
       shops and restaurants. The passage runs through to rue du Faubourg-St-Martin, crossing
12     the busy boulevard de Strasbourg and coming out just south of the impressive
       neo-Gothic town hall of the 10e arrondissement. Rue des Petites-Ecuries, one block
       north, has a real buzz about it, with its hip boutiques, foodie shops and cutting-edge
       bistros, and is also known for the large jazz and world music club, the New Morning
       (see p.308), while on the next street north again, at 18 rue de Paradis, is the
       magniﬁcent mosaic-and-tiled facade of Monsieur Boulanger’s Choisy-le-Roi tileworks
       shop; you can peer through the gate at the peacock tails and ﬂamingos adorning the
       stairs and ﬂoors.

       The Goutte d’Or
       M Barbès-Rochechouart/Château-Rouge
       The wide, grotty boulevard de la Chapelle forms the northern boundary of the 10e
       arrondissement, its only beacon the gloriously dilapidated Théâtre des Bouﬀes du Nord (see
       p.315). Immediately north of the boulevard, the poetically named Goutte d’Or quartier
       stretches between boulevard Barbès and the Gare du Nord rail lines. The setting for Zola’s
       classic novel of gritty realism, L’Assommoir, its name – the “Drop of Gold” – comes from a
       vineyard that stood here in medieval times. After World War I, when large numbers of
       North Africans were imported to restock the trenches, it became an immigrant ghetto.
         For years, the streets languished in a lamentable state of decay, but a major renovation
       programme has changed the area’s character – rue des Gardes has even become “fashion
       street”, lined with city-subsidized design boutiques. The quartier has changed ethnically,
       too, and is now predominantly the home of West African and Congolese people, rather
       than North Africans, along with south Asian, Haitian, Kurdish and other communities.
       Marché Dejean and around
       M Château-Rouge
       On the rue de la Goutte d’Or you could seek out one of the city’s Wallace fountains
       (see box, p.183), on the corner with the rue de Chartres, but the main sight is a few
       steps north on rue Dejean, where the Marché Dejean (daily except Sun afternoon and
       Mon) thrums with shoppers, including lots of women in brightly coloured West
       African dress. You can pick up imported African beers and drinks; if you’re self-catering
                                                                                                                                                                                                      BATIGNOLLES MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              195

        you may want to try vegetables such as plantain, yam and taro root. Another more
        general market takes place in the mornings twice weekly (Wed and Sat) underneath the
        métro viaduct on the boulevard de la Chapelle.

        Batignolles
        M Place de Clichy/Brochant
        West of Montmartre cemetery, in a district bounded by the St-Lazare train lines,
        marshalling yards and avenue de Clichy, lies Batignolles “village” – suﬃciently
        conscious of its uniqueness to have formed an association for the preservation of its
        caractère villageois. Its heart is the attractive place du Dr Félix Lobligeois, framing the
        elegant Neoclassical church of Ste-Marie-des-Batignolles – worth a peek inside if only
        for the extraordinary trompe l’oeil Assumption behind the altar, in which Mary
        apparently rockets up through the ceiling. On the corners of the place, a handful of
        modern bars and restaurants attract the neighbourhood’s young, bourgeois parents,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T
    0                                                                 200                                                                                                                                                             OQUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UY M
                          metres
                          PEREI                            Pont Cardinet SQUARE DES N
                 R OY SA
        AR
                  C
 RU E J. BIN                         RU                                  RU
 196     MONTMARTRE AND NORTHERN PARIS BATIGNOLLES

       while, behind, the green square des Batignolles is ﬁlled with pushchairs and handsome
       old plane trees. Just northwest lies the newly extended Parc Clichy-Batignolles, an
       ecologically designed public park created on land recovered from the railway.
