Chapter 7: Bastille and around

Bastille and around
A symbol of revolution since the toppling of the Bastille prison in 1789, the
Bastille quarter used to belong in spirit and style to the working-class
districts of eastern Paris. After the construction of the opera house in the
1980s, however, it became a magnet for artists, fashion folk and young
people, who brought with them over the years stylish shops and an
energetic nightlife. Much of the action takes place around rue de Lappe,
where cocktail lounges and theme bars have edged out the old tool shops,
cobblers and ironmongers. However, some of the working-class ﬂavour
lingers on, especially along rue de la Roquette and in the furniture
workshops oﬀ rue du Faubourg-St-Antoine, testimony to a long tradition of
cabinet-making and woodworking in the district.
                                                              PLACE DE LA BASTILLE BASTILLE AND AROUND                              109

South of Bastille, the relatively unsung twelfth arrondissement oﬀers an authentic slice
of Paris, with its neighbourhood shops and bars, and traditional markets, such as the
lively Marché d’Aligre. Among the area’s attractions are the Promenade Plantée, an
ex-railway line turned into an elevated walkway running from Bastille to the green
expanse of the Bois de Vincennes, and Bercy Village’s attractive cafés and shops set in
old wine warehouses.

Place de la Bastille
Place de la Bastille, a vast, traﬃc-choked square, is indissolubly linked with the events
of July 14, 1789, when the Bastille prison fortress was stormed, triggering the French
Revolution and the end of feudalism in Europe. Bastille Day (July 14) is celebrated
throughout France and the square is the scene of dancing and partying on the evening
of July 13. The prison itself no longer stands – its only visible remains have been
transported to square Henri-Galli at the end of boulevard Henri-IV. A Société Générale
bank is situated on the site of the prison and the place de la Bastille is where the                                                      7
fortress’s ramparts would have been.

Opéra Bastille
Place de la Bastille, 11e • W operadeparis.fr • M Bastille
The Bicentennial of the French Revolution in 1989 was marked by the inauguration of
a new opera house on place de la Bastille, the Opéra Bastille, one of François
Mitterrand’s pet projects. It ﬁlls almost the entire block between rues de Lyon,
Charenton and Moreau. One critic described it as a “hippopotamus in a bathtub”, and
you can see his point. The architect, Uruguayan Carlos Ott, was concerned that his
design should not bring an overbearing monumentalism to place de la Bastille. The
diﬀerent depths and layers of the semicircular facade do give a certain sense of the
building stepping back, but self-eﬀacing it is not. With time, use and familiarity,
Parisians became reconciled to it, and today people happily sit on its steps, wander into
its shops and libraries, and camp out all night for the free performance on July 14.

Port de l’Arsenal
M Bastille
Just south of the place de la Bastille is the Port de l’Arsenal marina, occupying part of
what was once the moat around the Bastille. The Canal St-Martin starts here, ﬂowing
underneath the square and emerging much further north, just past place de la
République, a route plied by canal pleasure-boats run by Canauxrama (see p.342).
Some two hundred boats are moored up in the marina, and the landscaped banks, with
children’s playgrounds, make it quite a pleasant spot for a wander.
Maison Rouge
10 bd de la Bastille, 11e • Wed & Fri–Sun 11am–7pm, Thurs 11am–9pm • €8 • T 01 40 01 08 81, W lamaisonrouge.org • M Bastille/Quai
de la Rapée
One of the former industrial spaces bordering the port de l’Arsenal has been converted
into a light and spacious contemporary art gallery, called the Maison Rouge – Fondation
Antoine de Galbert. Founded in 2004 by collector Antoine de Galbert, the Maison
Rouge, which takes its name from the bright-red pavilion at the centre of the building,
holds changing exhibitions, either devoted to an individual artist or a private collection.
The presence of a branch of Rose Bakery here also makes it a nice place for a bite to eat.

East of place de la Bastille
Northeast of place de la Bastille, oﬀ rue de la Roquette, narrow, cobbled rue de Lappe
is a lively place at night, crammed with bars drawing a largely teenage and out-of-town
        RU E D E
            S TOURN E L L E S
                                                                                                                                                                                          LL E



RU E D
          U PA S
                                                                                                                                                                  DA I NE                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LLE                                                                                                                                                                          RUE



           RUE DES TOURN E L L E S
                                                                                                                           D                  RU E SE                                             PG                                                                           Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   la Bastille                                                          RY
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RUE
                                                                                                                         E VA R                                                                             TS



                                                       R. JEAN BEAUSIRE
       R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PGE ST AN TOI
 LE S D U E D E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ad                                                                                                                                          DE




                          MA
                         EB
                                                              L’AMEUBL EMENT
     RUE CHA LIG N
  RU
         ED
             EC                                                                                                                                                  Montgallet                                               RU
                     HA                                                                                                                                               T                                                        ED
                      RE
                                                                                                      NE
                                                                                                           T                                                    LLE
                          NT
    112     BASTILLE AND AROUND EAST OF PLACE DE LA BASTILLE

          crowd. At no. 32, Balajo is one remnant of a very Parisian tradition: the bals musettes,
          or music halls of 1930s gai Paris, established by the area’s large Auvergnat population
          and frequented between the wars by such luminaries as Piaf, Jean Gabin and Rita
          Hayworth. It was founded by one Jo de France, who introduced glitter and spectacle
          into what were then seedy gangster dives, enticing Parisians from the other side of the
          city to drink absinthe and savour the rue de Lappe lowlife. Parisians are still drawn here
          and to the bars on neighbouring streets, such as rue Daval to the north.
            Oﬀ rue Daval, on the left as you walk up from rue de la Lappe, is charming little
          pedestrianized cour Damoye, a narrow cobbled street formerly lined with furniture
          workshops and now mostly inhabited by architects’ studios, design shops and the
          fragrant Brûlerie Daval coﬀee merchant. Other streets worth exploring are the nearby
          section of rue de Charonne, home to fashion boutiques and wacky interior designers,
          and rue Keller, clustered with alternative, hippie outﬁts, indie record stores and young
          fashion designers.

7         Ste-Marguerite
          36 rue St-Bernard, 11e • Mon–Sat 8am–noon & 3–7.30pm, Sun 8.30am–noon & 5–7.30pm • Free • M Charonne
          South of rue de Charonne, between rue St-Bernard and impasse Charrière, stands the
          rustic-looking church of Ste-Marguerite, with a garden dedicated to the memory of
          Raoul Nordling, the Swedish consul who persuaded the retreating Germans not to
          blow up Paris in 1944. The church itself was built in 1624 to accommodate the
          growing local population, which was about 40,000 in 1710 and 100,000 in 1900. The
          sculptures on the transept pediments were carved by its ﬁrst full-blown parish priest.
          The inside of the church is wide-bodied, low and quiet, with a distinctly rural feel. The
          stained-glass windows record a very local history: the visit in 1802 of Pope Pius VII,
          who was in Paris for Napoleon’s coronation; the miraculous cure of a Madame
          Delafosse in the rue de Charonne in 1725; the fatal wounding of Monseigneur Aﬀre,
          the archbishop of Paris, in the course of a street battle in the faubourg in 1848; the
          murder of sixteen Carmelite nuns at the Barrière du Trône in 1794; and the quartier’s
          dead of World War I. In the now disused cemetery of Ste-Marguerite lies the body of
          Louis XVII, the 10-year-old heir of the guillotined Louis XVI, who died in the Temple
          prison (see box, p.104). The cemetery also received the dead from the Bastille prison.

          Rue de la Roquette
          M Bastille/Voltaire
          Running parallel to rue de Charonne is rather scruﬀy rue de la Roquette, home to
          cheap and cheerful shops, Turkish restaurants and local bars. Towards its eastern end is

              THE COLONNE DE JUILLET
              A gleaming gold statue, a winged ﬁgure of Liberty, stands atop the bronze Colonne de Juillet
              at the centre of place de la Bastille. The plinth on which it stands was once intended to hold
              quite a diﬀerent monument – Napoleon had wanted a giant elephant fountain to stand here,
              with a spiral staircase inside one leg and viewing platform on top. The project never came to
              fruition, but the full-scale model that was made became a curiosity in its own right and stood
              for a while near the Gare de Vincennes (Gavroche in Victor Hugo’s Les Misérables sought shelter
              in it). After 35 years it was sold for 3833 francs. The same architect (Jean-Antoine Alavoine) who
              had worked on the elephant built the present column, which was erected to commemorate
              the July Revolution of 1830, replacing the autocratic Charles X with the “Citizen King”
              Louis-Philippe. When Louis-Philippe ﬂed in the more signiﬁcant 1848 Revolution, his throne
              was burnt beside the column and a new inscription added. Four months later, the workers
              again took to the streets. All of eastern Paris was barricaded, with the ﬁercest ﬁghting on rue du
              Faubourg-St-Antoine, until the rebellion was quelled with the usual massacres and deportation
              of survivors. The square is still an important rallying point for political protest.
                                    THE PROMENADE PLANTÉE AND AROUND BASTILLE AND AROUND       113

square de la Roquette, the site of an old prison, where four thousand members of the
Resistance were incarcerated in 1944. The low, forbidding gateway on rue de la
Roquette has been preserved in their memory.

Faubourg-St-Antoine
M Bastille/Ledru-Rollin/Faidherbe Chaligny
After Louis XI licensed the establishment of craftsmen in the ﬁfteenth century, the rue
du Faubourg-St-Antoine, running east from place de la Bastille, became the principal
working-class quartier of Paris, cradle of revolutions and mother of street-ﬁghters.
From its beginnings, the principal trade associated with it has been furniture-making,
and this was where the classic styles of French furniture – Louis XIV, Louis XV, Second
Empire – were developed. There are still quite a few furniture shops on the street, and a
number of workshops, as well as related trades such as inlayers, stainers and polishers,
still inhabit the maze of interconnecting yards and passages that run oﬀ the faubourg,
especially at the western end. One of the most attractive courtyards is at no. 56, the
cour du Bel Air, with its lemon trees, and ivy- and rose-covered buildings.                          7
Place de la Nation
M Nation
Rue du Faubourg-St-Antoine leads eastwards to place de la Nation. The place is adorned
with the Triumph of the Republic, a monumental bronze group topped with a stately
female ﬁgure personifying the Republic. To the east, framing the avenue du Trône, are
two tall Doric columns, surmounted by statues of medieval monarchs, looking very
small and insigniﬁcant. During the Revolution, when the old name of place du Trône
became place du Trône-Renversé (“the overturned throne”), more people were
guillotined here than on the more notorious execution site of place de la Concorde.

Marché d’Aligre
M Ledru-Rollin
South of rue du Faubourg-St-Antoine is the Marché d’Aligre, a lively, raucous market,
held every morning except Monday, and particularly animated on Saturdays and
Sundays. The square itself is given over to clothes and bric-a-brac stalls, selling anything
from old gramophone players to odd bits of crockery. There’s also a covered food market
with traditional fromageries and charcuteries, plus more unusual stalls such as Sur les
Quais, selling numerous varieties of olive oil. It’s along the adjoining rue d’Aligre,
however, where the market really comes to life, with the vendors, many of Algerian
origin, doing a frenetic trade in fruit and veg. As the market winds down, you could
follow the locals to the old-fashioned Le Baron Rouge wine bar (see p.280) for a glass of
wine and some saucisson, or drink in the North African atmosphere at the Ruche à Miel
café (see p.280) at 19 rue d’Aligre and order some mint tea with sticky cakes. Before
leaving the area it’s also worth taking a look at the old-style boulangerie on the corner of
rues Charenton and Emilio-Castelar, with its beautiful painted glass panels, the queue of
shoppers outside testifying to the excellence of its bread and pâtisseries.

The Promenade Plantée and around
M Bastille/Ledru-Rollin
The Promenade Plantée, also known as the Coulée Verte, is an excellent way to see a
little-visited part of the city – and from an unusual angle. This disused railway viaduct,
part of the old Paris–Cherbourg line, has been ingeniously converted into an elevated
walkway and planted with a profusion of trees and ﬂowers – cherry trees, maples,
limes, roses and lavender.
  The walkway starts near the beginning of avenue Daumesnil, just south of the Bastille
opera house, and is reached via a ﬂight of stone steps – or lifts – with a number of
    114     BASTILLE AND AROUND BERCY

          similar access points further along. It takes you to the Parc de Reuilly, then descends to
          ground level and continues as far as the périphérique, from where you can walk to the
          Bois de Vincennes. The whole walk is around 4.5km long, but if you don’t feel like
          doing the entire thing you could just walk the ﬁrst part, along the viaduct – a twenty-
          minute stroll – which also happens to be the most attractive stretch, running past
          venerable old mansion blocks and giving you a bird’s-eye view of the street below. Small
          architectural details such as decorative mouldings and elaborate wrought-iron balconies
          that you wouldn’t normally notice at street level come to light – the oddest sight is the
          series of caryatids adorning the police station at the end of avenue Daumesnil.

          Viaduc des Arts
          M Bastille/Gare de Lyon/Ledru-Rollin
          Underneath the Promenade Plantée, the red-brick arches of the viaduct itself have been
          converted into attractive spaces for artisans’ studios and craft shops, collectively known
          as the Viaduc des Arts. The workshops house a wealth of creativity: furniture and
7         tapestry restorers, interior designers, cabinet-makers, violin- and ﬂute-makers,
          embroiderers, and fashion and jewellery designers.

          Jardin de Reuilly
          M Montgallet/Dugommier
          The Viaduc des Arts ends around halfway down avenue Daumesnil, but the Promenade
          Plantée continues, taking you to the Jardin de Reuilly, an old freight station, now an
          inviting, circular expanse of lawn, popular with picnickers on sunny days, and bordered
          by terraces and arbours. The open-air café here makes a good refreshment stop if you’re
          walking the length of the promenade. You can also choose to bypass the park altogether
          by taking the gracefully arching wooden footbridge that spans it.

          Allée Vivaldi to the boulevard périphérique
          Towards the eastern end of the Promenade Plantée walkway is the nondescript allée
          Vivaldi, lined with modern blocks. Next, you go through a tunnel to emerge in the old
          railway cutting, a delightful stretch that meanders through a canopy of trees and
          ﬂowers below street level. At this point the path divides into two – one for pedestrians,
          the other for cyclists – landscaped all along, taking you through a series of ivy-draped
          ex-railway tunnels and shadowing the rue du Sahel for most of the way. The walk ends
          at the boulevard périphérique. From here you’re not far from the Porte Dorée métro
          station and the Porte Dorée entrance to the Bois de Vincennes. A pathway to the right
          takes you behind a sports stadium (with the périphérique on your left). The path turns
          into rue Edouard Lartet, then rue du Général Archinard. At the end of this turn left
          into avenue du Général Messimy, which leads into the main avenue Daumesnil; the
          métro station is to the right and entrance to the bois to the left.

          Bercy
          The former warehouse district of Bercy, along the Seine east of the Gare de Lyon, has been
          transformed recently by a series of ambitious and ultramodern developments designed to
          complement the grand-scale “Paris Rive Gauche” project (see p.178) on the opposite bank.

          Ministère des Finances
          139 rue de Bercy, 12e • M Bercy
          As you emerge from Bercy métro station, the ﬁrst thing you notice is the imposing bulk
          of the Ministère des Finances, constructed in 1990 to house the treasury staﬀ after they
          had ﬁnally agreed to move out of the Richelieu wing of the Louvre. Housing some 4700
          employees, it stretches like a giant loading bridge from above the river (where higher
          bureaucrats and ministers arrive by boat) to rue de Bercy, a distance of around 400m.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BERCY BASTILLE AND AROUND                                                                                                             115

  Parc de Bercy
  Maison du Jardinage March–Oct Tues–Fri 1–5.30pm, Sat & Sun 1–6.30pm; Nov–Feb Tues–Sat 1–5.30pm • Free • M Bercy
  Southeast of the Ministère des Finances squats the charmless Palais Omnisports de Paris
  Bercy. Built in 1983, its concrete bunker frame clad with grass covers a vast arena used
  for sporting and cultural events (see p.349). Beyond it, the area that used to house the
  old Bercy warehouses, where for centuries the capital’s wine supplies were unloaded
  from river barges, is now the extensive Parc de Bercy. Here, the French formal garden
  has been given a modern twist with geometric lines and grid-like ﬂowerbeds, but it also
  cleverly incorporates elements of the old warehouse site such as disused railway tracks
  and cobbled lanes. The western section of the park is a fairly unexciting expanse of
   PLACE
   HENRI                                                            OT
                                                              UIN
  FRESNAY                                              R AG
                                              PGE                                                    S                                        Pr                                                                                                                                                                               St-Eloi
 Gare                                                                                         BOI                                               om
de Lyon                                                                                G AT                                                         en
                                                        PLACE                   PGE
            RU                                         RUTEBEUF
                 ED
                                Palais Omnisports
              François
             Mitterand
                                                                          RU                                                                      SO   R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BERCY
    116     BASTILLE AND AROUND VINCENNES

          grass with a huge stepped fountain (popular with children) set into one of the grassy
          banks, but the area east has arbours, rose gardens, lily ponds, an orangerie and a Maison
          du Jardinage, a garden exhibition centre, where you can consult gardening books and
          magazines and visit the adjoining greenhouse and vegetable garden.

          Cinémathèque
          51 rue de Bercy, 12e • Museum Mon, Wed–Sat noon–7pm, Sun 10am–8pm • €5, free Sun 10am–1pm • T 01 71 19 33 33,
          W cinematheque.fr • M Bercy
          Of the new buildings surrounding the Parc du Bercy, the most striking, on the north
          side, is the Cinémathèque. Designed by Guggenheim architect Frank Gehry, it’s
          constructed from zinc, glass and limestone and resembles a falling pack of cards
          – according to Gehry, the inspiration was Matisse’s collages, created “with a simple pair
          of scissors”. Its huge archive of ﬁlms dates back to the earliest days of cinema, and
          regular retrospectives of French and foreign ﬁlms are screened in its four cinemas. It
          also has an engaging museum tracing the history of cinema, with lots of early cinematic
7         equipment, magic lanterns, silent-ﬁlm clips and costumes including outﬁts from
          Eisenstein’s Ivan the Terrible. On the upper ﬂoor, the Galerie des Donateurs focuses on
          recent acquisitions; the 2013 exhibition was devoted to Michel Carné.

          Cour St-Emilion
          M Cour-St-Emilion
          A little east of the Cinémathèque, arched footbridges take you over the busy rue Kessel
          into the eastern extension of the park and the adjoining Bercy Village, the hub of which is
          the Cour St-Emilion, a pedestrianized, cobbled street lined with former wine warehouses
          that have been stylishly converted into shops, restaurants and wine bars. These are popular
          places to come before or after a ﬁlm at the giant Bercy multiplex at the eastern end of the
          street, particularly on Sundays when shops in most other areas of Paris are closed.

          Musée des Arts Forains
          53 av des Terroirs-de-France, 12e • Daily 90min tours to be booked in advance by phone • €14, children €5 • T 01 43 40 16 15, W arts-
          forains.com • M Cour-St-Emilion
          A set of old stone wine warehouses houses the privately owned funfair museum, the Musée
          des Arts Forains, with its collection of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century funfair rides
          (which you can try out), fairground music and Venetian carnival rooms. It’s only open to
          groups, though individuals can join a tour (in French, 90min) if they book in advance.

          Vincennes
          Beyond the 12e arrondissement, across the boulevard périphérique, lies the Bois de
          Vincennes, the largest green space that the city has to oﬀer aside from the Bois de
          Boulogne in the west. The main draw is the Parc Floral, an attractive park with an
          adventure playground. To the east the Cartoucherie de Vincennes, an old ammunitions
          factory, is home to four theatre companies, including the radical Théâtre du Soleil (see
          opposite), while bordering the Bois to the north stands the Château de Vincennes, the
          country’s only surviving medieval royal residence. West of the Bois de Vincennes is the Cité
          Nationale de l’Histoire de l’Immigration, devoted to the history of immigration in France.

          Bois de Vincennes
          M Porte-Dorée/Porte-de-Charenton/Château-de-Vincennes; buses #46 and #86
          The extensive Bois de Vincennes was once a royal hunting ground roamed by deer;
          nowadays, unfortunately, it’s crisscrossed with roads, but it does have some pleasant
          corners, including the Parc Floral and the two lakes. The sights are quite a long
          distance from each other, so you may want to target one or two, or you could pick up
          a Vélib’ bike (see p.28) from near the entrance to the Parc Floral.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VINCENNES BASTILLE AND AROUND                                                                                                                                                         117

                  Parc Floral
                  Bois de Vincennes • Daily 9.30am–8pm, winter till dusk • Free except June–Sept Wed, Sat & Sun, when entry is €5.50 •
                  W parcﬂoraldeparis.com • M Château-de-Vincennes, then bus #112 or a short walk
                  If you’ve only got a limited amount of time in the Bois de Vincennes, make for the
                  Parc Floral, just behind the Château de Vincennes. This is one of the best gardens in
                  Paris – ﬂowers are always in bloom in the Jardin des Quatre Saisons, and you can
                  picnic beneath pines, then wander through camellias, rhododendrons, cacti, ferns,
                  irises and bonsai trees. Between April and September there are art and horticultural
                  exhibitions in several pavilions, free jazz and classical concerts, and numerous activities
                  for children including a mini-golf course studded with mini Parisian monuments.
                  The lakes and around
                  For a lazy afternoon in the park, you could go boating on the Lac Daumesnil, near the
                  Porte Dorée entrance, or feed the ducks on the Lac des Minimes (bus #112 from
                  Vincennes métro), on the other side of the wood. North of the Lac Daumesnil, at 53
                  av de St-Maurice, is the city’s largest zoo, which is scheduled to reopen in 2014.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                    The fenced enclave on the southern side of Lac Daumesnil harbours a Buddhist
                  centre (T 01 43 41 54 48) with Tibetan temple, Vietnamese chapel and international
                  pagoda, all occasionally visitable. As far as real woods go, the Bois comes into its own
                  once you’re east of avenue de St-Maurice. Boules competitions are popular – there’s
                  usually a collection of devotees between route de la Tourelle and avenue du Polygone.


                                                                                                                AV. JOFFRE
         COU RS DES
       Porte de



  AVE NU E DE
                              DT MA ND E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Château de                                                      AV E N U E D
           UD NE TT ER
       DR AR NO
                                                            I’Immigration
                                                                                       IL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E    MAN
                                                             & Aquarium            ESN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MP D
  Porte-Dorée                                                                  AUM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U CHA
                                                                          UE D                 AV E N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RTE D




                          RU
            AL
       EL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E LL
 AV                             CH AR ENTO N  L E  P O N T                                                                                                                                                                              AV E N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 U      E DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
   .D
    118     BASTILLE AND AROUND VINCENNES

          Château de Vincennes
          Daily 10am–6pm, Sept–April till 5pm • €8.50 • T 01 48 08 31 20, W chateau-vincennes.fr • M Château-de-Vincennes
          On the northern edge of the Bois de Vincennes stands the Château de Vincennes,
          enclosed by an impressive defensive wall and surrounded by a (now empty) moat.
          France’s only surviving medieval royal residence was built by Charles V, and subsequently
          turned into a state prison, porcelain factory, weapons dump and military training school.
          It presents a rather austere aspect on ﬁrst sight, but is worth visiting for its beautiful,
          recently renovated Flamboyant-Gothic Chapelle Royale, completed in the mid-sixteenth
          century and decorated with superb Renaissance stained-glass windows. Nearby, in the
          renovated fourteenth-century donjon (keep), you can see some ﬁne vaulted ceilings and
          Charles V’s bedchamber, as well as graﬃti left by prisoners, whose number included the
          Marquis de Sade. The château fell into the hands of the English in the ﬁfteenth century
          and it was in Charles V’s bedchamber that Henry V of England died of dysentery.

          Cité Nationale de l’Histoire de l’Immigration
7         293 av Daumesnil, 12e • Tues–Fri 10am–5.30pm, Sat & Sun 10am–7pm • €6; aquarium €7, children €5 • T 01 53 59 58 60,
          W histoire-immigration.fr • M Porte-Dorée
          Just outside the Bois de Vincennes, across the way from the Porte Dorée entrance, a
          huge Art Deco building, the Palais de la Porte Dorée, houses the Cité Nationale de
          l’Histoire de l’Immigration, which examines the history of immigration to France over
          the last two centuries (around 15 million French citizens have foreign roots) through
          photos, artwork, multimedia displays and audio installations. The museum is located in
          a building erected for the 1931 Colonial Exhibition and sports a vast, somewhat
          dubious bas-relief illustrating the former French colonies. Artworks themed around
          immigrants’ struggles to integrate into French society and images of vehicles loaded
          with possessions arriving at the border are among the thought-provoking exhibits.
