Chapter 10: The Eiffel Tower quarter

The Eiﬀel Tower quarter
Standing sentinel over a great bend in the Seine as it ﬂows southwest out
of Paris is the monumental ﬂagpole that is the Eiﬀel Tower. It surveys the
most relentlessly splendid of all Paris’s districts, embracing the palatial
heights of the Trocadéro, on the Right Bank, and the wealthy, western
swathe of the 7e (septième) arrondissement, on the Left. These are street
vistas planned for sheer magniﬁcence: as you look out across the river from
the terrace of the Palais de Chaillot to the Eiﬀel Tower and the huge Ecole
Militaire, or let your gaze run from the ornate Pont Alexandre III past the
parliament building to the vast Hôtel des Invalides, you are experiencing
city design on a truly monumental scale.
 148     THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER THE EIFFEL TOWER AND AROUND

       The quarter is home chieﬂy to diplomats, government oﬃcials and aristocrats, both
       old-school and new. It’s here that the Prime Minister has his well-guarded oﬃcial
       residence, the Hôtel Matignon, with its giant garden stretching south as far as rue de
       Babylone. Unsurprisingly, it is pretty dead in terms of shops and restaurants, but it is
       studded with some compelling museums, from the stunningly designed new one
       devoted to “primitive” art at quai Branly, down to another dedicated to Paris’s sewer
       system – found, appropriately enough, down in the sewers. In the heart of the septième,
       the imposing Hôtel des Invalides houses the French army’s vast war museum, centred on
10     the tomb of the still-idolized little general, Napoleon. The Musée Rodin, nearby, shows
       oﬀ the sculptor’s works in the intimate surroundings of a handsome private hôtel, or
       mansion house. Just across the river, in the Trocadéro quarter of the 16e arrondissement,
       you’ll ﬁnd a pocket of ﬁne museums specializing in Asian Buddhist art, fashion and
       architecture, along with two of the most exciting art museums in the city: the Palais de
       Tokyo’s galleries of Parisian modern art and contemporary French artworks.
         For all the pomp, there are some appealing little neighbourhoods, notably in the wedge
       of homely streets centred on the rue Cler market and in the arrondissement’s eastern
       fringe, towards the 6e. Note, however, that this easternmost end of the 7e – including the
       Musée d’Orsay and the shopping area around rue du Bac and the Sèvres-Babylone métro
       – belongs more in feel to the St-Germain quarter (see pp.133–146).

       The Eiﬀel Tower and around
       Daily: mid-June to Aug 9am–12.45am; Sept to mid-June 9.30am–11.45pm; upward-bound lifts stop 45min before closing time, Sept
       to mid-June access to stairs closes 6pm; ticket sales for the top end at 10.30pm (or 11pm from mid-June to Aug) • Tickets €14.50 (for the
       top), €8.50 (second level); you can climb the stairs as far as the second level for €5, then buy a “supplément ascenseur” ticket to the top for
       a further €6; save queueing time by buying tickets online • W tour-eiﬀel.fr • RER Champ de Mars-Tour Eiﬀel
       It’s hard to believe that the Eiﬀel Tower, the quintessential symbol both of Paris and the
       brilliance of industrial engineering, was designed to be a temporary structure for a fair.
       Late nineteenth-century Europe had a taste for giant-scale, colonialist–capitalist
       extravaganzas, but Paris’s 1889 Exposition Universelle was particularly ambitious: at 300m,
       its tower was the tallest building ever yet built. Outraged critics protested against this
       “grimy factory chimney”. “Is Paris”, they asked, “going to be associated with the grotesque,
       mercantile imaginings of a constructor of machines?” Eiﬀel believed it was a piece of
       perfectly utilitarian architecture. “The basic lines of a structure must correspond precisely
       to its speciﬁed use,” he said. “To a certain extent the tower was formed by the wind itself.”

           MODERN ARCHITECTURE IN THE SEPTIÈME
           The septième is renowned for its grand state monuments and extravagant aristocratic
           mansions, which mostly date from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but you can
           also seek out a trio of the city’s most exciting Art Nouveau apartment buildings, the work of
           Jules Lavirotte at the turn of the nineteenth century. From the contemporary era, the Musée
           du Quai Branly is the most trumpeted representative, but hidden away nearby is a fascinating
           example of the postmodernist architecture of Christian de Portzamparc.

           29 avenue Rapp (RER Pont de l’Alma). Art Nouveau to the extreme, with colourful, glazed
           ceramic tiles and an extravagant doorway representing an inverted phallus inside a vulval arch.
           Designed by Jules Lavirotte in 1901.
           3 square Rapp Oﬀ avenue Rapp (RER Pont de l’Alma). More of Lavirotte’s extravagant Art
           Nouveau work, dating from 1900. There’s also a ﬁne trellis trompe l’oeil alongside.
           12 rue Sédillot (RER Pont de l’Alma). From the studio of Lavirotte in 1899, featuring Art
           Nouveau and Art Deco elements, with superb dormers and wrought-iron balconies.
           Conservatoire de Musique Erik Satie 7 rue Jean-Nicot (MInvalides). Architect Christian de
           Portzamparc plays with a half-peeled tube of a tower in this building dating from 1988.
                                                       MUSÉE DU QUAI BRANLY THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER                       149

  Curiously, this most celebrated of landmarks was only saved from demolition by the
sudden need for “wireless telegraphy” aerials in the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth
century, and nowadays the original crown is masked by an eﬄorescence of antennae.
The tower’s colour scheme has changed too: the early coats of deep red then canary-
yellow paint have been covered with a sober, dusty brown since the late 1960s. The
only structural maintenance it has ever needed was carried out in the 1980s, when one
thousand tonnes of metal were removed to make the tower ten percent lighter, and the
frame was readjusted to remove a slight warp.
   Paris looks surreally microscopic from the top and the views are arguably better from                                     10
the second level, especially on hazier days. But there’s something irresistible about taking
the lift all the way up. At the very top, you can peer through a window into Eiﬀel’s airy
little show-oﬀ study, while at the second level is the gastronomic restaurant, Jules Verne
(see p.287). Many visitors overlook the ﬁrst level, but a major new renovation, due for
completion in 2014, should make it more appealing, particularly as part of the ﬂoor is
being replaced by glass, aﬀording dizzying views of the structure below.
  Outside daylight hours, sodium lights illuminate the main structure, while twin
xenon arc-lamps, added for the millennium celebrations, have turned the tower into an
oversized urban lighthouse. There’s also a third lighting system: for the ﬁrst ten minutes
of every hour thousands of lamps scramble about the structure, deﬁning the famous
silhouette in luminescent champagne.

The Champ de Mars
Parading back from the Eiﬀel Tower, the Champ de Mars has been an open ﬁeld ever since
it was used as a mustering ground for royal troops – hence the name “Martial Field”. After
1789 it became the venue for the great revolutionary fairs, including Robespierre’s vast
“Fête of the Supreme Being” in 1794, while the Second Empire turned it into a giant
industrial exhibition area, which explains the location of the Eiﬀel Tower. It’s now a
popular place for sunbathing on hot days. At the far southern end lie the eighteenth-
century buildings of the Ecole Militaire, originally founded in 1751 by Louis XV for the
training of aristocratic army oﬃcers – including the “little corporal”, Napoleon Bonaparte.

The UNESCO building
7 place de Fontenoy, 7e • Book guided tours in advance on E visits@unesco.org; ID required for visit • M Ecole Militaire
The quartier surrounding the Ecole Militaire is expensive, elegant and classic, and the
Y-shaped UNESCO building is the controversial exception. Built in reinforced concrete
in 1958 by, appropriately, an international team, it houses artworks by Giacometti,
Calder, Le Corbusier, Miró and Picasso, as well as the so-called “Nagasaki angel” – a
rare survivor of the atomic atrocities of August 1945. You can join a guided tour of the
building if you book by email in advance and bring ID. Alternatively, come for one of
the regular exhibitions or evening concerts, which range from “Colours and
Impressions of Albania” to Tchaikovsky dances.
  Behind UNESCO, the avenue de Saxe continues the grand line southeast towards the
giant Necker hospital, passing through the place de Breteuil, a huge roundabout – even by
Parisian standards – centred on a monument to Louis Pasteur, the much-loved inventor of
pasteurization. His role as a hero who saved millions of lives is represented by the Grim
Reaper cowering beneath him, while healthy lambs and children gambol all around.

Musée du Quai Branly
37 quai Branly, 7e • Tues, Wed & Sun 11am–7pm, Thurs–Sat 11am–9pm • €8.50 • T 01 56 61 70 00, W quaibranly.fr •
M Iéna/RER Pont de l’Alma
A short distance upstream of the Eiﬀel Tower, the brash Musée du Quai Branly cuts a
postmodern swathe along the riverbank. It’s well worth visiting for Jean Nouvel’s
exciting architectural design alone, which plays with the divide between structure and
                                                                                                                                             DE
                                                                                                                                                LO N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Galeries du                                                   Musée de                                                                     RUE L. REYNAUD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AVENUE GEORGE V
                                                                                                                                                     GCH                                                                                                                                    Panthéon                                                     la Mode                                                                    RU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EF
                                                                                                                                                         AM
                             AV EN UE
                                RAYM ON
                        'EY
          EL
 RU
                        SP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EN                                         LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            QU                                                                                                                                                                                                       UR                                                  NE
                                                                                                            PORT DE
                   GE                                         BIR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L
           OR
                                                                  HA                                                                                                                                                                                              UE                    R.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ET                                                                               UE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AV EN UE
       GE
 VO
                         ED
                              ES                                                                                       la Culture du                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HA
                    LE                                                                                                     Japon                                                                                                                                 U         CO                                                                                                                                                                                                       NU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EC
                   AL
      DE
           GR
                               THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER
          REINE ASTRID                                                                        COURS ALBERT 1ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COURS LA REINE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PLACE DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CANADA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PONT ALEXAN DRE III
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PORT DES CHAMPSELYS EES                                                                                                                                         Port des



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PONT DES INVALIDES
                                            PORT DE LA CONFERENCE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Champs-Elysées
  Port de la
 Conférence

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PORT DES INVALIDES
                                                                                     PORT DU GROS CAILLOU
      Musée des Egouts
         de Paris/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Q U A I D ’O R S AY
      Sewers entrance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PLACE DE FINLANDE




                                                                                                                                                                           RUE HENRI MOISSAN
                  Q U A I D ’ O R S AY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Invalides




                             RUE DE L’UNIVERSITE
                                                                                                                                                        N ICO                                                                                                                                                                                             R UE DE L’UNIVERSITE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F
                                                                                                                                                          T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RUE DE L’UN IVER SITE
                             A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IENI
                      PA S S


  AV E N
VAL ENT IN
                                                                              RE V
              BOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RU E DE LA



                   QUE
       LO G
                         T
         DE L
          GRO
              S                                                                                                            RUE C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Maubourg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ELL
                                                                                                     RUE V
                                                                                     A                                                                                                                             SQUARE DE LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
      DU U                                                                    PA S S                                         LER                  IE R                        N ES T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Musée de
R U E A IL LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TOUR MAUBOURG
                                                                                  GE D                      A LA D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l’Armée
                                                            AV E N
                                                                                                                                                                                         P SI CH
     C
                                                                                                              ON
                                LE                                                   E L’ U


    RU
         ED
            E   GR
                      EN
                           EL


                           DE
                                 BR                                                                         PGE                                                                                                           RU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EL
                      AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 . CODET
                   GN


           AV
                                      EN                                                     DE L’ECOLE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Eglise
    RU
       ES
                                                                 Y



     JOFFRE                                EP
                      DE
              UE                                                                                                                                                                                                   ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AL                                                                                                                                                                        Français
           EN                                                                                                                                                                                                     WE
       AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SE                SEG LA DE




 AV
 152     THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER MUSÉE DES EGOUTS DE PARIS


           BERGES DE SEINE: RECLAIMING THE RIVER
           As part of Mayor Delanoë’s pledge to reclaim the Seine for Parisians (see p.379), one of the most
           scenic stretches of the river, between the Musée du Quai Branly and Musée d’Orsay, is now
           pedestrianized. What was once a noisy traﬃc-choked road is now an attractive, lively
           promenade (W lesberges.paris.fr), where you can eat out on a sunny terrace, listen to occasional
           concerts, play a game of chess over a cup of coﬀee or simply relax in a deckchair and enjoy
           some of the best views the city has to oﬀer. One of the features of the design is that in the event
10         of a ﬂood warning everything can be dismantled within 24 hours, even the grand set of steps
           (known as the “emmarchement”) giving access to the quai from the Musée d’Orsay. The
           promenade also has an athletics track, a ﬁtness course and a zen space where you might be
           oﬀered a massage or join a tai chi class. Children (and adults) can draw on a huge slate wall with
           chunky chalks, and there’s a kids’ play area with climbing wall and a tepee village. If you fancy
           staking out a piece of the Seine all for yourself, you can book for free one of four bright-blue
           cabins, called Zzzzs; they’re available for ninety-minute slots and you even get your own little
           terrace and garden. Near the Pont de l’Alma are ﬁve ﬂoating gardens, each on a diﬀerent theme:
           one is an “orchard” planted with apple trees, for example, another has an aviary and one has
           games for children. Picnic tables are dotted all along the promenade, and a number of
           restaurants are busily installing themselves, some on barges moored alongside the riverbank.



       outside world. Fronting the riverbank is a tall glass wall, which turns the glorious,
       half-wild garden into a half-indoor space. Elsewhere, there’s a huge, living “green wall”.
       The building itself curls on stilts, its brightly coloured panels revealing sudden cavities
       or box-like swellings that pop outwards from the skin of the structure.
         Parisians have taken to Nouvel’s design, but the museum is more controversial. It was
       the pet project of former president Jacques Chirac, who has a passion for non-Western
       art, or what was once called Arts Premiers – “Primitive Art”. Inside the museum, folk
       artefacts (from every part of the world except Europe and North America) are arranged
       by their place of origin. As if to emphasize some sort of ethnic spookiness, you follow a
       trail in semi-darkness on blood-red ﬂooring between curving “mud” walls in brown
       leather, while screens show ﬁlm footage collected in the ﬁeld by anthropologists. The
       actual artefacts, or artworks, are stunning. Even if their original contexts aren’t always
       made clear, it’s hard not to be moved by the potency and craftsmanship of – to pick a
       few examples – Papua New Guinean full-body masks, Aboriginal Australian
       dot-paintings, exquisite Indonesian gold jewellery, or man-sized wooden statues of the
       spirits of god-kings from Abomey, in West Africa.

       Musée des Egouts de Paris
       Quai d’Orsay, 7e • Entrance on northeast side of place de la Résistance • Sat–Wed: May–Sept 11am–5pm; Oct–April 11am–4pm • €4.30 •
       T 01 53 68 27 81 • M Alma-Marceau/RER Pont de l’Alma
       The chief attraction of the Musée des Egouts de Paris, or Sewers Museum, is that it’s
       actually in the sewers. The main part of the visit runs along a gantry walk poised
       alarmingly above a main sewer. It’s dark, damp and noisy with gushing water, but not
       as smelly as you might fear. A good companion guide might be Victor Hugo’s Les
       Misérables: he turns the history of the sewer system – “a dread sink-hole which bears
       the traces of the revolutions of the globe as of the revolutions of man, and where are to
       be found vestiges of all cataclysms from the shells of the Deluge to the rag of Marat”
       – into a magniﬁcent lecture.
         The museum is more than half a publicity exercise by the sewage board. Bilingual
       displays of photographs, engravings, dredging tools, lamps and other ﬂotsam and
       jetsam turn the history of the city’s water supply and waste management into a
       fascinating topic, revealing how the natural water cycle was disrupted by the city’s
       dense population, then slowly controlled by increasingly good management. What it
                                                      THE INVALIDES QUARTER THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER                                  153

doesn’t say is that the work isn’t quite ﬁnished. Almost all the eﬄuent from the sewers
goes to the Achèves treatment plant, northwest of Paris, but several times a year parts of
the system get overloaded with rainwater, and excess – waste and all – has to be
emptied straight into the Seine.

The Invalides quarter
M /RER Invalides/La Tour-Maubourg
The broad green Esplanade des Invalides parades down from the Pont Alexandre III                                                        10
towards the resplendently gilded dome of the Hôtel des Invalides, home to the
Musée de l’Armee and Napoleon’s tomb. Despite its palatial appearance, it was
actually built for wounded soldiers in the reign of Louis XIV – whose foreign wars
gave the building a constant supply of residents and whose equestrian statue lords it
over a massive central arch. Architecturally, the building evokes a kind of barracks
version of the awesome spirit of Versailles, stripped of ﬁner ﬂourishes – other than
the gilded dome – but crushingly grand nonetheless. Even the cobbles on the
esplanade seem made for giants’ feet. You’ll ﬁnd muscularity of a more stirring kind
in the Musée Rodin, which brings the sculptor’s greatest works under the roof of a
ﬁne Parisian mansion.

Musée de l’Armée
51 bd de La Tour-Maubourg, 7e • April–Sept daily 10am–6pm, Tues till 9pm; Oct–March daily 10am–5pm; closed ﬁrst Mon of each
month, except July–Sept • €9.50; ticket also valid for Napoleon’s tomb (see p.154) • T 01 44 42 38 77, W invalides.org • M La Tour-
Maubourg/Varenne
Les Invalides today houses the vast Musée de l’Armée, the national war museum. The
moat around the whole Invalides complex means you can only approach from the
north or south ends of the building; the ticket oﬃce is in the southwest wing, where it
faces in towards the Eglise du Dôme.
Antique arms to Napoléon III
The northern half of the museum, on either side of the front court, is a relatively
traditional display of uniforms and weaponry. In the west wing, the lofty old
refectory and arsenal have been ﬁlled with a staggering array of medieval and
Renaissance weaponry and armour, including the extraordinary mail made for
François I, a big man for his time, and a chamber of beautifully worked Oriental
arms and armour. The east wing, covering 1643 to 1871, is relatively dreary, apart
from the glossy Ingres portrait of Napoleon on his throne and the room devoted to
the little emperor’s personal eﬀects – notably his campaign bed and trademark hat
and coat. The collection of super-scale models of French ports and fortiﬁed cities in
the Musée des Plans-Reliefs, on the top ﬂoor, is surprisingly engaging, however.
Essentially giant three-dimensional maps, they were created to plan defences and plot
artillery positions from the late seventeenth century. With the eerie green glow of
their landscapes only just illuminating the long, tunnel-like attic, the eﬀect is rather
chilling. All that’s missing is a few miniature armies.
The World Wars
The “modern” section of the museum pushes the ultra-traditionalist view of modern
French history: that, after a seventy-year struggle with the German aggressor, la Patrie
ﬁnally emerged victorious. The area covering 1871 to World War I focuses more on
maps, uniforms and strategy. The horrors – ten million dead soldiers, 1.37 million of
them French – are only really represented by the gas shells, machine guns and grenades
that killed them. The section on World War II is much more excitingly presented. War,
resistance and liberation are reconstructed using clever memorabilia and gripping ﬁlm
reels (most of which have an English-language option). You leave shocked, stirred, and
 154     THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER THE INVALIDES QUARTER


           BONAPARTE’S BONES
           In 2002 a French historian asked for Napoleon’s ashes to be exhumed for DNA testing,
           claiming that the remains had been swapped for those of his maître d’hôtel on St Helena, one
           Jean-Baptiste Cipriani. Apparently, a witness at the original 1821 burial observed that the great
           man’s teeth were “most villainous”, whereas at the exhumation it was reported that they were
           “exceptionally white”. There is some reason for suspicion, as the last round of tests – on a lock
           of the emperor’s hair – suggested he had died of arsenic poisoning, not cancer, as the British
10         claimed. Some said the traces were caused by the green – and therefore arsenic-laced
           – pigment in the imperial wallpaper, others that he was murdered by his captors. In 2008,
           however, the latter conspiracy theory was rebutted. Italian researchers found hairs from
           Napoleon’s boyhood home and compared them with others taken on Elba and on St Helena.
           The arsenic levels were found to be consistently high, not just in the ﬁnal sample; the British, it
           seems, were not as perﬁdious as all that.


       with the distinct impression that Général de Gaulle was personally responsible for the
       liberation of France – an impression that’s reinforced by the hagiographic Historial de
       Gaulle in the basement, an exhibition celebrating the man and his myth using
       ultra-high-tech audiovisuals and interactive screens.

       Eglise des Soldats
       Hôtel des Invalides • Daily 9.30am–5.30pm; closed ﬁrst Mon of each month • Free • M La Tour-Maubourg/Varenne
       At the core of the Invalides complex is a double church, built by Jules Hardouin-
       Mansart in the 1670s. The giant Eglise du Dôme, to the south, was formerly the
       Eglise Royale, intended for the private worship of Louis XIV and the royal family,
       while the relatively spartan northern section is known as the Eglise des Soldats. A
       glass wall divides the two churches, a design innovation which would have allowed
       worshippers to share the same high altar without the risk of coming into social contact.
       The door to the Soldiers’ Church (no ticket required) is in the main northern courtyard
       of Les Invalides. Inside it’s bright and airy, the high walls lined with almost a hundred
       banners captured by the French army over the centuries. The collection once numbered
       three thousand trophies at its peak, but was largely destroyed in 1817 by a governor of
       Les Invalides too proud to see them fall back into the hands of Napoleon’s triumphant
       enemies. A commemorative Mass is still said here on May 5, the anniversary of the
       emperor’s death.

       Eglise du Dôme
       Hôtel des Invalides • April–Sept daily 10am–6pm, Tues till 9pm; Oct–March daily 10am–5pm• €9.50; ticket also valid for the Musée de
       l’Armée (see p.153) • M La Tour-Maubourg/Varenne
       The Eglise du Dôme has a separate entrance on the south side of the complex. Unlike its
       northern twin, the Soldiers’ Church, it’s awesomely grand. Napoleon’s tomb, a mighty
       sarcophagus of deep red quartzite, is itself entombed in a giant circular pit, overlooked by
       guardian statues that represent his military victories. Friezes on the surrounding gallery
       parade the emperor’s civic triumphs, along with quotations of gigantic (and occasionally
       accurate) conceit such as “Wherever the shadow of my rule has fallen, it has left lasting
       traces of its value”. Napoleon’s shadow still fell heavily on Paris on December 14, 1840,
       the day on which his ashes, freshly returned from St Helena, were carried through the
       streets from the newly completed Arc de Triomphe to Invalides. Even though Louis-
       Philippe, a Bourbon, was on the throne, and Napoleon’s nephew, Louis-Napoléon, had
       been imprisoned for attempting a coup four months earlier, the Bonapartists came out in
       force – half a million of them – to watch the emperor’s last journey.
         More aﬀecting than Napoleon’s tomb is the simple memorial to Maréchal Foch,
       commander-in-chief of the allied forces at the end of World War I, which stands in the
       side chapel by the stairs leading down to the crypt. The marshal’s eﬃgy is borne by a
                                                     THE INVALIDES QUARTER THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER                                155

phalanx of bronze infantrymen displaying a soldierly grief, the whole chamber ﬂooded
by blue light from the stained-glass windows.

Musée Rodin
77 rue de Varenne, 7e • Daily except Mon: April–Sept 9.30am–5.45pm, garden closes 6.45pm; Oct–March 9.30am–4.45pm, garden closes
5pm • €6, garden only €1 • T 01 44 18 61 10, W musee-rodin.fr • M Varenne
The recently refurbished Musée Rodin has surely the loveliest setting of all Paris’s
museums: a superb, generously gardened eighteenth-century mansion which the
sculptor leased from the state in return for the gift of all his work upon his death.                                                10
Bronze versions of major projects like The Burghers of Calais, The Thinker and The
Gate of Hell are set among the grounds – the last forming the centrepiece of the
ornamental pond. There’s a pleasant outdoor café at the back and a collection of roses
at the front.
  Inside, the passionate intensity of the sculptures contrasts with the graceful wooden
panelling and chandeliers, while the many tarnished mirrors make the perfect foil for
Rodin’s theory of proﬁles, in which each sculpture is formed from a collection of views
from diﬀerent standpoints. The museum is usually crowded with visitors eager to see
much-loved works like The Kiss, which actually portrays Paolo and Francesca da
Rimini, from Dante’s Divine Comedy, in the moment before they were discovered and
murdered by Francesca’s husband. Contemporaries were scandalized by Francesca’s
distinctly active engagement; art critics today like to think of it as the last masterwork
of ﬁgurative sculpture before the whole art form was reinvented – largely by Rodin
himself. Paris’s Kiss is one of only four marble versions of the work. Don’t miss Paolo’s
ecstatically scrunched-up toes.
  It’s worth lingering over the museum’s vibrant, impressionistic clay works, small
studies that Rodin took from life. In fact, most of the works here are in clay or plaster,
as these are considered to be Rodin’s ﬁnest achievements – after completing his
apprenticeship, he rarely picked up a chisel, in line with the common nineteenth-
century practice of delegating the task of working up stone and bronze versions to
assistants. One room is devoted to Camille Claudel, Rodin’s pupil, model and lover.
Among her works is The Age of Maturity, symbolizing her ultimate rejection by Rodin,
and a bust of the artist himself.

La Pagode
57bis rue de Babylone, 7e • T 01 46 34 82 54, W etoile-cinemas.com • M St-François-Xavier
The Chinese-style roofs of La Pagode, overlooking the corner of rue Monsieur, were built
as a fashionable toy for the wife of a director of the Bon Marché department store, and
later turned into a historic cinema – in 1959 it premiered Cocteau’s Le Testament d’Orphée,
and, a year later, was one of the cinemas to ﬁrst screen the movies of the Nouvelle Vague.
Following a superb renovation, it is now once again one of the most enjoyable art-house
cinemas in the city, with its Art Deco-meets-Oriental decor and delightful garden.

Pont Alexandre III
M /RER Invalides
North of the Invalides complex, the eastern end of the quai d’Orsay opens out into a
grand esplanade. Parading across the river towards the giant conservatories of the
Grand and Petit Palais is the Pont Alexandre III. The vista here was so cherished that
when this bridge was built it was set as low as possible above the water so as not to get
in the way of the view. That said, it’s surely the most extravagant bridge in the city, its
single-span metal arch stretching 109m across the river. It was unveiled in 1900, just in
time for the Exposition Universelle, its name and elaborate decoration symbolizing
Franco–Russian friendship – an ever more important alliance in the face of fast-
growing German power. The nymph stretching out downstream represents the Seine,
matched by St Petersburg’s River Neva facing upstream.
 156     THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER THE TROCADÉRO QUARTER

       Quai d’Orsay
       To the west of the Pont Alexandre III, the pale neo-Gothic tower and copper spire of
       the American Church stand out on the quai d’Orsay. Together with the American
       College nearby at 31 av Bosquet, it plays a key role in the busy life of Paris’s large expat
       American community. News stories on French foreign policy use “the quai d’Orsay” to
       refer to the Ministère des Aﬀaires Etrangères (Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs), which sits
       next to the Esplanade des Invalides and the Palais Bourbon, home of the Assemblée
       Nationale. Napoleon, never a great one for democracy, had the riverfront facade of the
10     Palais Bourbon done to match the pseudo-Greek of the Madeleine. The result is an
       entrance that sheds little light on what’s happening within.

       Rue Cler
       M La Tour-Maubourg/Ecole Militaire
       An attractive, villagey wedge of early nineteenth-century streets huddles between avenue
       Bosquet and the Invalides, contrasting starkly with the grand austerity of much of the rest
       of the septième. At its heart is the market street rue Cler. It’s a well-to-do aﬀair – as much
       permanent delicatessens as fruit stalls on barrows – and the cross-streets, rue de Grenelle
       and rue St-Dominique, are full of classy boutiques, posh bistrots and little hotels.

       The Trocadéro quarter
       On the western side of the Eiﬀel Tower area, the Trocadéro quarter lies on the elevated
       northern bank of the Seine. The river forms little barrier to a visit, however, as there’s a
       picturesque above-ground métro line (line 6, which crosses the river on the Pont de
       Bir-Hakeim, oﬀering excellent views of the Eiﬀel Tower). The quartier is also connected
       to the septième by three ﬁne bridges: the businesslike Pont de l’Alma, the graceful
       Passerelle Debilly and the handsome Pont d’Iéna, which thrusts north as if from under
       the very legs of the Tower into the embrace of the breathtakingly ugly Palais de Chaillot.

       Palais de Chaillot
       1 place du Trocadéro et du 11 novembre, 16e • M Trocadéro
       The Palais de Chaillot stands on a site favoured by imperialist-minded rulers ever since
       Catherine de Médicis constructed one of her playpens here in the early sixteenth
       century. Napoleon planned (but never built) a palace here for his short-lived son, and,
       in 1878, an Oriental-style confection was erected (but soon after demolished). The
       current Modernist-Neoclassical monster went up in 1937 as part of the globalist-
       minded Exposition Universelle. Adorned as it is with heroic statues and symmetrical
       acres of marble paving, it would look less out of place in Fascist Rome than here, though
       the two curving wings do neatly embrace the shadow of the Eiﬀel Tower.
         Beneath the central terrace lies the Théâtre National de Chaillot, which stages diverse and
       usually radical productions; enter via the northern wing. Also below ground, but accessed
       from a ramp on the riverfront side of the palace is the Cinéaqua aquarium and cinema.
       Musée Nationale de la Marine
       Palais de Chaillot • Mon, Wed & Thurs 11am–6pm, Fri 11am–9.30pm, Sat & Sun 11am–7pm • €7 • T 01 53 65 69 69, W musee-marine
       .fr • M Trocadéro
       The southern wing of the Palais de Chaillot houses the rather specialized Musée
       Nationale de la Marine, which traces French naval history using model ships. It’s also
       home to the original Jules Verne trophy, awarded for nonstop round-the-world sailing
       – a hull-shaped streak of glass invisibly suspended by magnets within its cabinet.
       Cité de l’Architecture et du Patrimoine
       Palais de Chaillot • Mon, Wed & Fri–Sun 11am–7pm, Thurs 11am–9pm • €8 • T 01 58 51 52 00, W citechaillot.fr • M Trocadéro
       The splendid Cité de l’Architecture et du Patrimoine, a combined institute, library
                                                   THE TROCADÉRO QUARTER THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER                                        157

and museum of architecture, occupies the northern wing of the Palais de Chaillot.
The bedrock of the museum, the long and lofty Galerie des Moulages, on the
ground ﬂoor, displays giant plaster casts of sections of great French buildings. There
are entire portals from Romanesque cathedrals, Gothic windows, Renaissance tombs
and exact reproductions of the ﬁnest statuary in France. The casts date from an
earlier, nineteenth-century museum, and to see French architecture laid out as a
kind of grand historical panorama is as eye-opening now as it was for the original
curiosity-seekers.
  On the second ﬂoor, the Galerie d’Architecture Moderne et Contemporaine showcases                                                        10
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries with some stunning original architectural
models, and a full-size – and distinctly poky – reconstruction of an “E2 superior”
apartment from Le Corbusier’s Cité Radieuse, which you can actually walk around in.
This gallery oﬀers a fascinating lesson in the evolution of modern design, but more
wondrous is the Galerie des Peintures Murales et des Vitraux, which occupies the central
pavilion on the second and third ﬂoors. In the same spirit as the moulages gallery, it
displays life-size copies of French wall paintings, frescoes and stained glass. Its stunning
centrepiece is the lofty, Byzantine-style cupola from Cahors cathedral, but it’s well
worth penetrating deeper into the maze-like sequence of rooms as far as the
claustrophobic reconstruction of the Romanesque crypt of the church of Tavant, in the
Loire region, and heading up to the third ﬂoor for the terrifying sequence of medieval
Passions and Last Judgements. The library on the ﬁrst ﬂoor is also well worth visiting
for its copy of a Romanesque vault mural from the church of St-Savin-sur-Gartempe,
and the temporary exhibitions are generally excellent.

Musée National des Arts Asiatiques Guimet
6 place d’Iéna, 16e • Daily except Tues 10am–6pm • €7.50 • T 01 56 52 53 00, W guimet.fr • M Iéna
The Musée National des Arts Asiatiques Guimet winds round four ﬂoors groaning under
the weight of statues of Buddhas and gods, some ﬁerce, some meditative, all of them
dramatically displayed alongside ceramics, paintings and other objets d’art. Each room
is devoted to a diﬀerent country of origin, stretching from the Greek-inﬂuenced
Buddhist statues of the Gandhara civilization, on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, to ﬁerce demons from
Nepal and pot-bellied Chinese Buddhas. The highlight, however, is the breathtaking
roofed-in courtyard: it’s a perfectly airy space in which to show oﬀ the museum’s
world-renowned collection of Khmer sculpture – from the civilization that produced
Cambodia’s Angkor Wat. On the third ﬂoor is a rotunda used by the collection’s
founder, Emile Guimet, for the ﬁrst Buddhist ceremony ever held in France. A great
collector and patron of the arts, Guimet espoused the Christian-socialist-egalitarian
theories proposed by Fournier, Saint-Simon and, in Britain, Robert Owen.

Galeries du Panthéon Bouddhique
19 av d’Iéna, 16e • Daily except Tues 10am–5.45pm • Free • T 01 40 73 88 00, W guimet.fr/Pantheon-bouddhique • M Iéna
Emile Guimet’s original collection, which he brought back from his travels in Asia in
1876, is exhibited near the Musée Guimet in the Galeries du Panthéon Bouddhique.
While far smaller, in some ways it’s a more satisfying aﬀair than the larger museum, as the
gilded ranks of Buddhas are presented with a Buddhist’s eye rather than an art collector’s.
At the back is a small Japanese garden with bamboo, pussy willow and watery reﬂections.

Musée de la Mode
10 av Pierre 1er de Serbie, 16e • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm, Thurs till 9pm • Admission varies • T 01 56 52 86 00, W palaisgalliera.paris.fr •
M Iéna/Alma-Marceau
The rather exquisite and bizarrely Italianate bijoux box of the Palais Galliera was built
in the 1880s by the Duchesse de Galliera to house her private art collection. It now
belongs to the city, and is the home of the Musée de la Mode. The museum’s unrivalled
collection of historic and modern clothes and fashion accessories is exhibited in two or
 158     THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER THE PALAIS DE TOKYO AND AROUND

       three shows a year, with themes such as “Creating the Myth of Marlene Dietrich” or
       focusing on single designers. During changeovers the museum is closed.

       The Palais de Tokyo and around
       13 av du Président Wilson, 16e • M Iéna/Alma-Marceau
       The Palais de Tokyo houses two galleries of modern art, both of which are among the
       most rewarding in Paris, though they see fewer visitors than the Pompidou Centre. The
10     entrance to the palace is on its north side, but most people arrive across the Seine via
       the pedestrian Passerelle Debilly. Rather surprisingly, given its modern looks, this
       bridge is a contemporary of its near neighbour, the profoundly more ornate Pont
       Alexandre III – both were opened in 1900, in time for the Exposition Universelle. The
       Palais de Tokyo dates from a later exhibition, the tension-ﬁlled 1937 world fair, at
       which the German and Russian pavilions faced each other across the Seine in an
       architectural standoﬀ. Antoine Bourdelle’s bronze statue of “Eternal France”, which
       surveys the central terrace of the Tokyo building, is a living reminder of the fervid
       nationalism of those times. The palace was always intended to be a gallery of modern
       art, however, and most of its decoration takes a more consciously artistic theme; Alfred
       Auguste Janniot’s vast Art Deco bas-reliefs, which frame the central staircase, represent
       the nine muses. The colonnaded building itself is simple and beautiful. It’s also a
       perfect suntrap, and much favoured by skateboarders and graﬃti artists.
         On Wednesday and Saturday mornings a bustling market takes over avenue du
       Président Wilson, from Iéna métro station down to the palace.

       Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris
       Palais de Tokyo • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm • Free; charges for temporary exhibitions • T 01 53 67 40 00, W mam.paris.fr • MIéna/Alma-
       Marceau
       The east wing of the Palais de Tokyo houses the Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris.
       The collection can’t rival the Pompidou Centre’s, but it’s free, relatively uncrowded and the
       environment is far more contemplative – and architecturally more ﬁtting when it comes to
       works by early twentieth-century artists. The ground ﬂoor, by the entrance, is given over to
       temporary exhibitions.
       The Dufy and Matisse murals
       The gallery received unwelcome publicity in May 2010 when a lone thief made oﬀ
       with half a dozen priceless canvases by Picasso, Matisse, Modigliani and others, but it
       still has its two marvellous (and entirely untransportable) centrepieces. Just above the
       main stairs leading down to the permanent collections, a vast, curving chamber
       provides wall-space for Raoul Dufy’s mural La Fée Electricité (“The Electricity Fairy”).
       Originally designed for the Electricity Pavilion in the 1937 Exposition Universelle, its
       250 vivid, cartoon-like panels tell the story of electricity from the earliest experimenters
       to the triumph of industrialization that was the power station. Facing the stairs as you
       descend, the chapel-like salle Matisse is devoted to Matisse’s balletic and heart-lifting
       La Danse de Paris, beginning with an incomplete early version and progressing through
       to the ﬁnished work, displayed high on the wall. Daniel Buren’s Mur de Peintures
       (1995–2006), in his trademark stripes, is displayed in the same room.
       The permanent collection
       The main permanent collection is chronologically themed, starting with Fauvism and
       Cubism, and progressing through to Dada and the Ecole de Paris, and beyond. Most
       artists working in France – Braque, Chagall, Delaunay, Derain, Duchamp, Dufy, Klein,
       Léger, Modigliani, Picasso and many others – are represented, and there is a strong Parisian
       theme to many of the works. The collection is kept up to the minute by an active buying
       policy, and some bold acquisitions of sculpture, painting and video by contemporary
                                    THE PALAIS DE TOKYO AND AROUND THE EIFFEL TOWER QUARTER                                        159

artists are displayed in the ﬁnal suite of rooms. Look out in particular for the intimate
scrapbook works of Annette Messager, Jean-Marc Bustamante’s chilly photography,
Christian Boltanski’s sinister photographs and harrowing installations of old clothing and
phone books, and, towards the end, Philippe Parreno’s mesmerizing video works.

Palais de Tokyo Site de Création Contemporaine
Palais de Tokyo • Daily except Tues noon to midnight• €10, under-18s free • T 01 47 23 54 01, W palaisdetokyo.com • M Iéna/Alma-
Marceau
Set in the western wing of the Palais de Tokyo, the Palais de Tokyo Site de Création                                                 10
Contemporaine was opened in 2002 and quickly established a reputation for exciting
avant-garde exhibitions. A major revamp completed in 2012 made it one of Europe’s
largest and most ambitious contemporary art spaces. The original architects of the
museum, Lacaton and Vassal, added two new ﬂoors – in the cavernous and rather eerie
basement, which was sealed up after World War II and abandoned – to the existing two,
tripling the exhibition space, demolishing partitions and mezzanines and introducing
natural light. As with the rest of the building, however, the new spaces remain
deliberately semi-derelict, with industrial-looking concrete walls and exposed piping
creating a sense of “work in progress”. The museum has no permanent exhibits, but
instead mounts large-scale exhibitions involving multiple curators. Prominence is given to
French artists, but many international artists are also represented, ranging from the well
established, such as Julio Le Parc, to emerging young artists such as Hicham Berrada. The
museum has two restaurants: trendy Tokyo Eat (see p.286) and classy Monsieur Bleu (see
p.286), overlooking the Seine. There’s also a well-stocked bookshop on the ground ﬂoor.

Place de l’Alma
M Alma-Marceau
A few steps upstream of the Palais de Tokyo, on place de l’Alma, stands a full-scale, golden
replica of the ﬂame from the Statue of Liberty. It was given to France in 1987 as a symbol
of Franco-American relations but is now an unoﬃcial memorial to Princess Diana, whose
Mercedes crashed in the underpass beneath. The authorities clean up the site regularly,
but you’ll often ﬁnd bunches of withered ﬂowers and graﬃti messages left as tributes.
