Chapter 15: Auteuil and Passy

Auteuil and Passy
Often referred to as the Beaux Quartiers, the aﬄuent districts of Auteuil and
Passy, once villages on the outskirts of Paris, were only incorporated into the
city in 1860. They soon became the capital’s most desirable neighbourhoods,
where well-to-do Parisians commissioned new houses. Hector Guimard,
designer of the swirly green Art Nouveau métro stations, worked here, and
there are also rare Parisian works by interwar architects Le Corbusier and
Mallet-Stevens, who created the ﬁrst “Cubist” buildings. Though there are few
speciﬁc sights as such, apart from the Musée Marmottan, with its impressive
collection of Monets, the area has an almost provincial air, with its tight knot
of streets and charming villas – leafy lanes of attractive old houses, fronted
with English-style gardens, full of roses, ivy and wisteria.
 214     AUTEUIL AND PASSY AUTEUIL

       Auteuil
       M Eglise d’Auteuil
       The Auteuil district is now completely integrated into the city, but there’s still a villagey
       feel about its streets, and it holds some delightful little villas as well as ﬁne specimens of
       early twentieth-century architecture. The ideal place to start an exploration is the Eglise
       d’Auteuil métro station, close to several of Hector Guimard’s Art Nouveau buildings.

       Rue Boileau to the avenue de Versailles
       The house at no. 34 rue Boileau was one of Guimard’s ﬁrst commissions, in 1891. To
       reach it from the Eglise d’Auteuil métro, head west along rue d’Auteuil for 200m, then
       turn left (south) into Boileau. A high fence and wisteria obscure much of the view, but you
       can see some decorative tile-work under the eaves and around the doors and windows.
       Further down the street, just before you reach boulevard Exelmans, the Vietnamese
       embassy at no. 62 successfully combines 1970s Western architecture with the traditional
       Vietnamese elements of a pagoda roof and earthenware tiles. Continue south for 0.5km
15     along rue Boileau beyond boulevard Exelmans, turn right onto rue Parent de Rosan and
       you’ll ﬁnd a series of enchanting villas oﬀ to the right, backing onto the Auteuil cemetery.
         Rue Boileau terminates on avenue de Versailles, where you can turn left and head back
       to the métro via the Guimard apartment block at no. 142 (1905), with its characteristic
       Art Nouveau ﬂower motifs and sinuous, curling lines. It’s just by the Exelmans
       crossroads (on bus route #72). You can then cut across the Jardin de Ste-Périne, once the
       rural residence of the monks of Ste Geneviève’s abbey, established in 1109, to get back
       to the métro. Enter the garden opposite 135 av de Versailles, or alongside the hospital
       on rue Mirabeau, just north of the rue Chardon-Lagache junction.

       Rue de la Fontaine and around
       The old village high street, rue d’Auteuil, runs west to place Lorrain, which hosts a
       Saturday market. From here rue de la Fontaine runs northeast to the Radio-France
       building, with Guimard buildings at nos. 14, 17, 19, 21 and 60. No. 14 is the most
       famous: the “Castel Béranger” (1898), with exuberant Art Nouveau decoration in the
       bay windows, the roof line and the chimney. At no. 65 there’s a huge block of artists’
       studios by Henri Sauvage (1926) with a fascinating colour scheme, bearing signs of a
       Cubist inﬂuence. Alternatively, head up rue du Dr-Blanche for the cool, rectilinear
       lines of Cubist architects Le Corbusier and Mallet-Stevens (see below).

       Musée de Radio-France
       116 av du Président Kennedy, 16e • Undergoing renovation until 2016 • Mon–Fri 10–11am & 2.30–4pm • €5 • T 01 56 40 15 16,
       W radiofrance.fr • M Ranelagh /RER Av-du-Prés-Kennedy–Maison-de-Radio-France
       The Maison de Radio-France, the national radio headquarters, oﬀers free concerts and
       the Musée de Radio-France, which illustrates the history of broadcasting. Undergoing
       renovation at the time of writing, it should open again in 2016.

       Villa Montmorency and Villa La Roche
       Villa la Roche 8–10 square du Dr-Blanche, 16e • Mon 1.30–6pm, Tues–Sat 10am–6pm; closed Aug • €5 • T 01 42 88 75 72 • MJasmin;
       on the #52 bus route
       Just oﬀ place Lorrain, in rue Poussin, carriage gates open onto Villa Montmorency, one
       of the grander villas – more like an exclusive estate, built in the grounds of a former
       château. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, André Gide and Victor Hugo all lived in this one over
       the years. Behind it, in a cul-de-sac oﬀ rue du Dr-Blanche, are Le Corbusier’s ﬁrst
       private houses (1923), the Villa Jeanneret and the Villa La Roche, now in the care of
       the Fondation Le Corbusier. You can visit Villa La Roche, built in strictly Cubist style,
       very plain with strip windows, the only extravagance a curved frontage. The houses
       look commonplace enough now from the outside, but were a great contrast with
       anything that had gone before, and once you’re inside, the spatial play still seems
                           0                                                   200                                                          AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RESTAURANTS AND CAFÉS
                                                                                                                                                     EN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NNAIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV EN UE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K                   LY
                                                                                                                                                            UE



                                    UE V            RU E DE                                                              ET DU 11 Palais de Chaillot
Les Sablons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IO N



                                                                     RUE DE LA P O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E VA                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Anthoine                                                                                                                                                                              D ER AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NUE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E LA FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RUE D



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Passy                                 SQUARE O N I




                                                                                                                            RUE DESBO R D ES V
                                                                          MPE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CHARLES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Musée DICKENS R. DES EAUX                                                                                                                                                     PONT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D E B IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bir Hakeim




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AS                                                                            AV. R. BOYLES VE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L E VA                                                                                                                        D. S



PORTE DE PASSY                                                                       Ranelagh
                                                                                                                                                                                                            OPO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EOPH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Javel-




                                  Petite C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RU E CA UC



                                                                                                                                                          UP                                                                                               RU




                                                                                                                    N                             OU                                                                                     Baptiste Say




Stade Roland Garros & Tenniseum
                                                                                                                  E                    EP
                                                                                                                                                                    Michel-Ange-                                                                                                                                                               Jardin de                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RU



                             Auteuil                               Ecole Normal                 Ste-Périne
                           Racecourse                             des Instituteurs Chardon-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LER IOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AGACHE
                                      PLACE DE LA Porte d’Auteuil                       Lagache
                           Jardin des    PORTE                                       OR
 216     AUTEUIL AND PASSY WEST OF AUTEUIL


           AUTEUIL BUS ROUTES
           Handy bus routes for exploring Auteuil are the #52 and the #72. The #52 runs between
           M Opéra in the centre and M Boulogne-Pont-de-St-Cloud near the Parc des Princes, stopping at
           rue Poisson en route, while the #72’s route extends between M Hôtel-de-Ville in the Marais and
           M Boulogne-Pont-de-St-Cloud, stopping en route by the Exelmans crossroads near some of
           Guimard’s buildings on avenue de Versailles.


       ground-breaking. The interior is sparsely furnished, but originally the walls were hung
       with the outstanding collection of modern art built up by the ﬁnancier Raoul Albert La
       Roche, for whom the villa was built. In recent restoration work the walls have been
       repainted in the original colours – soothing greys, creams and blues, which Le
       Corbusier was fond of using in his easel painting.

       Rue Mallet-Stevens
15     M Jasmin
       Heading north along rue du Dr-Blanche and oﬀ to the right, you’ll come to the tiny
       rue Mallet-Stevens, built by the architect of the same name in Cubist style. The
       original proportions of the houses were altered by the addition of three storeys in the
       1960s, but you can still see the architectural intention of sculpting the entire street
       space as a cohesive unit. Continue to the end of rue du Dr-Blanche, turn left and
       then right onto boulevard de Beauséjour; a shortcut immediately opposite rue du
       Ranelagh across the disused Petite Ceinture rail line (see opposite) takes you to shady
       avenue Raphaël, which runs alongside the pretty Jardin du Ranelagh (with a rather
       engaging sculpture of the fabulist La Fontaine with an eagle and fox) and on to the
       Musée Marmottan.

       Musée Marmottan
       2 rue Louis-Boilly, 16e • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm, Thurs till 8pm • €10 • T 01 44 96 50 33, W marmottan.com • M Muette
       The Musée Marmottan is best known for its excellent collection of Monet paintings,
       bequeathed by the artist’s son. Among them is Impression, soleil levant, a canvas from
       1872 of a misty Le Havre morning, whose title the critics usurped to give the
       Impressionist movement its name. The painting was stolen from the gallery in 1985,
       along with eight others. After a police operation lasting ﬁve years, all were discovered in
       a villa in southern Corsica, and put back on show with increased security. There’s also a
       dazzling selection of canvases from Monet’s last years at Giverny, showing the
       increasingly abstract quality of his later work, including several Nymphéas (Water lilies),
       Le Pont japonais, L’Allée des rosiers and Le Saule pleureur, where rich colours are laid on
       in thick, excited whorls and lines. The collection also features some of Monet’s
       contemporaries – Manet, Renoir and Berthe Morisot. Morisot, who lived most of her
       life in Passy and is buried in the Cimetière de Passy, is particularly well represented,
       with two rooms devoted to her wonderfully summery canvases. Her work is
       characterized by vigorous, almost aggressive, brushwork, seen to best eﬀect in paintings
       such as Branches of an orange tree (1889) and Garden at Bougival (1884).
         In addition, the museum has a small and beautiful collection of thirteenth- to
       sixteenth-century manuscript illuminations – look out for the decorated capital R
       framing an exquisitely drawn portrait of St Catherine of Alexandria – and some
       splendid examples of First Empire pomposity, including chairs with golden sphinxes
       for armrests, and candelabra of complicated headdresses and twining serpents.

       West of Auteuil
       Attractive gardens west of Auteuil include the Jardin des Serres d’Auteuil, the municipal
       greenhouses and gardens that supply Paris with its plants and ﬂowers, as well as the
                                                                           WEST OF AUTEUIL AUTEUIL AND PASSY                       217


    THE PETITE CEINTURE
    The Petite Ceinture (“Little Belt”), a disused railway line that circles the city, was built in the
    1850s. It closed in 1934, when the PC bus took over the route. Left untouched and abandoned
    to nature, the tracks have become overgrown with wild ﬂowers and grasses, and provide a
    much-needed refuge for birds and butterﬂies. Seeing the potential of this “green corridor”, the
    city council has opened up one or two stretches to the public and turned them into sentiers
    natures, or nature trails. The stretch in the 16e is just over 1km long and extends from
    boulevard Montmorency (the entrance is opposite no. 37; M Porte d’Auteuil) to La Muette
    métro station (entrance opposite 27 bd de Beauséjour). Open in the daytime only, the path
    makes a nice getaway from the city, with an appealingly abandoned, rather secretive air. It
    meanders through trees and bushes, with grand apartment blocks just visible to either side.


beautiful Jardins Albert Kahn, with pretty French and Japanese gardens and an
intriguing museum of early colour photos from around the world.
                                                                                                                                     15
Jardin des Poètes and Jardin des Serres d’Auteuil
Jardin des Poètes Av du Général Sarrail • Daily 9am–6pm • Free Jardin des Serres d’Auteuil 3 av de la Porte d’Auteuil • Daily
10am–6pm, closes 5pm in winter • Free • M Porte-d’Auteuil
West of place de la Porte d’Auteuil are two gardens: the Jardin des Poètes, with its entrance
on avenue du Général Sarrail, and the adjoining Jardin des Serres d’Auteuil, entered either
at 3 av de la Porte d’Auteuil or via the Jardin des Poètes. You can’t escape the traﬃc noise
completely, but the Jardin des Poètes is extremely tranquil and very informal. Famous
French poets are remembered by verses (mostly of a pastoral nature) engraved on small
stones surrounded by little ﬂowerbeds, and a statue of Victor Hugo by Rodin stands in the
centre. Approaching the Auteuil garden and the greenhouses (serres) from the Jardin des
Poètes, you pass delightful potting sheds with rickety wooden blinds. Then you’re into a
formal garden, beautifully laid out around the big old-fashioned metal-frame greenhouses.
Among them is a palm house containing two hundred tropical species and a greenhouse
devoted entirely to ﬂora rarely seen outside their native New Caledonia. It also hosts some
special exhibitions, for example on azaleas in April.

Stade Roland Garros and the Tenniseum
2 av Gordon Bennett, 16e • Tenniseum Wed, Fri, Sat & Sun 10am–6pm • €8 • T 01 47 43 48 48, W ﬀt.fr/roland-garros/musee/le-musee-
de-la-ﬀt • M Porte-d’Auteuil
The Stade Roland Garros, beyond the Jardin des Serres d’Auteuil, is the venue for the
French Open tennis championships (see p.321). Within it, Le Tenniseum ﬁlls you in on
the history of the game and its development from jeu de paume, or “real tennis”; Paris
boasted over a hundred real tennis courts under Henri IV, while students in Orléans in
1656 spent so much time hitting a ball around that the only way to get them back to
their studies was to close the courts down. Much of the museum is given over to
photos and footage of mainly French tennis stars, such as René Lacoste and Yannick
Noah, and a multimedia centre shows archive ﬁlms dating from 1897 to the present day.

Jardins et Musée Albert Kahn
10–14 rue du Port, Boulogne-Billancourt • Daily 11am–7pm, Oct–April till 6pm • €4 • T 01 55 19 28 00,
W albert-kahn.hauts-de-seine.net • M Boulogne-Pont-de-St-Cloud/Marcel-Sembat
The Jardins et Musée Albert Kahn, in the suburb of Boulogne-Billancourt, consist of a
very pretty garden and a small museum dedicated to temporary exhibitions of “Les
Archives de la Planète” – photographs, many in colour, and ﬁlms collected by banker
and philanthropist Albert Kahn between 1909 and 1931. Kahn wanted to record
human activities and ways of life that he knew would soon disappear forever. His aim
in the design of the garden was to combine English, French, Japanese and other styles
to demonstrate the possibility of a harmonious, peaceful world. It’s an enchanting
 218     AUTEUIL AND PASSY PASSY

       place, with rhododendrons and camellias under blue cedars, a rose garden, an
       espaliered orchard, a forest of Moroccan pines, streams with Japanese bridges beside
       pagoda teahouses, Buddhas and pyramids of pebbles. A palm hothouse has been turned
       into a chic salon de thé, serving such delights as pear liqueur and marrons glacés sorbet.

       Passy
       Northeast of Auteuil, the area around the old village of Passy oﬀers scope for a good
       meandering walk. From La Muette métro, head east along the old high street, rue de
       Passy, past an eye-catching parade of boutiques, until you reach place de Passy and the
       crowded but leisurely café terrace of Le Paris Passy. From the place, stroll southeast along
       cobbled, pedestrianized rue de l’Annonciation, a pleasant blend of down-to-earth and
       genteel well-heeled that gives more of the ﬂavour of old Passy. You may no longer be able
       to have your Bechstein repaired here or your furniture lacquered, but the food shops that
       now dominate the street have delectable displays guaranteed to make your mouth water.
15
       Maison de Balzac
       47 rue Raynouard, 16e • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm • Free • T 01 55 74 41 80 • M Passy /RER Av-du-Prés-Kennedy–Maison-de-Radio-France
       The Maison de Balzac is a delightful little house with pale green shutters and a
       decorative iron entrance porch, tucked down some steps in a tree-ﬁlled garden. Balzac
       moved to this secluded spot in 1840 in the hope of evading his creditors. He lived
       under a pseudonym, and visitors had to give a special password before being admitted.
       Should any unwelcome callers manage to get past the door, Balzac would escape via a
       back door and go to the river via a network of underground cellars. Well-known works
       he wrote here include La Cousine Bette and Le Cousin Pons.
         The museum preserves his study, writing desk and monogrammed cafetière (his writing
       stints could extend up to eighteen hours a day for weeks on end). One room is devoted to
       the development of ideas for a monument to Balzac, resulting in the famously blobby
       Rodin sculpture of the writer, cartoon caricatures of which are on display. Other exhibits
       include letters to Mme Hanska, whom he eventually married after an eighteen-year
       courtship, and a complex family tree of around a thousand of the four thousand-plus
       characters that feature in his Comédie Humaine. Outside, the shady, serene rose-ﬁlled
       garden is a pleasant place to dally on wrought-iron seats amid busts of the writer.

       Rue Berton and around
       M Passy/La Muette
       Reached via steps that drop from rue Raynouard behind the Maison de Balzac, rue
       Berton is a cobbled path with gas lights still in place, blocked oﬀ by the heavy security
       of the Turkish embassy. The building, an eighteenth-century château, was once home
       to Marie-Antoinette’s friend, the Princesse de Lamballe, who met a grisly fate at the
       hands of revolutionaries in 1792. Later, it became a private asylum where the
       pioneering Dr Blanche treated patients with nervous disorders. The poet Gérard de
       Nerval was admitted in 1854, driven insane partly by the task of translating Goethe’s
       Faust into French. Four years later, Charles Gounod, while working on the score for his
       opera Faust, based on Nerval’s translation, was also treated here. And in 1892, Guy de
       Maupassant, suﬀering serious mental illness brought on by syphilis, was committed; he
       died here a year later. Get a better view of the building from rue d’Ankara, reached by
       heading down avenue de Lamballe, then left into avenue du Général-Mangin.

       Musée du Vin and around
       5 square Charles Dickens, 16e • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm • €11.90, admission includes a glass of wine • T 01 45 25 63 26,
       W museeduvinparis.com • M Passy
       From rue d’Ankara, head northeast along avenue Marcel-Proust, turn right and then
       left onto rue Charles Dickens and follow it until it hits rue des Eaux, where fashionable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PASSY AUTEUIL AND PASSY                                                                                                                                             219

      Parisians came in the eighteenth century for the therapeutic beneﬁts of the once-
      famous iron-rich Passy waters. Today, the street is enclosed by a canyon of moneyed
      apartments that dwarf the eighteenth-century houses of square Charles Dickens. One of
      these houses, burrowing back into the cellars of a vanished fourteenth-century
      monastery that produced wine until the Revolution, holds the Musée du Vin, an
      exhibition of viticultural bits and bobs about as exciting as ﬂat champagne, though the
      cellar bar is an atmospheric place for a glass of wine or lunch. Back on rue Raynouard,
      head northeast to place du Costa-Rica, take the ﬁrst right into rue de l’Alboni and go
      down the steps into square Alboni, a patch of garden enclosed by tall apartment
      buildings. Here the métro line emerges from what used to be a vine-covered hillside for
      the Passy stop, before rumbling out across the river by the Pont de Bir-Hakeim, the
      distinctive bridge featured in the Bertolucci ﬁlm Last Tango in Paris.

      Bois de Boulogne
      M Porte Maillot/Porte Dauphine/bus #244                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
      Designed by Baron Haussmann, the Bois de Boulogne was supposedly modelled on
      London’s Hyde Park – though it’s a very French interpretation. The bois, or “wood”, of
      the name is somewhat deceptive, though the extensive parklands do contain remnants of
      the once great Forêt de Rouvray. The Bois was the playground of the wealthy, especially
      in the nineteenth century, but it also established a reputation for illicit sex romps. Today
      the area is a favoured haunt for prostitutes and kerb-crawlers who, despite an obvious
      police presence and night-time road closures, still do business along its periphery. A
                       RU
RO
     UT                                                                                                 E LO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ED
          ED                                                                                     EE D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RU
               ES
Longchamp                                                UE
 220     AUTEUIL AND PASSY BOIS DE BOULOGNE

       certain amount of crime accompanies the sex trade; this is no place for a midnight walk.
         By day, however, the Bois de Boulogne is delightful. Entry to the park as a whole is free,
       but several attractions within it charge entry fees or open for limited times: the Jardin
       d’Acclimatation, aimed at children (see p.351); the beautiful ﬂoral displays of the Parc de
       Bagatelle; and the racecourses at Longchamp and Auteuil. With a riding school, a bowling
       alley, 14km of cycling routes and boating on the Lac Inférieur, a wealth of activities is also
       on oﬀer. The best, and wildest, part for walking is towards the southwest corner.

       Fondation Louis Vuitton pour la Création
       Av du Mahatma-Gandhi, Bois de Boulogne • M Porte-Maillot
       Inside the Jardin d’Acclimatation, a new Frank Gehry-designed contemporary art
       centre was shortly due to open at the time of research. Designed to house the collection
       of France’s richest man – Bernard Arnault, CEO of the luxury goods company LVMH
       – the Fondation Louis Vuitton pour la Création is expected to be worth visiting as much
       for the building itself as the art. Gehry’s impressive structure, dubbed the “cloud of
15     glass”, consists of twelve glass “sails”, made up of 3600 glass panels.

       Parc de Bagatelle
       Bois de Boulogne • Daily: March 9am–6.30pm; April & Sept 9am–8pm; May–Aug 9am–9pm • €5.50 • M Porte-Maillot, then bus #244,
       which takes you to the entrance on allée de Longchamp; there’s also an entrance on rte de Sèvres à Neuilly
       The Parc de Bagatelle comprises garden styles ranging from French and English to
       Japanese. Its most famous feature, the stunning rose garden of the charming Château de
       Bagatelle, was designed and built in just over sixty days in 1775 as a wager between
       Comte d’Artois and his sister-in-law Marie-Antoinette, who said it could not be achieved
       in less than three months. The best time for the roses is June, while other parts of the
       garden see beautiful displays of tulips, hyacinths and daﬀodils in early April, irises in May
       and water lilies in early August. The park’s attractive orangerie is the setting for candlelit
       recitals of Chopin’s music during the Festival de Chopin in late June (see p.321).

       Jardin Shakespeare
       Bois de Boulogne • Daily 2–4pm • Free • M Porte-Maillot
       In the middle of the Bois de Boulogne, the Pré Catalan park is famous for its huge
       two-hundred-year-old copper beech tree and the prestigious Pré Catalan restaurant.
       Also here is the Jardin Shakespeare, where you can study the herbs, trees and ﬂowers
       referred to in the Bard’s plays; in summer, open-air Shakespearean works, French
       classics and plays for children are staged here.
