Chapter 6: The Marais

The Marais
The Marais is one of the most seductive areas of central Paris, known for its
sophistication and artsy leanings, and for being the neighbourhood of
choice for gay Parisians. Largely untouched by Baron Haussmann and
modern development, it preserves its enchanting narrow streets and
magniﬁcent Renaissance hôtels particuliers (mansions). Some of these
mansions have become chic ﬂats, boutiques and commercial art galleries,
while others provide splendid settings for a number of excellent museums,
not least among them the Musée Picasso, the Musée Carnavalet history
museum and the Musée d’Art et d’Histoire du Judaïsme. As the Marais is one
of the few areas of the city where places open on a Sunday, many Parisians
come here for brunch and a leisurely afternoon’s shopping.
    94     THE MARAIS PLACE DES VOSGES AND AROUND

         The area was little more than a riverside swamp (marais) up until the thirteenth
         century, when the Knights Templar (see p.104) moved into its northern section and
         began to drain the land. It became a magnet for the aristocracy in the early 1600s
         after the construction of the place des Vosges by Henri IV in 1605. This golden age
         was relatively short-lived, however, for the aristocracy began to move away after the
         king took his court to Versailles in the latter part of the seventeenth century, leaving
         their grand houses to the trading classes, who were in turn displaced during the
         Revolution. From this point on, the mansions became slum tenements and the streets
6        degenerated into squalor. It was only in the 1960s, with its designation as a secteur
         sauvegardé (a conservation area), that eﬀorts were made to smarten up the area and
         improve living conditions.
           The main artery running through the Marais, dividing it roughly north and south, is
         the busy rue de Rivoli and its continuation to the Bastille, rue St-Antoine. South of this
         line is the quartier St-Paul, with its antique shops and atmospheric backstreets. To the
         north lies the beautiful place des Vosges; the old Jewish quarter centred on rue des
         Rosiers; and the Marais’ other main street, rue des Francs-Bourgeois, lined with
         aristocratic mansions and chic fashion and interior-design boutiques. Other streets
         worth exploring are rue Vieille du Temple, with its terraced cafés and bars, and the
         streets further north in the Haut Marais, an area on the up, home to young designers
         and contemporary art galleries.

         Place des Vosges and around
         M Bastille/Chemin-Vert/St-Paul
         As you approach via the narrow streets from Bastille or from the north or west, nothing
         quite prepares you for the size and grandeur of the place des Vosges, a magniﬁcent square
         bordered by arcaded pink-brick and stone mansions, with a formal garden at its centre. A
         masterpiece of aristocratic elegance and the ﬁrst example of planned development in the
         history of Paris, the square was commissioned in 1605 by Henri IV, and was inaugurated
         in 1612 for the wedding of Louis XIII and Anne of Austria; it is Louis’ statue – or, rather,
         a replica of it – that stands hidden by chestnut trees in the middle of the gardens.
         Originally called place Royale, it was renamed Vosges in 1800 in honour of the
         département, the ﬁrst to pay its share of the expenses of the revolutionary wars.
           A royal palace, the Hôtel des Tournelles, stood on what is now the north side of the
         square until 1559, when it was demolished by Catherine de Médicis after her husband
         Henri II was killed here during a joust. The vacant space became a huge weekly horse
         market, trading between one and two thousand horses. So it remained until Henri IV
         decided on the construction of his place Royale.
           Through all the vicissitudes of history, the place has never lost its cachet as a smart
         address. Today, the arcades harbour upmarket art, antique and fashion shops, as well as
         a number of restaurants and cafés. Buskers play classical music and jazz, and in the
         garden toddlers play in the sandpits and families picnic on the grass; this is one of the
         few Parisian gardens where the pelouse is not interdite.

         Maison de Victor Hugo
         6 place des Vosges, 4e • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm; closed hols • Free • T 01 42 72 10 16 • M Bastille
         Among the many celebrities who made their homes in the place des Vosges was Victor
         Hugo; the second-ﬂoor apartment, at no. 6, where he lived from 1832 to 1848 and
         wrote much of Les Misérables, is now a museum, the Maison de Victor Hugo. Hugo’s life,
         including his nineteen years of exile in Jersey and Guernsey, is evoked through a
         somewhat sparse collection of memorabilia, portraits, photographs and ﬁrst editions of
         his works. What you do get, though, is an idea of the writer’s prodigious creativity: as
         well as being a proliﬁc author, he drew – a number of his ink drawings are exhibited
         – and designed his own Gothic-style furniture, in which he let his imagination run riot,
     SQUARE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RUE M                    République
      EMILE
         PA P IN                          Musée des
            3
 R. D
             RAN
ST RUE                           RUE
                   4
       DE
 Hôtel

 RUE        STGERVAIS
                                                                                      E
                                                                                   IP P     M I RON                         IR O N         St-Paul                                                                                                                                                     E JA                                                                      Vosges
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RUE                               REN
                                                                               H IL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TE



                       P H LO U I
                       RUE
                 R
              U TA
                   A TO
    96     THE MARAIS RUE DES FRANCSBOURGEOIS AND AROUND

         as seen in some of the pieces displayed. He even put together the extraordinary
         Chinese-style dining room, originally designed for the house of his lover, Juliette
         Drouet, in Guernsey, re-created in its entirety here. Among the family portraits is one by
         Auguste de Châtillon of Hugo’s daughter, Léopoldine, shown holding a Book of Hours
         open at the Dormition of the Virgin – a poignant detail, given that eight years later at
         the age of 19 she drowned, along with her husband of just six months. Her loss inspired
         some of Hugo’s most moving poetry, including the well-known Demain dès l’aube.
6        Hôtel de Sully
         62 rue St-Antoine, 4e • Photographic exhibitions Tues 11am–9pm, Wed–Fri 11am–7pm, Sat & Sun 10am–7pm • €5, combined ticket with
         Jeu de Paume (see p.71) €8 • W jeudepaume.org • M St-Paul/Bastille
         From the southwest corner of the place des Vosges, a door leads through to the formal
         château garden, orangerie and exquisite Renaissance facade of the Hôtel de Sully. The
         garden, with its park benches, makes for a peaceful rest stop; it’s also a handy shortcut
         through to rue St-Antoine. Part of the building is used for temporary photographic
         exhibitions, usually with social, historical or anthropological themes, mounted by the
         Jeu de Paume, whose main site (see p.71) is in the Tuileries. The hôtel is also the
         headquarters of the Centre des Monuments Nationaux, which manages more than a
         hundred national monuments and publishes numerous books and guides, many of
         which are on sale in the excellent ground-ﬂoor bookshop near the rue St-Antoine
         entrance; it’s also worth a look for its ﬁne seventeenth-century painted beamed ceiling.
           A short distance back to the west along rue St-Antoine, almost opposite the sixteenth-
         century church of St-Paul-St-Louis, which was inaugurated by Cardinal Richelieu, you’ll
         ﬁnd another square. A complete contrast to the imposing formality of the place des
         Vosges, the tiny place du Marché-Ste-Catherine, with its trees and little restaurant
         terraces, is intimate and irresistibly charming.

         Rue des Francs-Bourgeois and around
         Running west from the place des Vosges, the main lateral street of the northern part of the
         Marais is the narrow rue des Francs-Bourgeois. Beatnik Jack Kerouac translated it as “the
         street of the outspoken middle classes”, which is a fair description of the contemporary
         residents, though the name in fact means “people exempt from tax”, referring to the
         penurious inmates of a medieval almshouse that once stood on the site of no. 34.
           Along or just oﬀ this street lie some of the Marais’ ﬁnest mansions, including the
         superb Musée Carnavalet, tracing the history of Paris; the bijou Musée Cognacq-Jay,
         devoted to eighteenth-century art and decorative arts; the engaging Musée d’Art et
         d’Histoire du Judaïsme; and the Musée de l’Histoire de France, the state archives
         museum, housed in one of the grandest mansions of all.

         Musée Carnavalet
         23 rue de Sévigné, 4e • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm • Free; entry to special exhibitions varies • T 01 44 59 58 58, W carnavalet.paris.fr • M St-Paul
         The fascinating Musée Carnavalet charts the history of Paris from its origins up to the
         belle époque through an extraordinary collection of paintings, sculptures, decorative arts
         and archeological ﬁnds. The museum’s setting alone, in two beautiful Renaissance
         mansions (Hôtel Carnavalet and Hôtel Le Peletier) surrounded by attractive gardens,
         makes a visit worthwhile. There are 140 rooms in all, probably too much to see in one go.
         The ground ﬂoor
         The ground ﬂoor displays nineteenth- and early twentieth-century shop and inn signs
         and engrossing models of Paris through the ages, along with maps and plans showing
         how much Haussmann’s boulevards changed the face of the city. The renovated orangerie
         houses a signiﬁcant collection of Neolithic ﬁnds, including a number of wooden pirogues
         unearthed during the redevelopment of the Bercy riverside area in the 1990s.
                                                 RUE DES FRANCSBOURGEOIS AND AROUND THE MARAIS   97

  The post-Revolution and Napoleonic period is also covered on the ground ﬂoor, in
rooms 115–121; look out for Napoleon’s favourite canteen, which accompanied him
on his military exploits (and also followed him into exile on St Helena), consisting of
110 pieces ingeniously contained within a case no bigger than a picnic hamper. Among
the items is a full set of gold cutlery, a gold-handled toothbrush, two candelabras and a
dinky geometry set – everything an emperor could possibly need while on campaign.
The ﬁrst ﬂoor
On the ﬁrst ﬂoor, decorative arts feature strongly, with numerous re-created salons and                6
boudoirs full of richly sculpted wood panelling and tapestries from the time of Louis XII
to Louis XVI, rescued from buildings that had to be destroyed for Haussmann’s
boulevards. Room 21 is devoted to the famous letter-writer Madame de Sévigné, who
lived in the Carnavalet mansion from 1677 until her death in 1696, and wrote a series of
letters to her daughter here which vividly portray her privileged lifestyle under the reign
of Louis XIV. You can see her Chinese lacquered writing desk, as well as portraits of her
and various contemporaries, such as Molière and Corneille. Rooms 128 to 148 are largely
devoted to the belle époque (early twentieth century), evoked through numerous
paintings of the period and some wonderful Art Nouveau interiors, among which is the
sumptuous peacock-green interior designed by Alphonse Mucha for Fouquet’s jewellery
shop in the rue Royale. Also well preserved is José-Maria Sert’s Art Deco ballroom, dating
from the 1920s, with its extravagant gold-leaf decor and grand-scale paintings, including
one of the Queen of Sheba with a train of elephants. Nearby is a section on literary life at
the beginning of the twentieth century, including a reconstruction of Proust’s modestly
furnished bedroom (room 147), with its cork-lined walls, designed to muﬄe external
noise and allow the writer to work in peace – he spent most of his last three years closeted
away here, penning his great novel, A la recherche du temps perdu.
The second ﬂoor
The second ﬂoor has rooms full of mementos of the French Revolution: models of the
Bastille, original declarations of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, sculpted allegories of
Reason, and crockery with revolutionary slogans and glorious models of the guillotine.
There are also execution orders to make you shed a tear for the royalists, and one of the
rooms of the Temple prison where Louis XVI and his family were locked up has been
re-created, complete with the king’s chess set and the Dauphin’s toy tin soldiers.

Bibliothèque Historique de la Ville de Paris
Entrance on 24 rue Pavée, 4e • Mon–Sat 10am–6pm • Free • W paris-bibliotheques.org • M St-Paul
Just across from the Musée Carnavalet on rue des Francs-Bourgeois stands the
Bibliothèque Historique de la Ville de Paris, housed in the splendid sixteenth-century
Hôtel Lamoignon and safeguarding centuries’ worth of texts and picture books about
the city. The library is open to the public, and exhibitions on the history of Paris are
often held here; details can be found on the website. Next to the Lamoignon on rue
Pavée – so called because it was among the ﬁrst of Paris’s streets to be paved, in 1450 –
was the site of La Force prison, where many of the Revolution’s victims were
incarcerated, including the Princesse de Lamballe, who was lynched in the massacres of
September 1792; her head was presented on a stake to her friend Marie-Antoinette.

Musée Cognacq-Jay
8 rue Elzévir, 4e • Tues–Sun 10am–5.40pm • Free • T 01 40 27 07 21 • M St-Paul/Chemin-Vert
One block west of the Musée Carnavalet lies the intimate Musée Cognacq-Jay, occupying
the ﬁne Hôtel Donon. The Cognacq-Jay family built the Samaritaine department store,
now closed (see p.92), and were noted philanthropists, as well as lovers of eighteenth-
century European art. Their small collection of pieces on show includes a handful of works
by Canaletto, Fragonard, Rubens and Quentin de la Tour, as well as an early Rembrandt
Le Fauconnier                                         10
Hôtel du Loiret                                        4             DES                                            S          Tour de                          FR
                                                                         BLA                                     IVE                                                 AN
Maubuisson                                             8                     NCS
              LA
                         DE R
                                    IVOL
  Hôtel
     D E LO                PLACE                                     R UE F R A N CO I S                                                 RUE
                                                                                                          FRANCAIS R                                        A SCHWEITZER                             SD                                                                                                                                                                                             RUE



Le Free DJ                  5
Autour du Saumon                                 28               Marché Baudoyer             24                                                                   Swildens               5                                                                                                                           L’AVE MARIA
Ba&sh                                            14               Marché des Enfants Rouges    1                                                                   Vintage Désir         17
Le BHV Marais                                    21               Mariage Frères              16                                                                   Zadig & Voltaire      18                                                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                        100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SQUARE
Les Caves St-Antoine                             33               Les Marionnettes du Marais   8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H GALLI                                               metres
                                                  RUE DES FRANCSBOURGEOIS AND AROUND THE MARAIS                                        99

and an exquisite still life by Chardin, displayed in beautifully carved wood-panelled rooms
ﬁlled with Sèvres porcelain and Louis XV furniture.

Musée de l’Histoire de France
60 rue des Francs-Bourgeois, 4e • Mon–Fri 10am–12.30pm & 2–5.30pm, Sat & Sun 2–5.30pm • €3 • M Rambuteau/St-Paul
At the western end of the rue des Francs-Bourgeois there once stood a magniﬁcent,
early eighteenth-century palace complex, ﬁlling the entire block from rue des Quatre
Fils to rue des Archives, and from rue Vieille-du-Temple to rue des Francs-Bourgeois.
Only half remains today, but it is utterly splendid, especially the grand colonnaded                                                         6
courtyard of the Hôtel de Soubise, with its fabulous Rococo interiors, paintings by
Boucher and vestigial fourteenth-century towers on rue des Quatre Fils. A stroll
through the adjoining formal gardens allows you to admire the setting all the more.
  The Hôtel de Soubise houses a large number of the city archives, dating from the
period before 1790, and the Musée de l’Histoire de France, which mounts changing
exhibitions drawn from its extensive holdings; its fascinating haul includes Joan of Arc’s
trial proceedings, with a doodled impression of her in the margin, and a Revolutionary
calendar, where “J” stands for Jean-Jacques Rousseau and “L” for “labourer”. The hôtel’s
ground-ﬂoor Chambre du Prince is the scene of chamber music recitals (€13.50), held
here most Saturdays, usually at 6pm.

Hôtel de Rohan and around
The Hôtel de Rohan, next to the Musée de l’Histoire de France, is part of the archives
complex and is sometimes used when there are large exhibitions. Its ﬁne interiors
include the Chinese-inspired Cabinet des Singes, whose walls are painted with
monkeys acting out various aristocratic scenes.
  Opposite the Hôtel de Soubise, at the back of a driveway for the Crédit Municipal bank,
stands a pepperpot tower that formed part of the city walls; these were built by King
Philippe-Auguste early in the thirteenth century to link up with his new fortress, the
Louvre. Further east, beyond several more imposing facades, you can admire the delicate
ﬁligree ironwork of the balcony above the main entrance to the Hôtel d’Albret (no. 31), built
in 1740, its stately courtyard a delightful setting for occasional concerts in summer.

Musée de la Chasse et de la Nature
62 rue des Archives, 3e • Tues–Sun 11am–6pm, Wed till 9.30pm • €8, free for under-18s and to everyone ﬁrst Sun of the month • T 01 53
01 92 40, W chassenature.org • M Rambuteau
Housed in the beautiful Hôtel Guénégaud and the neighbouring Hôtel Mongelas, the
Musée de la Chasse et de la Nature largely explores the theme of hunting, especially
animals of the hunt. The museum starts with a series of rooms each devoted to a
particular animal, such as the wild boar, wolf and dog. A “cabinet of curiosities” invites
you to pull open drawers and discover miscellaneous bits and bobs, such as paw prints,
animal droppings and drawings, and you can look through eyeglasses and watch a video
of the animal in its natural habitat – all quite appealing to children in particular. The rest
of the collection includes a formidable array of stuﬀed animals, including a giant polar
bear, weapons ranging from prehistoric stone arrowheads to highly decorative crossbows
and guns, and paintings by French artists, such as Desportes, romanticizing the chase.

Musée d’Art et d’Histoire du Judaïsme
71 rue du Temple, 3e • Mon–Fri 11am–6pm, Sun 10am–6pm • €6.80 • T 01 53 01 86 53, W mahj.org • M Rambuteau
Two blocks west of the Musée de la Chasse et de la Nature stands the attractively restored
Hôtel de St-Aignan, home to the Musée d’Art et d’Histoire du Judaïsme. The museum
traces the culture, history and artistic endeavours mainly of the Jews in France, though
there are also many artefacts from the rest of Europe and North Africa. The result is a very
comprehensive collection, as educational as it is beautiful. Free audioguides in English are
available and worth picking up if you want to get the most out of the museum.
    100    THE MARAIS RUE DES FRANCSBOURGEOIS AND AROUND

          The medieval period to the nineteenth century
          Highlights of the museum’s holdings from the medieval period to the nineteenth century
          include a Gothic-style Hanukkah lamp, one of the very few French-Jewish artefacts to
          survive from the period before the expulsion of the Jews from France in 1394; an Italian
          gilded circumcision chair from the seventeenth century; and a completely intact, late
          nineteenth-century Austrian sukkah, “a temporary dwelling built for the celebration of the
          Harvest, decorated with paintings of Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives”. Other artefacts
          include Moroccan wedding garments, highly decorated marriage contracts from
6         eighteenth-century Modena and gorgeous, almost whimsical, spice containers.
          The Dreyfus archives
          The museum also holds the Dreyfus archives, donated as a gift from Dreyfus’s
          grandchildren. The notorious Dreyfus aﬀair (see box below) is documented with letters,
          photographs and press clippings; you can read Emile Zola’s famous letter “J’accuse…!”
          in which the novelist defends Dreyfus’s innocence, and the letters that Dreyfus sent to
          his wife from prison on Devil’s Island in which he talks of épouvantable (“terrible”)
          suﬀering and loneliness.
          The twentieth century
          The museum also hosts a signiﬁcant collection of paintings and sculpture by Jewish
          artists – Marc Chagall, Samuel Hirszenberg, Chaïm Soutine and Jacques Lipchitz – who


             THE DREYFUS AFFAIR
             The Dreyfus Aﬀair was one of the biggest crises to rock the Third Republic. It centred on Alfred
             Dreyfus, a captain in the French army and a Jew, who was arrested and convicted of spying for the
             Germans in 1894 on the ﬂimsiest of evidence – his handwriting was said to resemble that on
             documents detailing French armaments found in the German embassy. In a humiliating public
             ceremony of “dégradation” in the courtyard of the Ecole Militaire his epaulettes were torn from his
             uniform and his sword broken, while anti-Semitic slogans were chanted by crowds outside. He was
             then sent to the notorious penal colony of Devil’s Island, oﬀ Guyana. His family, convinced of his
             innocence, began campaigning for a retrial. Two newspapers, L’Eclair and Le Matin, questioned the
             evidence and in 1897 Colonel Georges Picquart, the new head of the Statistical Section, discovered a
             document which suggested that the true culprit was Major Ferdinand Walsin-Esterhazy. Esterhazy
             was perfunctorily tried by the Ministry of War, and let oﬀ. The government, keen to uphold the army’s
             authority and reputation, acquiesced to the verdict, and Colonel Picquart was packed oﬀ to Tunisia.
               However, a storm broke out when shortly afterwards writer Emile Zola published his famous
             open letter, titled J’accuse…!, to the President of the Republic in the Aurore newspaper on
             January 13, 1898. In it he denounced the army and authorities and accused them of a cover-up.
             Zola was convicted for libel and sentenced to a year’s imprisonment, which he avoided by
             ﬂeeing to England. The article triggered a major outcry and suddenly the aﬀaire was the chief
             topic of conversation in every café in France. French society divided into two camps:
             Dreyfusards and anti-Dreyfusards. The former, convinced the army was guilty of a cover-up,
             comprised republicans committed to equal rights and the primacy of parliament and included
             many prominent intellectuals and left-wing ﬁgures such as Jean Jaurès, Anatole France, Léon
             Blum, Georges Clemenceau and Marcel Proust. Ranked among the anti-Dreyfusards were
             clerics, anti-Semitic newspapers such as La Libre Parole, monarchists and conservatives, all
             suspecting a Jewish conspiracy to tarnish the army’s reputation. The former clamoured for
             justice, while the latter called for respect and order.
               In June 1897, the secret dossier that convicted Dreyfus was ﬁnally re-examined; there was a
             retrial and, again, Dreyfus was convicted of treason, but was quickly pardoned by President
             Loubet, desperate to draw a line under the whole aﬀair. Finally, in 1906, Dreyfus, his health
             broken by hard labour, was granted a full pardon and awarded the Légion d’honneur. The matter
             was formally closed, but the repercussions of the aﬀair were deep and long-lasting; it had
             revealed fundamental divisions in French society, and split the country along lines that would
             determine France’s development in the twentieth century.
                              THE JEWISH QUARTER: RUE DES ROSIERS • THE HAUT MARAIS THE MARAIS                                      101

came to live in Paris at the beginning of the twentieth century. The Holocaust is only
brieﬂy touched on, since it’s dealt with in depth by the Musée de la Shoah (see p.106).
The main reference is an installation by contemporary artist Christian Boltanski: one of
the exterior walls of a small courtyard is covered with black-bordered death
announcements printed with the names of the Jewish artisans who once lived in the
building, a number of whom were deported.

The Jewish quarter: rue des Rosiers                                                                                                       6
M St-Paul
One block south of the rue des Francs-Bourgeois, the area around narrow,
pedestrianized rue des Rosiers has traditionally been the Jewish quarter of the city since
the twelfth century. However, soaring property prices and the area’s burgeoning
popularity with tourists have forced many of the traditional grocers, bakers, bookshops
and cafés to close, and the area is in real danger of losing its identity. The hammam
(no. 4) now houses a clothing store, as does Jo Goldenberg (no. 7), once the city’s most
famous Jewish restaurant. Despite these changes, the area still retains a Jewish ﬂavour,
with a number of kosher food shops and Hebrew bookstores. There’s also a distinctly
Mediterranean feel in the quartier; on Sunday lunchtimes the street ﬁlls with people
who come to pick up a falafel wrap from one of the handful of Middle Eastern cafés.
This development is testimony to the inﬂuence of the North African Sephardim, who,
since the end of World War II, have sought refuge here from the uncertainties of life in
the French ex-colonies. They have replenished Paris’s Jewish population, depleted when
its Ashkenazim, having escaped the pogroms of Eastern Europe, were rounded up by
the Nazis and the French police and transported back east to concentration camps.

The Haut Marais
The northern part of the Marais, known as the Haut Marais (the “upper Marais”),
encompasses the old Quartier du Temple, named after the Knights Templar’s
stronghold that once stood at its heart, and the city’s original Chinatown, concentrated
on the upper end of rue du Temple and the streets west. Here the aristocratic stone
facades of the lower Marais give way to the more humble, though no less attractive,
stucco, paint and thick-slatted shutters of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century streets.
Some bear the names of old rural French provinces: Beauce, Perche, Saintonge,
Picardie. Formerly a quiet backwater, the area now attracts an arty crowd, who come
to browse the many contemporary art galleries (see box, p.102), interior design shops
and boutiques of young fashion designers concentrated on rue Charlot, rue de Poitou,
rue Vieille du Temple and around. The area’s chief visitor attractions are the excellent
Musée Picasso, the absorbing Musée des Arts et Métiers and the new state-of-the-art
Gaîté Lyrique digital arts centre.

Musée Picasso
5 rue de Thorigny, 3e • Closed until 2014 for renovation, see website for updated opening hours and admission • T 01 42 71 25 21,
W musee-picasso.fr • M Chemin-Vert/St-Paul
On the northern side of rue des Francs-Bourgeois, rue Payenne leads up to the lovely
gardens and houses of rue du Parc-Royal and on to rue de Thorigny. Here, at no. 5, the
magniﬁcent classical facade of the seventeenth-century Hôtel Salé, built for a rich
salt-tax collector, conceals the Musée Picasso, which is currently closed for renovation.
When it reopens in 2014 there will be three times as much exhibition space available to
display what is the largest collection of Picasso’s work anywhere, representing almost all
the major periods of the artist’s life from 1905 onwards. Many of the pieces were owned
by Picasso and on his death in 1973 were donated to the state by his family in lieu of
taxes owed. The result is an unedited body of work, which, although not including the
    102     THE MARAIS THE HAUT MARAIS

          most recognizable of Picasso’s masterpieces, nevertheless provides a sense of the artist’s
          development and an insight into the person behind the myth.
          The collection
          The collection includes paintings from the artist’s Blue Period, studies for the
          Demoiselles d’Avignon, experiments with Cubism and Surrealism, as well as
          larger-scale works on themes of war, peace, love and death. Perhaps some of the
          most engaging works are the most personal – the portraits of the artist’s lovers,
6         Dora Maar and Marie-Thérèse, show how the two women inspired him in diﬀerent
          ways: Dora Maar is painted with strong lines and vibrant colours, suggesting a
          vivacious personality, while Marie-Thérèse’s muted colours and soft contours
          convey serenity and peace.

          Passage de Retz and around
          9 rue Charlot, 3e • Tues–Sun 10am–7pm • Free • W passagederetz.com • M Filles-du-Calvaire
          Contemporary art galleries abound in the Marais particularly in the streets around
          the Musée Picasso (see box, below); also check the listings in Pariscope (see p.39). At
          the lower end of rue Charlot you could check out what’s happening at Passage de
          Retz, a gallery that stages occasional exhibitions of ﬁne art and design from young
          artists and is attractively set in an old mansion; it also has a bookshop and café.
            Opposite, in the ruelle de Sourdis, one section of the street has remained unchanged
          since it was built in 1626. Further along, on the corner of rue du Perche, a little Classical
          facade on a leafy courtyard hides the Armenian church of Ste-Croix, testimony to the many
          Armenians who sought refuge here from the Turkish pogroms of World War I.


              PRIVATE ART GALLERIES IN THE MARAIS
              The Marais, and the Haut Marais in particular, is where most of the city’s private commercial art
              galleries are concentrated. Many occupy handsome old mansion houses, which are set back
              from the road and reached via cobbled courtyards. The following are some of the highlights;
              all are free to visit.
              Galerie Chantal Crousel 10 rue Charlot, 3e                      Galerie Marian Goodman 79 rue du Temple, 3e
              W crousel.com; M Filles-du-Calvaire; map p.99.                  W mariangoodman.com; M Rambuteau; map p.99.
              Around since 1980, this gallery represents mostly               This oﬀshoot of the famed New York gallery recently
              foreign and some French artists, such as Gabriel Orozco         exhibited Jean-Marc Bustamante and Rineke Dijkstra.
              and Monica Hatoum, working in a variety of media. It            Tues–Sat 11am–7pm.
              also promotes the work of emerging video artists, such          Galerie Thaddeus Ropac 7 rue Debelleyme, 3e
              as Melik Ohanian. Tues–Sat 11am–1pm & 2–7pm.                    W ropac.net; M Filles-du-Calvaire; map p.99. Recent
              Galerie Emmanuel Perrotin 76 rue de Turenne, 3e                 exhibitions at this well-established gallery have
              W galerieperrotin.com; M St-Sébastien-Froissart;                included Ilya and Emilia Kabakov and Joseph Beuys.
              map p.95. One of the most inﬂuential galleries on the           Also well worth a visit is Ropac’s enormous outpost in
              French contemporary art scene, Perrotin has exhibited           Pantin, near La Villette, sited in a former factory and
              French artists like Sophie Calle as well as international       ideal for showing large-scale installations and
              names such as Takashi Murakami and Maurizio Cattelan.           sculptures by the likes of Anselm Kiefer and Georg
              Tues–Sat 11am–7pm.                                              Baselitz. Tues–Sun 11am–7.30pm, Mon 1–7.30pm.
              Galerie Karsten Greve 5 rue Debelleyme, 3e                      Galerie Yvon Lambert 108 rue Vieille du Temple,
              W artnet.com/kgreve.html; M St-Sébastien-Froiss-                3e W yvon-lambert.com; M Filles-du-Calvaire; map
              art; map p.99. Paris branch of the German gallery,              p.99. A major player for more than forty years: the likes
              showing the work of world-class artists such as Louise          of Andres Serrano, Giulio Paolini and Andy Warhol have
              Bourgeois and Willem de Kooning. Tues–Sat                       all been exhibited here in recent years. Tues–Fri
              11am–7pm.                                                       10am–1pm & 2.30–7pm, Sat 10am–7pm.

                       CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT LOUIS XIV STATUE, MUSEE CARNAVALET P.96; MARIAGE FRÈRES P.336; YIDDISH BAKERY >
    104     THE MARAIS THE HAUT MARAIS

          Marché des Enfants-Rouges
          39 rue de Bretagne, 3e • Tues–Sat 8.30am–2pm & 4–7.30pm, Sun 8.30am–2pm • MFilles-du-Calvaire
          Just west of rue Charlot, a little short of the vibrant rue de Bretagne, is the easily missed
          entrance to the Marché des Enfants-Rouges, one of the smallest and oldest food markets in
          Paris, dating back to 1616, its name a reference to the red uniforms once worn by children
          at the orphanage that stood nearby. It has a very lively atmosphere and outdoor tables
          where you can eat takeaway soups, couscous, sushi and all types of food. Rue de Bretagne
          itself is full of traditional food shops such as cheesemongers, bakeries and coﬀee merchants,
6         as well as some popular cafés such as Café Charlot (see p.278) and Le Progrès (see p.279).

          Quartier du Temple
          M Temple
          The Quartier du Temple – bounded by rue de Bretagne, rue du Temple, rue de Béranger
          and rue de Picardie – designates the area that was once the central stronghold of the
          Knights Templar, a military order established in Jerusalem at the time of the Crusades to
          protect pilgrims to the Holy Land. Its members were exceedingly rich and powerful, with
          some nine thousand commands spread across Europe. They came to a sticky end early in
          the fourteenth century, however, when King Philippe le Bel, alarmed at their growing
          power, and in alliance with Pope Clement V, had them tried for sacrilege, blasphemy and
          sodomy. Fifty-four of the order’s members were burnt, and the order abolished. The
          Temple buildings survived until the Revolution, when Louis XVI and the royal family
          were imprisoned in the keep (see box below), but they were demolished in 1808 by
          Napoleon, and nothing remains beyond the name “Temple”, preserved in the Square du
          Temple gardens and the Carreau du Temple, a former clothes market. The Carreau is
          currently being converted into a performing arts and sports centre, due to be completed in
          early 2014. The shell of the nineteenth-century brick, glass and iron-frame structure is
          being preserved and will house a 250-seat auditorium and a multi-use underground space.

          Chinatown
          M Arts-et-Métiers/Temple
          A couple of blocks to the west of the Carreau du Temple, on and around the top end of

              THE TEMPLE AND LOUIS XVII
              Louis XVI, Marie-Antoinette, their two children and immediate family were all imprisoned in
              the keep of the Knights Templar’s ancient fortress in August 1792 by the revolutionary
              government. By the end of 1794, when all the adults had been executed, the two children
              – the teenage Marie-Thérèse and the 9- or 10-year-old Dauphin, now, in the eyes of royalists,
              Louis XVII – remained there alone, in the charge of a family called Simon. Louis XVII was
              literally walled up, allowed no communication with other human beings, not even his sister,
              who was living on the ﬂoor above (Marie-Thérèse, incidentally, survived, went into exile in
              1775, and returned to France in 1814 with the Bourbon restoration). He died of tuberculosis in
              1795, a half-crazed imbecile, and was buried in a public grave.
                 For many years afterwards, however, rumours circulated that Louis XVII was in fact alive.
              The doctor, for example, who certiﬁed the child’s death kept a lock of his hair, but it was later
              found not to correspond with the colour of the young Louis XVII’s hair, as remembered by his
              sister. Furthermore, Mme Simon confessed on her deathbed that she had substituted
              another child for Louis XVII. One theory is that the real Louis XVII died early in 1794. But since
              Robespierre needed the heir to the throne as a hostage with which to menace internal and
              foreign royalist enemies, he had Louis disposed of in secret and substituted another child.
                 Taking advantage of this atmosphere of uncertainty, 43 diﬀerent people subsequently claimed
              to be Louis XVII. After nearly two centuries of speculation, all rumours were put to rest in 2000
              when DNA from the child who died of TB was found to match samples obtained from locks of
              Marie-Antoinette’s hair, and also that of several other maternal relatives.
                                                                                    QUARTIER STPAUL THE MARAIS                 105

rue du Temple, lies Paris’s original Chinatown. The area was settled during World War I
when Chinese immigrants came over to ﬁll the gap in the workforce left by the
departure of French troops for the front. Rue du Temple, lined with many beautiful
houses dating back to the seventeenth century, is full of Chinese-run wholesale
businesses trading in leather and fashion accessories.
  The streets to the west of rue du Temple are narrow, dark and riddled with passages,
the houses half-timbered and bulging with age. No. 51 rue Montmorency is Paris’s
oldest house, built in 1407 for the alchemist Nicolas Flamel, whose name will ring a
bell with Harry Potter fans; the building is now a restaurant, Auberge Nicolas Flamel.                                                6
Musée des Arts et Métiers
60 rue de Réaumur, 3e • Tues–Sun 10am–6pm, Thurs until 9.30pm • €6.50 • W arts-et-metiers.net • M Arts-et-Métiers
The Musée des Arts et Métiers is a fascinating museum of technological innovation. It’s
part of the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers and incorporates the former Benedictine
priory of St-Martin-des-Champs, its original chapel dating from the fourth century. The
most important exhibit is Foucault’s pendulum, which the scientist used to demonstrate
the rotation of the earth in 1851, a sensational event held at the Panthéon and attended
by a huge crowd eager to “see the earth go round”. The orb itself, a hollow brass sphere,
is under glass in the chapel, and there’s a working model set up nearby.
  Other exhibits include the laboratory of Lavoisier, the French chemist who ﬁrst showed
that water is a combination of oxygen and hydrogen, and, hanging as if in mid-ﬂight
above the grand staircase, the elegant “Avion 3”, a ﬂying machine complete with feathered
propellers, which was donated to the Conservatoire after several ill-fated attempts to ﬂy it.

La Gaîté Lyrique
3bis rue Papin, 3e • Tues–Sat 2–8pm, Sun 2–6pm • T 01 53 01 51 51, W gaite-lyrique.net • M Réaumur-Sébastopol/Arts-et-Métiers
The Gaîté Lyrique is a centre for digital arts and contemporary music, opened in
2011. This venerable Italian-style theatre, built in 1862, was once renowned as a
venue for operettas under such illustrious directors as Jacques Oﬀenbach, and hosted
the Ballets Russes in the 1920s. After twenty years closed, it was given a radical
makeover: the architects preserved and restored the facade, splendid marble foyer and
entrance hall, and opened up the interior to accommodate a state-of-the-art concert
hall, exhibition spaces and artists’ studios, as well as a shop and café. The busy
programme of events includes regular concerts, exhibitions, dance and theatre
performances, and art installations.

Quartier St-Paul
The southern part of the Marais, the Quartier St- Paul, between the rue de Rivoli, rue
de St-Antoine and the Seine, is less buzzy than the rest of the district, its quiet,
atmospheric streets lined with attractive old houses. The chief sights are the moving
Mémorial de la Shoah, with its museum documenting the fate of French Jews in World
War II; the Maison Européenne de la Photographie, which hosts exhibitions by
contemporary photographers; and the Pavillon de l’Arsenal, a showcase for the city’s
current architectural projects. The area is also a good hunting ground for antiques,
concentrated mostly in the Village St-Paul and rue St-Paul.

St-Gervais-St-Protais
Place St-Gervais, 4e • M Hôtel- de-Ville
There’s been a church on the site of St-Gervais-St-Protais since the sixth century; the
current building was started in 1494, though not completed until the seventeenth
century, which explains the mismatched late-Gothic interior and Classical exterior.
There’s some lovely stained glass inside, sixteenth-century carved misericords and a
seventeenth-century organ; it’s one of Paris’s oldest and has been played by eight
    106     THE MARAIS QUARTIER STPAUL

          generations of the Couperin family, including the famous François Couperin. The third
          chapel down on the right commemorates the 88 victims of a German shell that hit the
          church on Good Friday 1918 and caused part of the nave to collapse.
           Exiting the church round the altar at the back, you enter cobbled rue des Barres, a
          picturesque little street, ﬁlled with the scent of roses from nearby gardens in summer,
          and a nice setting for the outdoor terrace of L’Ebouillanté café (see p.277).

          Mémorial de la Shoah
6         17 rue Geoﬀroy l’Asnier, 4e • Daily except Sat 10am–6pm, Thurs till 10pm • Free • T 01 42 77 44 72, W memorialdelashoah.org •
          M St-Paul/Pont-Marie
          The grim fate of French Jews in World War II is commemorated at the Mémorial de la
          Shoah, within the Centre de Documentation Juive Contemporaine, access to which
          usually involves queuing, as visitors and bags are scanned at the entrance. President Chirac
          opened a new museum here in 2005 and, alongside the sombre Mémorial du Martyr Juif
          Inconnu (Memorial to the Unknown Jewish Martyr), unveiled a Wall of Names; ten
          researchers spent two and a half years trawling Gestapo documents and interviewing
          French families to compile the list of the 76,000 Jews – around a quarter of the wartime
          population – sent to death camps from 1942 to 1944. In 2006, the Mur des Justes was
          added, a wall listing the names of French people who aided Jews at this time.
            Chirac, in 1995, was the ﬁrst French president to acknowledge that France was involved
          in systematically persecuting Jews during World War II. In most instances, it was the
          French police, not the Nazi occupiers, who rounded up the Jews for deportation. The most
          notorious case was in July 1942, when 13,152 Jews (including more than 4000 children)
          were rounded up in the Vel d’Hiv bicycle stadium in Paris and sent to death camps.
          The museum
          The Vel d’Hiv incident, along with much else, is documented in the excellent
          museum, with plenty of information in English. The main focus is events in France
          leading up to and during World War II, but there is also lots of background on the
          history of Jews in France and in Europe as a whole. Individual stories are illustrated
          with photos, ID cards, letters and other documents. You learn about model citizens
          such as the Javel family, who were all deported and died in the camps, their long-
          established residence in France and distinguished record of military service counting
          for naught in the relentless Nazi drive to exterminate all Jews. Others, such as the
          Lifchitz family, who ﬂed pogroms in Russia and settled in France in 1909, managed
          to survive the war – in this case by going into hiding and obtaining false ID as
          Orthodox Christians. The collection also features drawings and letters from Drancy,
          the holding station outside Paris, from which French Jews were sent on to camps in
          Germany. The museum ends with the Mémorial des Enfants, an overwhelming
          collection of photos, almost unbearable to look at, of 2500 French children, each
          image marked with the date of their birth and the date of their deportation.

          Maison Européenne de la Photographie
          4 rue de Fourcy, 4e • Wed–Sun 11am–8pm • €8, free Wed after 5pm • T 01 44 78 75 00, W mep-fr.org • M St-Paul/Pont-Marie
          Between rues Fourcy and François-Miron, a gorgeous Marais mansion, the early
          eighteenth-century Hôtel Hénault de Cantobre, now houses the Maison Européenne de
          la Photographie, dedicated to the art of contemporary photography. Temporary shows
          combine with a revolving exhibition of the permanent collection; young photographers
          and photo journalists get a look-in, as well as artists using photography in multimedia
          creations or installation art. There’s also a library, vidéothèque and stylish café.

          Village St-Paul and around
          M St-Paul/Pont-Marie
          East of the Maison Européenne de la Photographie is Village St-Paul, a network of
                                                                                     QUARTIER STPAUL THE MARAIS                107

courtyards and streets housing around a hundred antique, interior-design and art
shops. This part of the Marais suﬀered a postwar hatchet job, and, although
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century magniﬁcence is still in evidence (there’s even a
stretch of the city’s defensive wall dating from the early thirteenth century in the lycée
playground on rue des Jardins St-Paul), it lacks the architectural cohesion of the Marais
to the north. The ﬁfteenth-century Hôtel de Sens, on the rue du Figuier, looks bizarre
in its isolation. The public library it now houses, the Bibliothèque Forney (see p.346),
ﬁlled with volumes on ﬁne and applied arts, provides a good excuse to explore this
outstanding medieval building.                                                                                                        6
Musée de la Magie
11 rue St-Paul, 4e • Wed, Sat & Sun 2–7pm; live magic show every 30min 2.30–6pm • €12, children €9 • T 01 42 72 13 26,
W museedelamagie.com • M St-Paul/Sully-Morland
Set amid the antique shops on rue St-Paul is the Musée de la Magie, a delightful
museum of magic and illusion. Automata, distorting mirrors and optical illusions,
objects that ﬂoat on thin air, a box for sawing people in half – they’re all on view, with
examples from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, as well as contemporary
magicians’ tools and hands-on exhibits for children. Most fun is a live magician’s
demonstration. The museum shop sells books on conjuring, plus magic cards, wands,
boxes, scarves and the like. School groups tend to visit on Wednesdays, so it’s better to
visit at weekends.

Pavillon de l’Arsenal
21 bd Morland, 4e • Tues–Sat 10.30am–6.30pm, Sun 11am–7pm • Free • T 01 42 76 33 97, W pavillon-arsenal.com • M Sully-Morland
The Pavillon de l’Arsenal is an exhibition centre that presents the capital’s current
architectural projects, such as the Eiﬀel Tower’s new glass ﬂoor (see p.148), to the public.
There’s also a permanent exhibition on Paris’s architectural development, centring on a
huge interactive screen on the ﬂoor showing Google Earth images of Paris; superimposed
on it are all the major construction projects planned over the next twenty years, so you
can bring up a projected image of what, for example, the Les Halles district will look
like when its makeover is complete in 2016.
