Chapter 14: Belleville and Ménilmontant

Belleville and Ménilmontant
The old working-class quarters of Belleville and Ménilmontant in the east of
Paris are some of the most cosmopolitan in the city, home to North Africans,
Malians, Turks, Chinese and inhabitants of the former Yugoslavia. The area is
also favoured by students and artists, who have done a great deal to create a
thriving alternative scene and some of the city’s best nightlife. Probably the
main reason visitors come to this part of town, though, is to seek out the
graves of various famous people, from Modigliani to Jim Morrison at
Père-Lachaise cemetery. A couple of parks, the Buttes-Chaumont and the
modern Parc de Belleville, also make for rewarding visits, not least for their
ﬁne views over the city, and there are some worthy destinations for
contemporary art fans, too.
      0                                                                        250                                                Bolivar                                                  AV                                                                                                 Parc des                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RUE DE MOU ZAÏA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       EN
                             metres
                SB
                           NC
                                 PLACE DU
                                  FABIEN
     LA
            RUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RUE DE PALE STIN E
                                         AVENUE CLAUDE VELLEFAUX
                    IE T T
                        E D
          RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B O U L E VA R D D E S M A R E



                            A                                                           AM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IL M                                             ME                      RUE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AP                                          CH
                                                                                                        OUR                                                  UE                                                                                                                      ELE                 AIC                                   ME N                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R UE DES PARTA N T S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV E
       B L V D  P R IE U R
                                            BELLEVILLE BELLEVILLE AND MÉNILMONTANT              207

Belleville and Ménilmontant were once villages outside Paris, whose populations were
swelled during the Industrial Revolution in the mid-nineteenth century with the arrival
of migrants from the countryside. These new arrivals supplied the people-power for the
many insurrections in the nineteenth century, including the short-lived Commune of
1871, with the centre and west battling to preserve the status quo against the
oppressed, radical east. Indeed, for much of the nineteenth century, the establishment
feared nothing more than the “descente de Belleville” – the descent of the mob from
the heights of Belleville. It was in order to contain this threat that so much of the Canal
St-Martin (see p.198), a natural line of defence, was covered over by Baron Haussmann             14
in 1860.
  Today, only a few reminders of these turbulent times survive, such as the Mur des
Fédérés in Père-Lachaise cemetery recording the deaths of 147 Communards, and a
few streets bearing the names of popular leaders. Some of the old working-class
character of the district lives on: narrow streets and artisans’ houses survive in places.
Much of the area, however, has undergone redevelopment over the last few decades.
Crumbling, dank and insanitary houses were replaced by shelving-unit apartment
blocks in the 1960s and 1970s, giving way in recent years to more imaginative and
attractive constructions.

Belleville
M Belleville/Pyrénées/Jourdain/Télégraphe
The old village of Belleville, only incorporated into the city in 1860, is strung out along
the western slopes of a ridge that rises steadily from the Seine at Bercy to an altitude of
128m near the place des Fêtes, the highest point in Paris after Montmartre. “Belle” is
not the ﬁrst adjective that springs to mind when describing Belleville, with its many
bland apartment blocks, but there are pockets of charm, especially around the attractive
Parc des Buttes-Chaumont and Parc de Belleville. It’s home to what is probably one of
the most diverse populations in the city: a mix of traditional working class, various
ethnic communities and a good number of students and artists, drawn to the area by
the availability of aﬀordable and large spaces, ideal for ateliers. The best opportunity to
view local artists’ work is during the Journées portes ouvertes ateliers d’artistes de
Belleville at the end of May (for dates see W ateliers-artistes-belleville.org), when around
250 artists living or working in Belleville open their doors to the public.

Rue de Belleville and around
Belleville’s main artery is rue de Belleville. Its lower end is liveliest, with numerous
Chinese restaurants and traiteurs doing a brisk trade, while adjoining boulevard de
Belleville is home to Algerian pastry shops, grocers and shisha cafés. The boulevard is
lined with dramatic new architecture, employing jutting triangles, curves and the
occasional reference to the roof lines of nineteenth-century Parisian blocks. It’s
particularly lively on Tuesday and Friday mornings when the market sets up, stretching
the whole length of the boulevard. Kosher food shops and cafés, belonging to
Sephardic Jews from Tunisia, are also in evidence here and on rue Ramponeau, running
parallel to the rue de Belleville. It was at the junction of rue Ramponeau and rue de
Tourtille that the very last barricade of the Commune was defended single-handedly
for ﬁfteen minutes by the last ﬁghting Communard in 1871.
  The upper stretch of rue de Belleville is not as distinctive as its lower end and, with its
boulangeries and charcuteries, could be the busy main street of any French provincial
town. On the wall of no. 72, a plaque commemorates the birth of the legendary
chanteuse Edith Piaf; the story goes that she was born under a street lamp just here.
One of Piaf ’s favourite hangouts is back down at rue de Belleville’s lower end, at 105
rue du Faubourg-du-Temple, the street’s busy lower extension: La Java, a former bal
musette venue whose original dancehall interior is still intact.
 208     BELLEVILLE AND MÉNILMONTANT BELLEVILLE


           CLAUDE CHAPPE AND THE RUE DU TELEGRAPHE
           The rue du Télégraphe, running south oﬀ the eastern end of rue de Belleville alongside the
           Cimetière de Belleville, is named in memory of Claude Chappe’s invention of the optical
           telegraph. Chappe ﬁrst tested his device here in September 1792, in a corner of the cemetery.
           When word of his activities got out, he was nearly lynched by a mob that assumed he was
           trying to signal to the king, who was at that time imprisoned in the Temple (see box, p.104).
           Eventually, two lines were set up, from Belleville to Strasbourg and the east, and from
14         Montmartre to Lille and the north. By 1840, it was possible to send a message to Calais in three
           minutes, via 27 relays, and to Strasbourg in seven minutes, using 46 relays. Chappe himself did
           not live to see the fruits of his invention; his patent was contested in 1805 and, distraught, he
           threw himself into a sewer (his grave is in nearby Père-Lachaise).


       Parc de Belleville and around
       Maison de l’Air April–Sept Wed 1.30–5pm, Sat 1.30–6.30pm; Oct–March Wed & Sat 1.30–5pm • Free • M Pyrénées/Couronnes
       A turn oﬀ rue de Belleville onto the cobbled rue Piat will take you past the beautiful
       wrought-iron gate of the jungly Villa Otoz to the Parc de Belleville, created in the
       mid-1990s. From the terrace at the junction with rue des Envierges, there’s a fantastic
       view across the city, especially at sunset. At your feet, the small park descends in a
       further series of terraces and waterfalls. There’s a little exhibition/educational centre
       geared towards children in particular, the Maison de l’Air, with lots of information on air
       quality and meteorology, including live satellite pictures of the weather across Europe.
         A path crosses the top of the Parc de Belleville past a minuscule vineyard and turns
       into steps that drop down to rue des Couronnes (which leads back to boulevard de
       Belleville). Some of the adjacent streets are worth a wander for a feel of the changing
       times – rue de la Mare, rue des Envierges, rue des Cascades – with two or three
       beautiful old houses in overgrown gardens, alongside new housing that follows the
       height and curves of the streets and passages between them.

       Parc des Buttes-Chaumont
       Daily: May & mid-Aug to Sept 7am–9.15pm; June to mid-Aug 7am–10.15pm; Oct–April 7am–8.15pm • Free • M Buttes-Chaumont/Botzaris
       The delightful, hilly Parc des Buttes-Chaumont, north of the Belleville heights, was
       constructed under Haussmann in the 1860s to camouﬂage what until then had been a
       desolate warren of disused quarries, rubbish dumps and shacks. Out of this unlikely
       setting, a park was created – there’s a grotto with a cascade and artiﬁcial stalactites, and
       a picturesque lake from which a huge rock rises up, topped with a delicate Corinthian
       temple. You can cross the lake via a suspension bridge, or take the shorter Pont des
       Suicides. This, according to Louis Aragon, the literary grand old man of the French
       Communist Party, “before metal grilles were erected along its sides, claimed victims
       even from passers-by who had had no intention whatsoever of killing themselves but
       were suddenly tempted by the abyss” (Le Paysan de Paris). You can go boating on the
       lake, and, unusually for Paris, you’re not cautioned oﬀ the grass.
         There are some rather desirable residences around the park, especially to the east,
       between rue de Crimée and place de Rhin-et-Danube; little cobbled villas (mews) lined
       with ivy-strewn houses, their gardens full of roses and lilac trees, can be found here, oﬀ
       rue Miguel-Hidalgo, rue du Général-Brunet, rue de la Liberté, rue de l’Egalité and rue
       de Mouzaïa.

       Le Plateau
       33 rue des Alouettes, 19e • Wed–Fri 2–7pm, Sat & Sun noon–8pm • Free • W fracidf-leplateau.com • M Jourdain
       One block south of the Parc des Buttes-Chaumont is a small contemporary arts centre,
       Le Plateau, set up following a vigorous campaign by local residents who successfully
       acquired the space after ﬁghting oﬀ property developers. Exhibitions tend to focus on
       experimental, cutting-edge French and international artists.
                 MÉNILMONTANT • PÈRELACHAISE CEMETERY BELLEVILLE AND MÉNILMONTANT                                                 209

Ménilmontant
M Ménilmontant
Like Belleville, much of Ménilmontant aligns itself along one straight, steep street, the
rue de Ménilmontant and its lower extension rue Oberkampf. Although run-down in
parts, its popularity with artists and young professionals, or bobos (bourgeois-bohémiens),
has helped to revitalize the area. Alternative shops and cool bars and restaurants have
elbowed in among the grocers and cheap hardware stores, especially along rue
Oberkampf and its parallel street rue Jean-Pierre Timbaud, the city’s most vibrant
nightlife hub (see p.302). The upper reaches of rue de Ménilmontant, above rue                                                       14
Sorbier, are quieter, and looking back you ﬁnd yourself dead in line with the rooftop of
the Pompidou Centre, a measure of how high you are above the rest of the city.

Musée Edith Piaf
5 rue Crespin-du-Gast, 11e • Mon–Wed & Thurs 1–6pm; closed Sept • Donation • Admission by appointment only on T 01 43 55 52 72 •
M Ménilmontant/St-Maur
Sitting very close to the Ménilmontant métro is the Musée Edith Piaf. Piaf was not an
acquisitive person; the few clothes (yes, including a little black dress), letters, toys,
paintings and photographs that she left are almost all here, along with every one of her
recordings. The venue is a small ﬂat lived in by her devoted admirer Bernard Marchois,
who will show you around and gladly answer any questions (in French).

Père-Lachaise cemetery
Main entrance on bd de Ménilmontant • Mon–Fri 8am–5.30pm, Sat 8.30am–5.30pm, Sun 9am–5.30pm • Free • W pere-lachaise.com •
M Père-Lachaise/Phillipe-Auguste
Final resting place of a host of French notables, as well as some illustrious foreigners,
Père-Lachaise is one of the world’s largest and most famous cemeteries. Sited on a hill
commanding grand views of Paris, it’s a bit like a miniature town, with its grid-like
layout, cast-iron signposts and neat cobbled lanes – a veritable “city of the dead”. It’s
surely also one of the most atmospheric cemeteries, an eerily beautiful haven, with
terraced slopes and magniﬁcent old trees (around six thousand of them) spreading their
branches over the moss-grown tombs as though shading them from the outside world.
  Finding individual graves can be a tricky business. Our map (see p.210) and the free
plans given out at the entrance will point you in the right direction, but it’s worth
buying a slightly more detailed one, as it’s easy to get lost; the best is published by
Editions Métropolitain Paris (around €2) and should be available at the Père-Lachaise
shop at 45 bd de Ménilmontant or in the newsagents and ﬂorists near the main
entrance on the same street.
  Père-Lachaise was opened in 1804 and turned out to be an incredibly successful piece
of land speculation. Nicolas Frochot, the urban planner who bought the land,
persuaded the civil authorities to have Molière, La Fontaine, Abélard (see box, p.47)
and Héloïse reburied in his new cemetery, and it began to acquire cachet, but it really
took oﬀ when Balzac set the last scene of his 1835 novel Le Père Goriot here. Ironically,
Frochot even sold a plot to the original owner for considerably more than the price he
had paid for the entire site. Even today, rates are extremely high.

Chopin, Jim Morrison and Oscar Wilde
Among the most visited graves is that of Chopin (Division 11), who has a willowy muse
mourning his loss and is often attended by groups of Poles laying wreaths and ﬂowers
in the red and white colours of the Polish ﬂag.
  Swarms also ﬂock to the grave of ex-Doors lead singer Jim Morrison (Division 6), who
died in Paris in 1971 at the age of 27. Once graﬃti-covered and wreathed in marijuana
fumes, it has been cleaned up and is watched over by a security guard, though this
hasn’t stopped fans placing ﬂowers, candles and cigarette butts on his tomb and
210                       BELLEVILLE AND MÉNILMONTANT PÈRELACHAISE CEMETERY

                 scribbling messages in praise of love and drugs on other graves, and trees, nearby. In
                 fact things got so bad some years ago that relatives of undistinguished Frenchmen
                 interred nearby signed a petition asking for the singer’s body to be exhumed and sent
                 home, but the grave, unlike many here, is on a perpetual lease, so the Lizard King is
                 here to stay.
                   Another tomb that attracts many visitors is Oscar Wilde’s (Division 89), the base of
                 which is covered in graﬃti and lipstick kisses left by devoted fans. It’s topped with a
                 sculpture by Jacob Epstein of a Pharaonic winged messenger (sadly missing its once
                 prominent member, which was last seen being used as a paperweight by the director of
                 the cemetery). The inscription behind is a grim verse from The Ballad of Reading Gaol.

    R U E B ELGR A N D
                                                       OU
                                                      SN                                                                                                RA
                                           DE                                                                                                            NC                                                                                                                                                                                         RUE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D E FONT A R A B I E
                               R U E D E L A C OU R
    GAMBETTA                                                 RU
                         AV
                                                                                   Spinelli          54 E LA CHAPE                                  Héloise
                                                                                  and Sivel 70         AV D    56 Jacques- Ledru-Rollin          and Abélard
    Entrances                                                                                                   Père-Lachaise                                                                                                                   PÈRELACHAISE CEMETERY
                                 PÈRELACHAISE CEMETERY BELLEVILLE AND MÉNILMONTANT                     211

Writers and musicians
Many other musicians repose near Chopin, among them Bellini, Cherubini, the
violinist Kreutzer, whose commemorative column leans precariously to one side, and
the more recently deceased French jazz pianist, Michel Petrucciani. Rossini is honoured
with a spot on the avenue principale, though in fact his remains have been transferred
to his native Italy. Bizet, composer of the opera Carmen, lies intact in Division 68,
though sadly the ﬁne bronze bust that used to adorn his tomb was stolen in 2006,
along with several other bronzes.
  Most of the celebrated dead have unremarkable tombs. Femme fatale Colette’s tomb,                       14
close to the main entrance in Division 4, is very plain, though always covered in
ﬂowers. The same holds true for the divine Sarah Bernhardt’s (Division 44) and the
great chanteuse Edith Piaf’s (Division 97). Marcel Proust lies in his family’s
conventional, black marble tomb (Division 85). Just across the way is the rather
incongruous-looking Crematorium (Division 87), crudely modelled on the Aghia
Sophia in Istanbul, with domes and minarets. Here among others of equal or lesser
renown lie the ashes of Max Ernst, Georges Perec, Stéphane Grappelli and American
dancer Isadora Duncan, who was strangled when her scarf got tangled in the rear wheel
of her open-top car. Maria Callas has a plaque here, too, though her ashes were
removed and scattered in the Aegean.

Artists
Among other illustrious representatives of the arts, Corot (Division 24) and Balzac
(Division 48) both have ﬁne busts, as does poet Alfred de Musset, near Rossini on the
avenue principale, and buried, according to his wishes, under a willow tree. Delacroix lies
in a sombre sarcophagus in Division 49, while Jacques-Louis David’s heart rests in
Division 56 (the rest of him is buried in Belgium, where he died). His pupil Ingres
reposes in Division 23. Géricault reclines on cushions of stone (Division 12), paint palette
in hand, his face taut with concentration; below is a sculpted relief of part of his
best-known painting The Raft of the Medusa. Close by is the relaxed ﬁgure of Jean Carriès,
a model-maker, in felt hat and overalls, holding a self-portrait in the palm of his hand.
  In Division 96, you’ll ﬁnd the grave of Modigliani and his lover Jeanne Herbuterne,
who killed herself in crazed grief a few days after he died in agony from meningitis.
Impressionist painter Camille Pissarro lies among the sober, unadorned tombs of the
Jewish plot near the main entrance, as does the beautiful nineteenth-century actress
Rachel, known for one of the briefest love-letter exchanges in history; after seeing her
on stage, Prince de Joinville sent her his card with the note “Où? Quand? Combien?”,
to which Rachel scribbled back, “Chez toi. Ce soir. Pour rien.”

Politicians
Notable politicians include Félix Faure (on the avenue principale, Division 4), French
president, who died in the arms of his mistress in the Elysée palace in 1899; draped in

   IMMODEST MONUMENTS
   In contrast to the many modest monuments marking the tombs of the famous, in Division 48
   a now-forgotten French diplomat, Félix de Beaujour, is marked with an enormous tower,
   rather like a lighthouse. To the north in Division 86, one Jean Pezon, a lion-tamer, is shown
   riding the pet lion that ate him. In Division 71, two men lie together hand in hand – Croce-
   Spinelli and Sivel, a pair of balloonists who went so high they died from lack of oxygen. In
   Division 92, journalist Victor Noir – shot at the age of 22 in 1870 by Prince Napoléon for
   daring to criticize him – is portrayed at the moment of death, ﬂat on his back, fully clothed, his
   top hat fallen by his feet. However, it’s not as a magnet for anti-censorship campaigners that
   his tomb has become famous, but as a lucky charm – a prominent part of his anatomy has
   been worn shiny by the touch of infertile women, hoping for a cure.
 212     BELLEVILLE AND MÉNILMONTANT CHARONNE AND AROUND

       a French ﬂag, his head to one side, he cuts rather a romantic ﬁgure. Auguste Blanqui,
       after whom so many French streets are named, lies in Division 91. Described by Karl
       Marx as the nineteenth century’s greatest revolutionary, he served his time in jail – 33
       years in all – for political activities that spanned the 1830 Revolution to the Paris
       Commune. Karl’s daughter, Laura Marx, and her husband Paul Lafargue, who
       committed suicide together in 1911, lie south from Blanqui’s grave, in Division 76.

       War memorials and the Mur des Fédérés
14     Monuments to collective, violent deaths have the power to change a sunny outing to
       Père-Lachaise into a much more sombre experience. In Division 97, in what’s become
       known as the “coin des martyrs”, you’ll ﬁnd memorials to the victims of the Nazi
       concentration camps, to executed Resistance ﬁghters and to those unaccounted for in
       the genocide of World War II. The sculptures are relentless in their images of
       inhumanity, of people forced to collaborate in their own degradation and death.
         Marking one of the bloodiest episodes in French history is the Mur des Fédérés
       (Division 76), the wall where the last troops of the Paris Commune were lined up and
       shot in the ﬁnal days of the battle in 1871. A total of 147 men were killed, after a
       frenetic chase through the tombstones, and the remains of around a thousand other
       Communards were brought here and thrown into a grave-pit. The wall soon became a
       place of pilgrimage for the Left, and remains so today. The man who ordered the
       execution, Adolphe Thiers, lies in the centre of the cemetery in Division 55.

       Charonne and around
       M Porte de Bagnolet/Gambetta
       Just south of Père-Lachaise cemetery, with its perfect little Romanesque church and the
       cobbled street of rue St-Blaise, Charonne retains its village-like atmosphere.
