Chapter 4: The Grands Boulevards and passages

The Grands Boulevards
The Grands Boulevards is the collective name given to the eight streets that form one
continuous thoroughfare running from the Madeleine to République, then down to the
Bastille. Lined with classic nineteenth-century apartment blocks, imposing banks,
cinemas, theatres, brasseries and neon-lit fast-food outlets, the Grands Boulevards are
busy and vibrant. They are not, however, the most alluring or fashionable parts of Paris –
though this was not always so. As recently as the 1950s, a visitor to Paris would, as a
matter of course, have gone for a stroll along the Grands Boulevards to see “Paris
vivant”. Something of this tradition still survives in the theatres, cinemas – including
the Max Linder and Rex, the latter an extraordinary building inside and out (see
p.311) – brasseries and cafés.
Brief history
The western section of the Grands Boulevards, from the Madeleine to Porte St-Denis,
follows the rampart built by Charles V in the mid-fourteenth century. When its
defensive purpose became redundant with the oﬀensive foreign policy of Louis XIV in
the seventeenth century, the walls were pulled down and the ditches ﬁlled in, leaving a
wide promenade. However, it wasn’t until the nineteenth century that the boulevards
became a fashionable place to be seen; Parisians came in droves to stroll and frequent
the numerous cafés. The chic café customers of the west-end boulevard des Italiens set
the trends for all of Paris in terms of manners, dress and conversation, and it was a
hotbed of intellectual debate and ferment.
  The eastern section developed a more colourful reputation, derived from its
association with street theatre, mime artists, jugglers, puppet shows and cafés of ill                                                 4
repute, earning itself the nickname the boulevard du Crime, immortalized in the 1945
ﬁlm Les Enfants du Paradis. Much of this area was swept away in the latter half of the
nineteenth century by Baron Haussmann’s huge place de la République.
  It was at 14 boulevard des Capucines, in 1895, that Paris saw its ﬁrst ﬁlm, or
animated photography, as the Lumière brothers’ invention was called. Some years
earlier, in 1874, another artistic revolution had taken place at no. 35 in the former
studio of photographer Félix Nadar – the ﬁrst Impressionist exhibition, greeted with
outrage by the art world; one critic said of Monet’s Impression, soleil levant
(“Impression: sunrise”), “it was worse than anyone had hitherto dared to paint”.

Musée Grévin
10 bd Montmartre, 9e • Mon–Fri 10am–6.30pm, Sat & Sun 10am–7pm; last admission 1hr before closing • €22.50, children €16 • T 01
47 70 85 05, W grevin.com • M Grands Boulevards
A remnant from the fun-loving times on the Grands Boulevards is the waxworks
museum, the Musée Grévin. You can have your photo taken next to Isabelle Adjani,
Omar Sy and many other French and international celebrities, but perhaps the best
thing about the museum is its rooms: the magical Palais des Mirages (Hall of Mirrors),
built for the Exposition Universelle in 1900; the theatre with its sculptures by
Bourdelle; and the 1882 Baroque-style Hall of Columns.

Opéra Garnier
Cnr rues Scribe and Auber, 9e • Interior Available for visits daily 10am–5pm • €9 Shows See p.319 • W operadeparis.fr • M Opéra
Set back from boulevard des Capucines is the dazzling Opéra de Paris – usually referred to
as the Opéra Garnier to distinguish it from the newer opera house at the Bastille.
Constructed between 1865 and 1872 as part of Napoléon III’s vision for Paris, it crowns
the avenue de l’Opéra. The architect, Charles Garnier, whose golden bust by Carpeaux can
be seen on the rue Auber side, drew on a number of existing styles and succeeded in
creating a magniﬁcently ornate building the like of which Paris had never seen before
– when the Empress Eugénie asked in bewilderment what style it was, Garnier replied that
it was “Napoléon III style”. Certainly, if any building can be said to exemplify the Second
                                                                G. PERI



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RUE STGEORGES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MOGA DOR
                                       RUE PASQ UIER
                                                                       RUE DE L’ARCADE
             BOULE
             CHA
                                                                                                                                                         RU E GO
BOU                 UVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BO         ULEV                                                                                                                       MO NT



             LES
                                                                                                               MADE                                                                                                                                                                                            AU                                                                                                            RUE D



 agnès b.                                                        33                       Galeries Lafayette                                               2                 Marché St-Honoré                                                                                                       13                               Jardin du                                                                 Musée du Louvre
 Anthony Peto                                                    28                       Galignani                                                       25                 Marché Ste-Eustache-Les-Halles                                                                                         37                               Carrousel                                                                      Musée de
              Notre-Dame
  RU E LA
R. DE
           R U E FA       PLACE R U E S T  MARC
             RUE MENARS                                                         O U R SE
           Bibliothèque                                                                    Notre-Dame
                                                                                                                                             IC TO IR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
            Nationale                                                                      des Victoires                                   D ES V
                      LO IS
                                                                                                                                                                        E                                                     EJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L’A B B O U R G
                            RUE                                                                                                                                                                                        RU                                                                                                       Marché Ste-                                                                                                                                                                                                              BE
                   D E VA
                                    DU C                                                                                       OI                                                                                                                                                             R
                                               O LO N                                                                       UL                                                                                                                                                             OU                                    Eustache-
                                                          EL DR                                                          BO                                                                                                                                                         UJ                                                                                                                                                                                          Etienne
               RUE
    76     THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS AND PASSAGES THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS

         Empire, it is this – in its show of wealth and hint of vulgarity. In the event, however, it was
         only completed in 1875 after the Empire had been swept away by the Third Republic, and
         even Garnier had to pay for his ticket on the opening night. Part of the reason
         construction took so long – fourteen years in all – was the discovery of a water table which
         had to be drained and replaced by a huge concrete well, giving rise to the legend of an
         underground lake, popularized by Gaston Leroux’s 1910 novel Phantom of the Opera.
           The theatre’s facade is a fairy-tale concoction of white, pink and green marble,
         colonnades, rearing horses, winged angels and gleaming gold busts of composers. The
         group sculpture on the right of the entrance, Carpeaux’s La Danse (the original is now in
         the Musée d’Orsay), caused a stir upon unveiling for its frank sensuality; one outraged
         protestor went as far as to throw black ink over the ﬂeshy thighs of the two female nude
         dancers. Perhaps more audacious to modern eyes is the recently added restaurant on the
         rue Halévy side, featuring shocking-red decor and a sinuous glass structure that encloses
         the Rotonde du Glacier, where patrons would once have driven up in their carriages.
         The interior
         You can visit the opulent interior, including the auditorium – as long as there are no
         rehearsals; your best chance is between 1 and 2pm. With its spacious gilded-marble
         and mirrored lobbies, the building was intended to give Second Empire society suitably
         grand spaces in which to meet and be seen. The auditorium itself is all red velvet and
         gold leaf, hung with a six-tonne chandelier; the colourful ceiling was painted by
         Chagall in 1964 and depicts scenes from well-known operas and ballets jumbled up
         with famous Parisian landmarks. Your entry ticket includes the Bibliothèque-Musée de
4        l’Opéra, containing model sets, dreadful nineteenth-century paintings and rather better
         temporary exhibitions on operatic themes. Amid the postcards and memorabilia in the
         shop is one of the city’s most unusual souvenirs – honey collected from hives on the
         vast copper and zinc roof of the opera house; some 125,000 bees seek out nectar from
         parks, cemeteries and window boxes and produce up to 300kg of honey a year.

         Paris-Story
         11bis rue Scribe, 9e • Daily with 50min shows on the hour 10am–6pm • €10.50 • T 01 42 66 62 06, W paris-story.com • M Opéra
         On the western side of the Opéra is the Paris-Story multimedia show, a partial and
         highly romanticized history of Paris “narrated” by Victor Hugo, with simultaneous
         translation in English. The ﬁlm uses a kaleidoscope of computer-generated images and
         archive footage, set against a luscious classical-music soundtrack.

         Printemps and Galeries Lafayette
         Bd Haussmann, 9e • M Chausée d’Antin/Havre Caumartin
         Just to the north of the Opéra you’ll ﬁnd two of the city’s big department stores,
         Printemps and Galeries Lafayette (see p.324). Built at the beginning of the twentieth
         century, they may have lost their grand central staircases, but they still sport their
         proud Art Nouveau stained-glass domes. Printemps’ dome is particularly splendid, in
         glowing hues of green and blue, best appreciated from the brasserie beneath.

         Eglise de la Madeleine and around
         Place de la Madeleine, 8e • M Madeleine
         South of boulevard Haussmann, occupying nearly the whole of the place de la
         Madeleine, is the imperious-looking Eglise de la Madeleine, a favourite venue for
         society weddings. Modelled on the Parthenon, the building is surrounded by 52
         Corinthian columns and fronted by a huge pediment depicting the Last Judgement; its
         facade is a near mirror image of the Assemblée Nationale, directly opposite, on the far
         side of the place de la Concorde – a ﬁne vista best appreciated from the top of the
         Madeleine steps. Originally intended as a monument to Napoleon’s army – a plan
         abandoned after the French were defeated by the Russians in 1812 – the building
                             THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS AND PASSAGES                                                77

narrowly escaped being turned into a railway station before ﬁnally being consecrated to
Mary Magdalene in 1845.
  Inside, a theatrical stone sculpture of the Magdalene being swept up to heaven by two
angels draws your eye to the high altar. The half-dome above is decorated with a fresco
by Jules-Claude Ziegler (1804–56), a student of Ingres; entitled The History of
Christianity, it commemorates the concordat signed between the church and state after
the end of the Revolution, and shows all the key ﬁgures in Christendom, with
Napoleon centre stage, naturally. The church’s interior is otherwise rather gloomy,
heavy with gilt-edged marble. If you’re lucky, the sombre atmosphere may be broken by
the sound of the organ, reckoned to be one of Paris’s best – the church is a regular
venue for recitals and choral concerts. Illustrious former organists include Saint-Saëns
and Fauré, whose famous Requiem was premiered at the Madeleine in 1888 – to be
heard here again at the composer’s own funeral 36 years later.
Place de la Madeleine
M Madeleine
If the Madeleine caters to spiritual needs, much of the square around it is given over to
nourishment of a rather earthier kind, for this is where Paris’s top gourmet food stores,
Fauchon and Hédiard (see box, p.334), are located. Their remarkable displays are a feast
for the eyes, and both have ﬁne restaurants. East of the church is one of the city’s oldest
ﬂower markets dating back to 1832, open every day except Monday, while nearby some
rather ﬁne Art Nouveau public toilets, built in 1905, are deﬁnitely worth inspecting.
Pinacothèque de Paris                                                                                                                     4
28 place de la Madeleine and 8 rue Vignon, 8e • Daily 10.30am–7.30pm, Wed till 9.30pm • Exhibitions €12, permanent collection €8 •
T 01 42 68 02 01, W www.pinacotheque.com • M Madeleine
When it opened in 2007, the privately run Pinacothèque de Paris staged only
temporary art exhibitions. A new annexe, unveiled in 2011, just around the corner,
displays a ﬁne permanent collection of around one hundred paintings on loan from
forty private individuals; they include works by Rembrandt, Ghirlandaio, Picasso,
Vuillard, Bonnard and Pollock, many rarely or never seen before. What also makes this
collection unusual is the way in which the artworks are hung – not by artist or school,
but by theme, such as “landscape” or “intimacy”, rather in the manner a private
collector might display their paintings. The museum’s pioneering owner, Marc
Restellini, takes the same approach with his temporary exhibitions, some of which,
such as the Edvard Munch show in 2011, have drawn queues round the block.

Place Vendôme and around
M Pyramides/Opéra
A short walk east of place de la Madeleine lies place Vendôme, one of the city’s most
impressive set pieces, built by Versailles architect Hardouin-Mansart during the ﬁnal

    BEAUTIFUL BANKS
    Following in the wake of the Printemps and Galeries Lafayette department stores on
    boulevard Haussmann, a number of imposing banks were built in the area. The Crédit
    Lyonnais at 19 bd des Italiens, south of boulevard Haussmann, is perhaps the most impressive,
    with its huge gold clock ﬂanked by gigantic caryatids. Across the road at no. 20 the Banque
    Nationale de Paris occupies another striking building, with gilded wrought-iron balconies and
    ﬁnely sculpted friezes depicting hunting scenes. It used to be the Maison Dorée, a restaurant
    from the 1840s, where you might have bumped into Balzac, Hugo, Flaubert and Nerval, among
    other literary ﬁgures. At no. 16 is the bank’s main building – a sleek 1930s Art Deco ediﬁce. As
    you cross over rue Laﬃtte to reach it, you get a wonderful view of Notre-Dame de Lorette, with
    the Sacré Coeur rearing up in the background.
    78     THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS AND PASSAGES THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS

         years of Louis XIV’s reign. It’s a pleasingly symmetrical, eight-sided place, enclosed by a
         harmonious ensemble of elegant mansions, graced with Corinthian pilasters, mascarons
         and steeply pitched roofs. Once the grand residences of tax collectors and ﬁnanciers,
         they now house such luxury establishments as the Ritz hotel (from where Di and Dodi
         set oﬀ on their last journey), Cartier, Bulgari and other top-ﬂight jewellers, lending the
         square a decidedly exclusive air. The Ministry of Justice is also sited here, on the west
         side; its facade still has the marble plaque showing a standard metre put here in 1795
         in order to familiarize Parisians with the new unit of measure. No. 12, on the opposite
         side, now occupied by Chaumet jewellers, is where Chopin died, in 1849.
         Colonne Vendôme
         Somewhat out of proportion with the rest of place Vendôme, the centrepiece is the
         Colonne Vendôme, a towering triumphal column modelled on Trajan’s column in Rome,
         and surmounted by a statue of Napoleon dressed as Caesar. It was raised in 1806 to
         celebrate the Battle of Austerlitz – bronze reliefs of scenes of the battle, cast from 1200
         recycled Austro-Russian cannons, spiral their way up the column. The column that
         stands here today is actually a replica of the original, brought crashing down during the
         Commune in 1871 – the main instigator behind this act was the artist Gustave Courbet,
         who was imprisoned and ordered to pay for the column’s restoration; he was ﬁnancially
         ruined and lived the rest of his life in exile in Switzerland.
         Rue St-Honoré
         M Pyramides/Madeleine/Palais-Royal-Musée-du-Louvre
4        You’ll need a healthy bank balance if you intend to do more than window-shop in the
         streets around place Vendôme, especially ancient rue St-Honoré, the preserve of top fashion
         designers and art galleries. All the classic designers such as Hermès, Yves Saint Laurent and
         Christian Lacroix are here – along with the Colette concept store at no. 213 (see p.328).
           East of place Vendôme, on rues St-Roch and Ste-Anne, in particular, the Japanese
         community has established a mini-enclave; you’ll ﬁnd some good noodle and sushi bars
         here, such as Higuma (see p.275).
         Eglise St-Roch
         296 rue St-Honoré, 1er • M Pyramides
         On the corner of rue St-Roch and rue St-Honoré stands the Eglise St-Roch, begun in
         1653 but not completed until 1740, as money kept running out. Its handsome honey-
         coloured classical facade was recently scrubbed clean and shows little sign of the battering
         it received in 1795 when the young Napoleon dispersed a Royalist uprising with cannon
         (or a “whiﬀ of grapeshot”, as he famously put it), and was rewarded with promotion to
         the rank of general. The St-Roch quartier was much more densely populated than it is
         now and boasted many illustrious parishioners, some of whom – Corneille, Diderot and
         Le Nôtre (who landscaped the Versailles and Tuileries gardens) among them – are buried
         in the church. The nave is very long, ﬁlled with light and ﬂanked with numerous chapels
         richly decorated with paintings and sculpture by Coysevox and Coustou, and other
         leading artists of the day. A free leaﬂet detailing the works is available from the welcome
         desk. The church is also a venue for evening concerts, and holds free lunchtime song and
         chamber music recitals most Tuesdays from 12.15 to 1pm.

         Palais Royal
         Place du Palais Royal, 1er • M Palais-Royal-Musée-du-Louvre
         There are two main parts to the handsome Palais Royal complex: the palace itself and,
         beyond it, galleries surrounding gardens on three sides. The palace, a ﬁne colonnaded
         building, dates back to 1624, though it has been much modiﬁed and renovated since.
         It was built for Cardinal Richelieu, who left it to the king, Louis XIV, then just a boy;
         he and his mother lived here for a time. The palace later passed to his brother, the duc
                         THE PASSAGES AND AROUND THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS AND PASSAGES                    79

d’Orléans, and provided sanctuary to Henrietta Maria, widow of executed English
king, Charles I. It is now occupied by various government departments and is rarely
open to the public; an annexe to the side houses the Comédie Française, long-standing
venue for the classics of French theatre (see p.315).
The gardens and arcades
Beyond the palace lie sedate gardens lined with stately arcaded buildings, put up in the
1780s by Philippe-Egalité, a descendant of the duc d’Orléans. Desperate to pay oﬀ his
debts, he let out the spaces under the arcades to shops. One of them, Guillaumot,
founded in 1785 and selling antiquarian books mostly on genealogy and heraldry (153
Galerie de Valois), is still there today. Many of the other shops also specialize in
antiques or quirky collectors’ items, such as lead soldiers and Légion d’Honneur
medals. At no. 142 Galerie de Valois is an exquisite purple-panelled parfumerie, Les
Salons du Palais Royal Shiseido, while the bright-red decor at Didier Ludot’s La Petite
Robe Noire (no. 125) sets oﬀ to advantage his wonderful collection of new and vintage
little black dresses.
  Former residents of the desirable ﬂats above the arcades include Jean Cocteau and
Colette – the latter enjoyed looking out over the gardens when she was too crippled
with arthritis to walk. It’s certainly an attractive and peaceful oasis, with avenues of
limes, fountains and ﬂowerbeds. You’d hardly guess that for many years this was a site of
gambling dens, funfair attractions and brothels (it was to a prostitute here that
Napoleon lost his virginity in 1787). The clearing of Paris’s brothels in 1829–31 and the
prohibition on public gambling in 1838, however, put an end to the fun; later, the
Grands Boulevards took up the baton. Folly, some might say, has returned – in the form                      4
of Daniel Buren’s black-and-white-striped pillars, rather like sticks of Brighton rock, all
of varying heights, dotted about the main courtyard in front of the palace. Installed in
1986, they’re rather disconcerting, but certainly popular with children and rollerbladers,
who treat them as an adventure playground and obstacle course respectively.

The passages and around
The 2e arrondissement is scattered with around twenty passages, or shopping arcades,
that have survived from the early nineteenth century. In 1840 more than a hundred
existed, but most were later destroyed to make way for Haussmann’s boulevards. After
decades of neglect, some have now been restored. Some chic boutiques have moved in,
though the overall atmosphere is one of nostalgia, as most of the shops, selling
old-fashioned toys, prints, secondhand books, postcards and stamps, hark back to
another age. Their entrances are easy to miss and where you emerge at the other end
can be quite a surprise. Most are closed at night and on Sundays.

Galerie Véro-Dodat
Between rues Croix-des-Petits-Champs and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, 1er • M Palais-Royal-Musée-du-Louvre
The most homogeneous and aristocratic of the passages, with painted ceilings and
panelled mahogany shop fronts divided by faux marble columns, is the elegant Galerie
Véro-Dodat, named after the two butchers who set it up in 1824. It’s been largely
colonized by design shops, fashion boutiques (such as Christian Louboutin) and art
galleries, though some older businesses, such as R.F. Charle, at no. 17, specializing in
the repair and sale of vintage stringed instruments, remain.
  The Banque de France lies a short way northwest. Rather than negotiating its massive
bulk to reach the passages further north, it’s more pleasant to walk through the garden
of the Palais Royal via place de Valois. Rue de Montpensier, running alongside the
gardens to the west, is connected to rue de Richelieu by several tiny passages, of which
Hulot brings you out at the statue of Molière on the junction of rues Richelieu and
Molière. A certain charm also lingers about rue de Beaujolais, bordering the northern
    80     THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS AND PASSAGES THE PASSAGES AND AROUND

         end of the gardens, with its corner café looking out on the Théâtre du Palais-Royal, and
         with glimpses into the venerable Le Grand Véfour restaurant (see p.275), plus more
         short arcades leading up to rue des Petits-Champs.

         Galerie Vivienne
         M Bourse
         The ﬂamboyant Grecian and marine motifs in Galerie Vivienne, linking rue Vivienne with
         rue des Petits-Champs, create the perfect ambience in which to buy Jean Paul Gaultier
         gear. Alternatively, you could browse in the antiquarian bookshop, Librairie Jousseaume,
         dating back to the passage’s earliest days, or check out the delightful wooden toys at Si Tu
         Veux toy shop (see p.358), before taking a tea break in A Priori Thé (see p.275).

         Place des Victoires
         At the eastern end of rue des Petits-Champs rears up a grand equestrian statue of Louis
         XIV, at the centre of attractive place des Victoires, surrounded by elegant seventeenth-
         century townhouses. Designer fashion boutiques, such as Kenzo and Cacharel, occupy
         most of the shops here. Adjoining the square to the north is the appealingly
         asymmetrical place des Petits-Pères, once the courtyard of the monastery of the
         Petits-Pères, closed during the Revolution. Its church, Notre-Dame des Victoires,
         survives, notable for its collection of paintings by Carl Van Loo. Across the street at no.
         10 is Au Bon Pain, a lovely Art Nouveau boulangerie that’s been around since 1896.
         The large isolated building on the west side of the square (no. 1) once housed, as a
         plaque testiﬁes, the notorious French Commissariat for Jewish Aﬀairs (1941–44),
4        which more than willingly collaborated in rounding up the city’s Jews for deportation
         to German concentration camps.

         Bibliothèque Nationale
         58 rue de Richelieu, 2e; temporary entrance during renovation work: 5 rue Vivienne • Times vary for temporary exhibitions • Admission
         prices vary, depending on the exhibition • T 01 53 79 59 59, W bnf.fr • M Bourse
         Across from the Palais Royal, on the other side of rue des Petits-Champs, looms the
         forbidding wall of the Bibliothèque Nationale, part of whose enormous collection has
         been transferred to the new François Mitterrand site in the 13e (see p.178). It’s
         currently undergoing major renovation work to improve the conditions in which the
         library’s twenty million documents are kept, and to open up more of the building to
         the public. Work is due to ﬁnish in 2017. Parts of the library will remain open during
         this period for exhibitions, though it’s best to check the website for the latest updates.
           The library’s origins go back to the 1660s, when Louis XIV’s ﬁnance minister
         Colbert deposited a collection of royal manuscripts here, and it was ﬁrst opened to the
         public in 1692. There’s no restriction on entering, nor on peering into the
         atmospheric reading rooms, such as the huge Salle Ovale and the Salle Labrouste,
         with its slender iron columns supporting nine domes, a ﬁne example of the early use
         of iron frame construction.
         Cabinet des Monnaies, Médailles et Antiques
         Bibliothèque Nationale, 58 rue de Richelieu, 2e • Mon–Fri 1–5.45pm, Sat 1–4.45pm, Sun noon–6pm • Free • M Bourse
         Installed on the ﬁrst ﬂoor of the Bibliothèque Nationale, the Cabinet des Monnaies,
         Médailles et Antiques is a ﬁne collection of coins and ancient treasures built up by
         successive kings from Philippe-Auguste onwards. Exhibits include Etruscan bronzes,
         ancient Greek jewellery and some exquisite medieval cameos. One of the highlights
         is Charlemagne’s ivory chess set, its pieces malevolent-looking characters astride
         elephants. The cabinet is due to close in 2014 for several years, during which period
         it will be transferred to grander rooms in the building as part of the library’s
         extensive revamp.

                                                                              FROM TOP OPÉRA GARNIER P.73; CARTIER AT PLACE VENDÔME >
    82     THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS AND PASSAGES THE PASSAGES AND AROUND

         Passage Choiseul
         M Pyramides/Quatre-Septembre
         West of Galerie Vivienne along rue des Petits-Champs lies the longest of the arcades,
         passage Choiseul. This once dark and dingy arcade is now ﬂooded with light once
         more after its glass roof was repaired in 2013 and the ugly netting removed. It was
         here, in the early 1900s, that the author Louis-Ferdinand Céline lived as a boy, and
         judging by his account of it in his autobiographical Death on Credit, it was none too
         salubrious: “The gas lamps stank so badly in the stagnant air of the passage that towards
         evening some women would start to feel unwell, added to which there was the stench
         of dogs’ urine to contend with.” Nowadays the only aromas likely to assail you come
         from the takeaway food shops, which keep company with discount clothes and shoe
         stores, jewellery shops, galleries and well-known supplier of artists’ materials, Lavrut
         (no. 52). Also here is an entrance to the Théâtre des Bouﬀes Parisiens, where in 1858
         Oﬀenbach conducted the ﬁrst performance of Orpheus in the Underworld.

         The Bourse and around
         Rue Notre-Dame des Victoires, 2e • M Bourse
         A little to the north of the Bibliothèque Nationale stands the Bourse, the Paris stock
         exchange, an imposing Neoclassical ediﬁce built under Napoleon in 1808 and enlarged
         in 1903 with the addition of two side wings. With trading taking place online these
         days, the building is now chieﬂy used for conferences and trade fairs, and there are plans
         to open a restaurant. Overshadowing the Bourse from the south is the antennae-topped
         building of AFP, the French news agency. Rue Réaumur, running east from here, used to
4        be the Fleet Street of Paris, but all the newspapers have now moved elsewhere.

         Passage des Panoramas
         M Grands Boulevards/Bourse
         The grid of arcades north of the Bourse, just oﬀ rue Vivienne, is known as the passage
         des Panoramas, named after two large rotundas that once stood here showing huge
         panoramic paintings of cities and battle scenes. It was also around here, in 1817, that
         the ﬁrst Parisian gas lamps were tried out. A little shabby and frayed around the edges,
         the passage combines old-fashioned chic and workaday atmosphere. It’s long been a
         favourite with philatelists, who frequent the many stamp dealers, and is also fast
         becoming a foodie destination, with the arrival of a number of popular wine bistrots.
         L’Arbre à Cannelle restaurant at no. 57 is worth a look for its beautiful carved wood
         ornamentation dating from the 1900s, as is no. 47, which used to house the printshop
         Stern and still has its original decor dating from 1834.

         Passages Jouﬀroy and Verdeau
         M Grands Boulevards
         On the other side of boulevard Montmartre from the passage des Panoramas,
         passage Jouﬀroy is full of the kind of stores that make shopping an adventure. One
         of them, M & G Segas, sells eccentric walking canes and theatrical antiques;
         opposite is Pain d’Epices (see p.358), which stocks every conceivable ﬁtting and

             LE CROISSANT
             Just up the road from the Bourse, on the corner of rue du Croissant and rue Montmartre,
             Le Croissant, now a bistrot but once a popular drinking den, was the scene of the assassination
             on July 31, 1914 of Jean Jaurès, the Socialist leader. He was shot by young French nationalist
             Raul Vilain, protesting at Jaurès’s paciﬁsm. Even if he had survived it seems unlikely that Jaurès
             could have held back the slide to war: just three days later Germany declared war on France.
             The table at which Jaurès was drinking when he was shot can still be seen.
                           THE PASSAGES AND AROUND THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS AND PASSAGES                                             83

furnishing for a doll’s house. Near the romantic Hôtel Chopin (see p.257), La
Librairie du Passage’s art books spill out into the arcade. Crossing rue de la
Grange-Batelière, you enter equally enchanting passage Verdeau, sheltering
antiquarian books, old prints and galleries.

Passage des Princes
M Richelieu-Drouot
At the top of rue de Richelieu, the tiny passage des Princes, with its beautiful glass
ceiling, stained-glass decoration and twirly lamps, has been taken over by the toy
emporium JouéClub. Its erstwhile neighbour, the passage de l’Opéra, described in
Surrealist detail by Louis Aragon in his 1926 Paris Peasant, was eaten up with the
completion of Haussmann’s boulevards.

Hôtel Drouot
9 rue Drouot • Viewing possible 11am–6pm on the eve of the sale, 11am–noon on the day of the sale • W drouot.fr • MLe Peletier/
Richelieu-Drouot
While in the area of the passage des Princes, you could take a look at what’s up for sale
at auction house Hôtel Drouot. You can simply wander around looking at the goods
before the action starts – auctions are announced in the press, under “Ventes aux
Enchères”. You’ll ﬁnd details, including photos of pieces, in the widely available weekly
Gazette de l’Hôtel Drouot or on their website.

Sentier and around
At the heart of the 2e arrondissement lies the Sentier quartier, traditionally the centre                                              4
of Paris’s rag trade, though these days much of the business tends to be at the haute
couture end. The deliveries of cloth and the general to-ing and fro-ing make a lively
change from the oﬃce-bound districts further west. On place du Caire, beneath an
extraordinary pseudo-Egyptian facade of grotesque Pharaonic heads (a celebration of
Napoleon’s conquest of Egypt), an archway opens onto a series of arcades, the passage
du Caire. Entirely monopolized by wholesale clothes shops (not open to the public), it
is very dilapidated and little frequented these days, though it’s actually the oldest of the
passages, built in 1798.
  More recently, the area has been dubbed Silicon Sentier on account of the growing
number of internet start-up companies moving in here. It’s also fast becoming one
of the city’s hippest areas, sporting a growing number of cool boutiques and
fashionable restaurants.
Tour Jean Sans Peur
20 rue Etienne Marcel • Mid-April to mid-Nov Wed–Sun 1.30–6pm • €5 • M Etienne Marcel
Bordering the Sentier district to the south is rue Etienne Marcel, which is roughly
where the old medieval city wall used to run. At no. 20 a rare vestige from this period
survives: the Tour Jean Sans Peur, a ﬁne Gothic tower, the sole remnant of a grand
townhouse that used to straddle the old wall. It was built by Jean Sans Peur, the duc de
Bourgogne, who had the tower erected as a place of refuge; he feared reprisal after
having assassinated Louis d’Orléans, the king’s brother – a murder that kicked oﬀ a
thirty-year war between the Armagnacs and Burgundys. A spiral stone staircase (138
steps) inside the tower ends with a beautiful vaulted roof decorated with stone carvings
of oak leaves, hawthorn and hops, symbols of the Burgundy family. The rooms oﬀ the
staircase contain information on the tower and the period.
Passage du Grand-Cerf
M Etienne Marcel
Between rue St-Denis and rue Dussoubs arches the lofty, three-storey passage du
Grand-Cerf, one of the most attractive of all the arcades. The wrought-iron work, glass roof
    84     THE GRANDS BOULEVARDS AND PASSAGES THE PASSAGES AND AROUND

         and plain-wood shop fronts have all been restored, attracting chic arts, craft and design
         shops. There’s always something quirky and original on display in the window of Le Labo
         (no. 4), specializing in lamps and other lighting ﬁxtures made from recycled objects, while
         As’Art, opposite, is a treasure-trove of home furnishings and objects from Africa.
         Rue St-Denis
         M Etienne Marcel
         The northern stretch of rue St-Denis, beyond rue Etienne Marcel, is the city’s centuries-
         old red-light area, where weary women still wait in doorways between strip clubs and
         sex shops. The area is changing, however, and some of the older outlets are closing
         down, partly because sex megastores have taken some of their business and partly
         because the 2e arrondissement mairie is attempting to clean up the area by encouraging
         new businesses to move in.
         Rue Montorgueil and around
         M Etienne Marcel
         The emphasis on rues Montmartre, Montorgueil and Turbigo, as they lead south from
         rue Réaumur, is ﬁrmly on food as they approach the Les Halles complex. Worth
         lingering over in particular is the picturesque, pedestrianized market street rue
         Montorgueil, where grocers, horse butchers and ﬁshmongers ply their trade alongside
         traditional restaurants, such as L’Escargot, serving snails since 1875, and cafés catering
         to a cool crowd. It’s hard to pass by Stohrer’s pâtisserie, in business since 1730, without
         stopping to gaze at its exquisite cakes and beautiful old decor.
